






















































Hansard: February 18, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 253 
 February 18, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
House, 22 grade 8 students from Sutherland School in 
Saskatoon from the Sutherland-University constituency. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher, Tim Comfort, and 
chaperons, Diane Mycham and Liz Stefanuk.  I'd like to ask 
members of the Assembly to please welcome them here to the 
legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Budget Projections 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Madam Minister, as you know in last year's budget you set a 
target of 2,000 new jobs, which you failed to meet.  Yesterday 
in your pre-budget news conference you said that the 
government wasn't setting any targets for jobs in this year's 
budget so people wouldn't be disappointed when you failed to 
meet them again.  But, Madam Minister, page 27 of your 
budget did in fact contain a job target of 5,000 new jobs for 
1994.  This is the first time I've heard a Finance minister trying 
to distance herself from her own budget before it's even 
released. 
 
Madam Minister, do you believe you will reach your target of 
5,000 jobs?  Where will these jobs come from, or do you think 
Saskatchewan will fall short of that target and see no new jobs 
created, as occurred last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
are going to have to get in the habit of checking exactly what 
the truth of the situation is.  I was asked with respect to a 
particular program -- infrastructure and capital 
spending -- what number of jobs we were going to attach to 
those programs.  And I said to those particular programs we 
don't attach any particular job number. 
 
We have a commitment to create jobs in the province.  The 
problem of jobs is not just a Saskatchewan issue.  All across 
Canada governments are finding that as their economies 
recover there is a lag in jobs.  That's why the main focus of this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, is on job creation -- short-term job 
creation through infrastructure, through capital projects; 
long-term job creation through such things as the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation, the ag equity corporation 

and other initiatives in the budget.  So jobs are our number one 
priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the 
employment projection is one of the major assumptions of the 
budget, which you just said, yet you seem very uncomfortable 
with your own projection and for good reason. 
 
Last year individual income tax fell by $20 million short of 
your budget estimates because no jobs were created in the 
province.  That's why that money had to be made up last year 
by massive utility increases. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, this year you project, you predict, that 
the revenue from individual income taxes is going to go up $40 
million.  How do you plan to make up that amount if your 
employment figures once again fall short like they did last 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
direct the member opposite to an independent source, Professor 
Rushton from the University of Regina, who has looked at all 
the economic forecasts for Saskatchewan in terms of the 
growth and the economy and the projected growth in jobs.  And 
what he says about the estimates in this budget, when it comes 
to growth in the economy and growth in jobs, is that we have 
been extremely cautious. 
 
So one of the reasons we are on track in our deficit 
projections -- and I know this would be a mystery to the 
members opposite, that you would actually bring a budget in on 
target; this is a world they are not familiar with -- one of the 
reasons we are on track is because we are always cautious in 
the assumptions upon which we base our budgets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I would like to 
hear your thoughts on another one of your assumptions that 
you're making on behalf of your government, and that is that 
the projected deficit will be $190 million.  I notice that you 
have budget transfers from the federal government equivalent 
to a hundred million dollars; that accounts for nearly all of your 
forecasted drop from 294 to 190 million. 
 
Should the federal government decide to reduce any of this 
volume of dollars in transfers, Madam Minister -- and the 
deficit reduction will be almost equivalent to that volume of 
dollars that the federal government will not give you, Madam 
Minister -- what assurances have you received from your 
federal counterparts that this figure will not change, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I obviously do not 
want to upstage Mr. Martins's budget on Tuesday, 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

but I will say this.  The main increase in costs that this 
government incurred over the last year was because of the 
federal government.  They offloaded onto the province 
responsibility for status Indians' welfare payments.  The cost . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . your former friends in Ottawa. 
 
The cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan is $40 million a 
year.  There have been, as my colleague says, other offloads, 
changes in Unemployment Insurance.  The Liberal government, 
when they changed, added a 7 per cent increase to 
unemployment insurance premiums; that cost us a million 
dollars. 
 
We went to Ottawa with the argument that listen, you have 
offloaded a major cost onto the province and we would like 
some offset.  We feel very secure in equalization; it's is a 
five-year agreement.  The commitment of the new federal 
government has been: no surprises, cooperation with the 
provinces.  We feel secure about this year.  And as I said in my 
budget address, after that we do not believe the Liberals have a 
long-term game plan, so we don't know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, one revenue item under 
your control is transfers from Crown entities.  Your budget has 
forecasted a 50 per cent increase in funding from Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan -- 50 per cent, 
Madam Minister, from 40 to $60 million.  These revenues 
come from SaskEnergy, SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and other Crowns. 
 
Madam Minister, is this why you refuse to comment on no 
utility increases for the next year?  Are you planning to raise 
$20 million in taxes through utility rate increases this year or 
just an arbitrary increase in transfers from CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) as we get closer to 
the election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make two 
points to the member opposite.  First of all, I do wish he'd try to 
get the full story.  Money coming from CIC can come from 
Crowns.  If you look at what happened last year, it also came 
from asset sales.  So it does not mean that we're getting $60 
million from the Crowns.  It means we're getting $60 million 
from CIC, some of which could come from Crowns, but also 
from asset sales. 
 
The other point I want to make is with respect to utility rates.  
There was a change as a result of this budget.  In last year's 
budget, the package of utilities -- car insurance, telephones, 
electricity and home heating -- the package of utility rates in 
Saskatchewan was the second lowest in Canada . . . was the 
second cheapest place to live in terms of utility rates. 
 
What direction are we going in terms of utility rates?  In this 
budget Saskatchewan is the cheapest place to live in terms of 
utility rates, so we're moving in the right direction.  In fact we 
have the lowest utility rates in 

Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, you have 
also budgeted an increase in gaming revenue of about $50 
million, Madam Minister -- $50 million.  That is more than 
double the estimate for '93-94; more than doubled, Madam 
Minister. 
 
On the news this morning the minister responsible for Gaming 
said this: figure does not include any revenues the government 
may receive from implementation of the casinos. 
 
My question is simply this: where does it come from, Madam 
Minister?  What assumptions have you made that gives you the 
confidence to more than double the revenues from the gaming 
commitment from the minister of Gaming?  Would you answer 
that, please? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this assumes no 
expansion in gaming.  All it assumes is that what was in place 
for only part of the year, this year -- and we got revenues for 
only part of the year -- will now be annualized.  You get the 
revenue for the full year. 
 
I want to make a comment about the gaming issue, and this is 
directed to the Liberal leader as well.  It's fine for opposition 
parties to sit there and say, you know, we're far too pure to get 
into gaming.  We wouldn't get any money from gaming.  I want 
to ask them, especially the Liberal leader, if she doesn't want to 
be in gaming, where is she going to get that extra $75 million?  
Which tax is she going to raise or which cut is she going to 
make?  Opposition parties have to be accountable as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, it seems to 
me that you're skating on thin ice.  Out of a hundred million 
dollar reduction, 40 million depends on individual income tax, 
which is suspect -- hopefully for more employed people; 
hundred million depends on the federal government; 20 million 
comes from the Crown corporations; and 50 million comes 
from the gaming assumptions.  Not to mention forecasted 
natural gas revenues of over $50 million.  That's about $260 
million forecasted in increases that must be generated or 
compensated for to have you reach your forecasted budget of 
$190 million deficit. 
 
Madam Minister, would you agree that your revenue 
projections are too generous, optimistic, especially given the 
heavy burden of government taxes on people and businesses 
you have imposed, even last year, and now again this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan would find it ironic, to say 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

the least, that a member of the previous administration would 
stand in this legislature and give us advice on how to keep the 
books of the province.  There is an element of hilarity to that. 
 
What I'll rely on is not what I say, what they say, I'll rely on an 
independent source -- Professor Rushton -- who said on two 
different media occasions yesterday that the assumptions upon 
which this budget were based were very realistic. 
 
But the main point I'd like to make to the members opposite, if 
they'd ever take time to listen here . . . It sounds like a barnyard 
over there. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I don't want to interrupt the 
minister because she is on the question, but I can't hear the 
question.  There's too much noise coming from the members 
opposite.  And if you asked a question, I think you should give 
her the courtesy and listen to the answer. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- My final point is this.  The proof of 
the pudding is in the eating.  Last year we said we'd bring in a 
deficit of 296 million.  We delivered less than that.  We said the 
deficit for the next year is going to be 190 million.  We'll 
deliver that as well.  This is a government that delivers the 
promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gambling Revenues 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
addressed to the minister in charge of the Gaming Authority. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have stated in the media that the projected 
increases in gambling profits in your budget do not include the 
new casinos but will be generated from VLT (video lottery 
terminal) operations.  How much money will have to be bet by 
the people of Saskatchewan to generate $50 million in extra 
profit for the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In answer 
to the member's questions, I would want to say that the figure 
that we have budgeted is very realistic, as the Minister of 
Finance has indicated. 
 
And I guess I have a question for the member from Greystone.  
She stands in this House and she says, we support what you're 
doing but we don't support how you're doing it.  She knows full 
well that the revenue that we're going to be generating from the 
gaming industry, from the video lottery terminals, is going to 
be turned back to the people of this province through health 
care, through education, through highways, and through the 
budgetary process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she knows full well that that is the case.  On one 
hand she says, no gambling; on the other hand she says, 
balance your budgets.  I say to the member from Greystone, the 
only thing that you get from sitting on the fence is slivers, and 
the people of this province know that. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 
have a far greater chance at winning at any high-risk gambling 
game than I do getting an answer from you. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are 700,000 people of gambling age in 
Saskatchewan, people over 19 years of age.  This year you 
predict that the adult members of Saskatchewan families will 
lose more money to the government through gambling -- in 
other words, $81 million -- than the entire family of Crown 
corporations will pay in dividends -- $60 million. 
 
If, Mr. Minister, the extra $50 million in revenue is based on 
slot machines returning 7 per cent profit -- which is what they 
do -- shared by you the government and the site owners, it 
means approximately 843 million loonies have to be plugged 
into those machines for you to get your $50 million in profits. 
 
My question is this:  would you agree, Mr. Minister, that every 
single gambling age person would have to bet more than 
$1,200 per year to create those profits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
member from Greystone's question, let me say this:  she knows 
full well what the revenue percentage and the shares of those 
revenues are with respect to the video lottery terminals.  It's 
based on 85 per cent of the profits going into the Consolidated 
Fund and 15 per cent to the vendors.  She knows that. 
 
And I want to say to the member:  would you in fact deny the 
rural hoteliers the right to maintain a viable business?  Is that 
your position?  And I say to you, the member from Greystone, 
Mr. Speaker, would she rather that we increase taxes as Liberal 
governments across this province do?  Where would we get the 
money to pay for her 37 per cent wage increase that she just 
received? 
 
I say, Madam, would you rather have a 7 cents a litre gas tax?  
Is that your option?  Would you rather have a 1 per cent 
increase in E&H (education and health) tax?  Is that your 
option? 
 
I say to the member, you can't have it both ways.  Get off of the 
fence and decide where you're at. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I guess what 
you're telling us, Mr. Minister, is you don't know the answers 
to this.  We're talking about taking $15 million out of 
struggling Saskatchewan communities.  We're talking about 
hoteliers, okay?  That's what we're talking about.  We're talking 
about taking $15 million out of struggling Saskatchewan 
communities even though a few dollars are left behind for the 
site owners today before you introduce your casinos. Surely 
you have full information on the impact that this will have on 
those local economies. 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

Would you provide us today with the economic impact studies 
that assess these particular impacts that this will have on the 
communities of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will provide for 
the member today is the fact that 86 per cent of the people of 
this province gamble.  I would provide for the member that 
what we are trying to do is to maintain those gaming dollars 
within the boundaries of this province. 
 
Who does she support?  Do you support the rural hoteliers?  Do 
you support the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indians) 
and the aboriginal community who are looking for this as an 
economic development opportunity for job creation for them?  
Or do you support Premier Filmon? 
 
Would you want to see gaming dollars leave this province to 
support the Manitoba treasury, or would you rather we keep 
these dollars within this province? 
 
I say to you, Madam Minister, get off the fence because the 
only thing you're going to get on that fence is slivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you've spent a considerable 
amount of time rehearsing your non-answer but I'm still going 
to try.  Mr. Minister, according to your own social impact 
study, only 15 per cent of the people surveyed actually play 
video lottery terminals.  And that creates a very obvious 
problem for you.  Maybe you should try to figure this out.  
You're the minister of Gaming. 
 
You have to agree that we cannot rely on the current 15 per 
cent participation level shown in your study, because that few 
people just cannot bet the necessary volume of money. 
 
My question to you is this: how many new gamblers do you 
expect to entice and what level of spending will be required for 
them to support your $50 million in profit projections? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member for Greystone, that it is a fact that 86 per cent of the 
people of this province involve themselves in gaming of one 
form or another, whether it be the break-opens, the bingos, 
whatever form, that 86 per cent do. 
 
I want to say to the member from Greystone that the 
incremental dollars we want to see are what we may be able to 
attract from people coming into this province and spending 
dollars in our province on gaming, as opposed to our people 
going to Winnipeg and to North Dakota and to Alberta. 
 
I say to the member from Greystone that she can't have it both 
ways.  If she is an opponent of gaming expansion in this 
province, have her tell this House where she would suggest we 
generate this revenue.  Mr. Speaker, I say to the member one 
more time, she 

can't have it both ways and she should get off of the fence on 
this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cuts to Rural Hospitals 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health.  Your government's 
delivering the promised budget is going to deliver only one 
promise to rural Saskatchewan -- and that's to cut back on acute 
care bed levels in rural hospitals. 
 
Madam Minister, you say that your bed target levels for rural 
Saskatchewan will be 1.5 beds per 1,000.  Just to give you an 
example of what 1.5 beds per 1,000 means to the Moose 
Mountain Health District, Madam Minister, Dr. Schneeberger 
from Kipling Hospital said: the Wawota hospital will be closed; 
the Kipling hospital will be cut from 30 beds to 8 beds; the 
Redvers hospital will be cut from 28 beds to 8 beds; the Arcola 
hospital will be cut from 26 beds to 8 beds. 
 
Madam Minister, the Moose Mountain Health District won't 
deny these closures or cut-backs are coming when the health 
boards receive their budgets April 1.  Madam Minister, can you 
give us the commitment today that your budget will not cause 
any further hospital closures in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 
member opposite is fully aware of the fact that the budget 
levels in this budget allow district boards to continue to operate 
the services that are in their district.  The member opposite is 
also fully aware, because I've answered this question several 
times in the House, that the bed targets are of a provincial 
nature; they are flexible; they are to be phased in over a long 
period of time as we develop alternative community-based 
services. 
 
So the member opposite is fully aware that that question has 
been answered in considerable detail in the past and this budget 
this year allows the districts to continue to operate the services 
in their area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, what that 
provincial nature means to rural Saskatchewan is further 
closures.  That's what it means, is it not Madam Minister?  The 
cut-backs I mentioned are for one health district using your 
formula for bed targets.  This is what is going to happen in the 
Moose Mountain district, Madam Minister.  It's going to 
happen all over rural Saskatchewan in addition to that. 
 
About a year ago you accused the official opposition of stirring 
up trouble by reporting rural health hospital cuts.  But, Madam 
Minister, the axe did fall on rural hospitals.  You denied any 
hospitals would close, but they did close, Madam Minister. 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

It's pretty easy to sit back and say it's up to the rural health 
boards in rural Saskatchewan, but it is you, Madam Minister, 
that sets the numbers.  It's you that sets the budget, it is you that 
sets the acute care bed levels, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell us in the Assembly today how 
many rural hospitals will be closed and how many beds will be 
eliminated in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
clearly opposed to reforming the health care system in a 
manner that is going to provide higher quality health services 
for Saskatchewan people and keep us in tune with what is 
happening around this world.  The member opposite is clearly 
opposed to that.  He is bent on proceeding in a certain direction 
that meets his political purposes, and he doesn't want to see 
what's happening around the world that will take us into the 
21st century. 
 
The member opposite is fully aware of the fact that the 
government has established a new initiatives fund for rural 
communities, that is going to increase the community-based 
services, the health promotion, and disease prevention 
programing in those communities; that will develop services in 
the home that will allow people to stay in their home instead of 
pouring money into services that do not meet real health care 
needs.  The member opposite, I know, does not want to face the 
reality of targeting funds to health needs. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Madam 
Minister, Dr. Schneeberger of Kipling says, and all other rural 
doctors are saying, Madam Minister, greater consultation is 
absolutely imperative before any further cuts are made to rural 
hospital beds.  He says that all hospitals are going to suffer as a 
result of the inevitable second axe that is going to fall on rural 
hospitals all across rural Saskatchewan, and the whole health 
care reform started on the wrong foot. 
 
That is what one doctor in rural Saskatchewan and that's what 
other doctors in rural Saskatchewan are saying about your 
changes, Madam Minister.  Discussions of further hospital 
closures of rural Saskatchewan, rural hospitals, are dramatic 
cut-backs.  That's what's happening, Madam Minister.  And 
they should not be made without consultation with elected 
boards, Madam Minister. 
 
We are receiving calls from all across Saskatchewan about 
rural health care boards, Madam Minister.  We want to know 
today and receive a commitment from you, Madam Minister, 
that you will hold democratically elected board elections as 
absolutely soon as possible, as you have promised. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You know these words really ring hollow 
from a party that right next door in Alberta 

is implementing huge cut-backs in health, much larger than 
what this government has done. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Savage. 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They're savage cuts without a plan, 
without any way of minimizing the impact of these cuts.  This 
government had a plan from the day it took over as 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And the member opposite is fully aware 
of what's happening in Alberta, yet he stands up and criticizes 
what's going on when we have had an absolutely massive 
consultative process which is ongoing and continues. 
 
And in response to his question about Moose Mountain, I just 
have received information from my office which actually says 
they get an increase in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Could I have leave to introduce some 
visitors? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to 
introduce visitors from the Regina Home Schooling 
Association.  With the Regina Home Schooling Association we 
have 75 students ages 5 to 10 years old, along with some 
adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have with the association Gareth Dillistone 
who is on the steering committee for the Association of Regina 
Christian Home Educators.  As well, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
president of the Saskatchewan Home-Based Educators, Judy 
Whiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be visiting with them right after this 
question period and I'll be meeting with them also at room 218 
and will be there also to take pictures, Mr. Speaker.  So I ask all 
the members to welcome the home-based association -- home 
schooling association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I ask 
leave to make a statement. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm not by orders of the day yet.  I've 
got ministerial statements and introduction of Bills to do yet, 
and then I'll recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

orders of the day, I ask leave to make a statement on athletes in 
the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1030) 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are eight 
Saskatchewan-born athletes and officials on the Canadian team 
at the Olympic Winter Games which opened on Saturday, 
February 12 in Lillehammer, Norway.  In speed skating, Mike 
Hall and Catriona Lemay are currently residing in Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan and are athletes at the Olympics. 
 
Catriona Lemay from Saskatoon is on the women's speed 
skating team.  Catriona was a Saskatchewan sport athlete of the 
month for December.  She qualifies for the 500 and 1,000 
metre events at the Olympics. 
 
Mike Hall, from Regina Beach, is one of Canada's top male 
speed skaters.  Hall, aged 23, was named to the Canadian team 
after competing at the national long-track speed skating trials in 
Calgary.  Hall competed in the 5,000 metre event and he 
finished 22nd among 32 -- 32 competitors -- this past weekend 
at the Olympics. 
 
In the luge, Bob Gasper, originally from Bruno, is on the luge 
team.  Ben Morin from Gravelbourg is also a member of the 
luge team's mission staff. 
 
In figure skating, Mr. Speaker, Susan Humphreys, originally 
from Moose Jaw, is competing in women's figure skating.  In 
hockey, George Kingston from Biggar is the director of hockey 
administration.  Troy Parchman from Moose Jaw is an 
equipment manager with the Canadian hockey team.  Kevin 
Muench, now living in Moose Jaw, has been named to the 
officiating crew for the Olympic hockey competitions.  Muench 
is the only Canadian hockey official at the games. 
 
In the cultural Olympic competitions there are six 
Saskatchewan participants in the cultural side of the Olympics. 
 
They are competing in the snow sculpture competitions.  Mr. 
Speaker, they are Ms. Patricia Leguen, captain, from 
Saskatoon; Miss Mariana C. Neves from Saskatoon; Mr. 
Marius Paul from Beauval; Mr. Lloyd Pinay, captain, from 
Langham; Mr. Laurie Afseth from Saskatoon; and Mr. Kim 
Ennis from Big River. 
 
On behalf of all members we congratulate these individuals and 
we wish them well in Lillehammer, Norway. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to make a private 
members' statement regarding the 20th anniversary of the 
Moose Jaw Multicultural Council. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
members for leave in order to make this statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I inform the House 
that tomorrow, Saturday, February 19, marks the 20th 
anniversary of the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council. 
 
There is a Chinese proverb which states that the big river is 
strong because small rivers flow into it.  This proverb may be 
applied to multiculturalism.  Our province and country have all 
been made stronger because of the contribution of many 
cultures who have settled here and who've brought their own 
cultural traditions. 
 
The Moose Jaw Multicultural Council has long been one of the 
most active in all of the province of Saskatchewan and 
continues to be an active participant in community matters and 
does a superb job of providing a centre through which 
immigrants and refugees are welcomed into the community and 
assisted in their settlement needs. 
 
The council also provides an annual outdoor recreational 
festival called Motif for the enjoyment of all residents and 
tourists.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, in recent years Motif has had to 
expand from a one-evening to a two-day celebration of the 
collage of cultures that make up our community. 
 
The Moose Jaw Multicultural Council plays an important role 
in promoting intercultural understanding and awareness by 
working closely with city officials and other agencies in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
And today I ask the House to join with me in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw Multicultural Council for reaching this important 
milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege on behalf of 
the opposition yesterday to respond to the speech from the Hon. 
Minister of Finance.  And I guess in quoting from her book, 
Delivering the Promise, is probably more accurate than what 
we had at first 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

intended to respond, on the basis that it is a good title for the 
budget.  It's delivering on a promise, Mr. Speaker, and 
members of this Assembly, it's delivering on a promise of more 
taxes. 
 
Last year the Minister of Finance said, this is what the taxes are 
going to be for 1993-94 and she committed herself to that.  
And, Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, you delivered.  You 
also delivered on delivering the promise.  This is sequel 2, Mr. 
Speaker, and members of this Assembly, this is sequel 2 of 
delivering on the promise, delivering on the promise of more 
taxes.  And that's not the only promise that's being delivered 
through this -- and indirectly a promise to increase utility rates 
like they've never been increased before.  That's delivering on 
the promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I believe, as we've raised in question period and other 
areas, I believe, Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, that the 
delivery on the promise is, as you said, going to impact in 
Saskatchewan.  It's going to impact not as you said, positively, 
but it's going to impact negatively. 
 
We have had, Madam Minister, as we've tried to question you, 
a reduction in the volume of dollars that are going to be coming 
in because of income tax.  And why, Mr. Speaker?  Why is this 
delivery going to be less in income tax than it was expected to 
be?  Because, Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, there are 
9,000 less jobs in the province of Saskatchewan today than 
there were when they took office.  That is the reason, Madam 
Minister -- 9,000 less jobs.  And that's the reason why we have 
a delivery on the promise. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there's other things that are going to be 
impacting here. And why is there a reduction on jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan?  Why is there a reduction? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I pointed out in my questions yesterday that there 
are increases in many, many areas in this government's review 
of what they're going to be doing.  For example, Mr. Speaker, 
the tax increases come, and utility rate increases.  We have had 
increases in sales tax, income tax, gas tax, resource tax, liquor 
tax, SaskPower rates, SaskTel rates, SaskEnergy rates, driver's 
licences, vehicle registrations, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) rates, tuition fees, livestock fees, 
brand fees, incorporation fees, business registration fees, 
pasture fees, crop insurance premiums, workers' compensation 
premiums, prescription drug charges, property taxes, because 
of their offloading.  And, Mr. Speaker, it even costs more to get 
married these days in the province of Saskatchewan because 
these people increase the fees on everything that moves. 
 
As a matter of fact as I was thinking about this yesterday, my 
father bought a $22 rifle in 1937.  And if he wants to go to a 
game show . . . or if I took it to a gun show in the province of 
Saskatchewan I would have to pay $50 to have that gun at that 
gun show. 
 
Madam Minister, you have raised fees on everything 

that moves in this province, and even those things that are 
static.  And, Madam Minister, the people of the province are to 
the point where they can't give you any more because they have 
been taxed right out of existence. 
 
And that is a very, very serious problem.  Businesses can't 
continue to exist under those kind of tax rate increases that you 
have provided the people of this province. 
 
In the short run . . . and speaking as a part of an article that I 
read in the Leader-Post on February 16: In the short run, 
businesses will be looking for more positive signals in the 
Saskatchewan budget this week. 
 
Madam Minister, there were no positive signals.  The signals 
are that there is going to be an increase in taxes in this province 
that come indirectly to every person and every person wanting 
to do business in this province. 
 
And that is the reason why we are rejecting this budget.  That is 
the reason why the people of the province are rejecting the 
budget.  That's why in today's editorial page from a leading 
political columnist, Mr. Eisler says that you are going to cause 
a serious problem with the tax increases that you have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What you see on the top, Mr. Speaker, is nothing.  But on 
delivering on the promise, Madam Minister, you are delivering 
on the promise you made last year to collect more taxes.  More 
taxes from the people of the province of Saskatchewan who are 
already leaving the province in droves because they can't afford 
to do business here. 
 
And my view, Mr. Speaker, is this: that if we want the 
economy of this province to grow . . . and I've been a person 
who has resided in this province all my life, and I believe in 
this province.  I've worked in this province; I've invested in this 
province.  But I can't take my land and my equipment and my 
farm and my ranch and move it to Alberta like business people 
can.  I have to continue to exist in this province. 
 
But, Madam Minister, people are saying over and over again 
that they will have to move, if they want to continue to do 
business, in this province.  They have to move elsewhere. 
 
Madam Minister, it is a serious, serious problem when the 
wealth of this province is going down instead of up.  We have 
to increase the wealth of the province.  We have to increase the 
volume of taxpayers in this province in order to have the people 
in the province pay less tax.  That's the only way we're going to 
overcome this hurdle and you haven't even considered that in 
response to the kinds of things that you've done in setting up 
this budget. 
 
Madam Minister, we need more taxpayers in this province.  
This is without a doubt.  And what we have had is a steady 
decline in the volume of people prepared to pay taxes. 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

As a matter of fact, Madam Minister, it's been the opposite.  
There are more and more people who are requiring assistance 
in this province than ever in the history of this province -- 20 
million more people on welfare.  You put in the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 20,000. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Twenty thousand more people on welfare, 
Madam Minister, and you are putting onto the people of this 
province another $40 million worth of taxes in welfare and 
social services that have to go to pay for those 20,000 extra 
people.  That, Madam Minister, is the wrong way for this to be 
going.  It's the wrong trend, and if we want to talk about trends, 
Madam Minister, the trend is to move out. 
 
Madam Minister, as I pointed out in my questions this morning, 
there is a hundred million that you're anticipating coming from 
the federal government.  Where does that come from, Madam 
Minister?  That comes from my taxes.  That comes from th  
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  That hundred million 
million, that's more taxes; it isn't less taxes. 

e We're told (he also goes on to say) that we should be happy 
because it's not worse than what they said it would be. 

 
Madam Minister, you talked about the gaming going up $50 
million in revenue.  The gaming people in this province are 
going to have to contribute another $50 million to the economy 
of this province.  Or as a matter of fact, Madam Minister, are 
you going to take it more?  Are you planning on taking more 
out of the people who provide services out of the benefits they 
get from the bingo halls and the Nevadas?  Are you going to 
take that money from those people who provide benefits to 
their local hospitals, benefits to their local communities, are 
you going to take that money away?  Is that what the plan for 
the $50 million is? 
 
And if it is, Madam Minister, you are in very, very serious 
difficulties because those people are providing health care 
services across this province. And, Madam Minister, it is 
important for you to remember that and that's why I'm pointing 
it out to you today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she talks about another $20 million increase in 
income tax -- $20 million increase in income tax.  And she, in 
her forecast of what is going to be concluded in the March 31, 
is that she is going to have $20 million less income tax in 
'93-94 than she had predicted -- $20 million less than she 
predicted, and now she's going to increase income tax even 
more. 
 
My view of that, Mr. Speaker, is this: she doesn't understand 
that in order to have the capacity to pay income tax, you have 
to have income.  And in order to have income, enough to 
generate the differential between last year's forecast and this 
year's forecast . . . is a differential of $40 million, Mr. Speaker.  
And is she going to get that out of the economy of the province 
of Saskatchewan the way she is operating it?  No, I don't 
believe she is.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's what causes a serious 
problem. 

(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a column in today's newspaper said this, and I 
believe Mr. Eisler is absolutely accurate in that the headlines 
say: "If this is good news, I'll take the bad."  That was his 
headline on his political story.  And this man has carried 
political stories against my government, against my political 
party, but this, Mr. Speaker, is an indictment of the Minister of 
Finance's capability of leading the finances of this province.  
He says this: 
 

 It is really just an extension (part 2, sequel 2, of delivering 
the promise) -- part two, if you will -- of last year's bad-news 
budget. 

 
That's what he says, and he's absolutely right.  He's absolutely 
right. 
 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you're getting beat up year after year after 
year, you finally get used to it.  And people are getting to the 
place, Mr. Speaker, where they're choosing, where they're 
choosing . . . we have had people on that side of the House say 
people are choosing between drugs and food.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the cost for running the government of this province 
keeps going up -- keeps going up.  The costs keep going up, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that people in the province have 
recognized that. 
 
We are speaking in many cases exactly what the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are telling us.  We are speaking 
about the issues that people in the province are telling us.  We 
are identifying issues that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan are telling us.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
what the Minister of Finance needs to do, and do far more of, is 
go and find out what the people of the province really think 
about what her budget is. 
 
A street poll -- today's paper -- a gentleman says: 
 

 I think the fact that we've got one of the highest per capita tax 
rates says there is something wrong.  I also don't think the 
fact that they are playing politician with this is good.  When 
they first start they say the deficit is bigger that it is, then at 
the end of their term, they make things look good.  That is not 
right. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan are starting to 
understand, not only what this government is doing about a 
high deficit projection when they took office, but they saw also 
in Mr. Chrétien's, or Mr. Martin's budget analysis and financial 
statement that he made when he took office, that he had 
overextended the volume of deficit in his budget. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is coming back to haunt. It's coming 
back to haunt.  They had a huge increase in write-offs, and 
what do they say about write-offs today?  Well if we have to 
write off a little bit, that isn't 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

going to make too much difference on the budget.  And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is exactly what they did in 1991 when they took 
office. And now they say, well it doesn't really matter; we'll let 
it slide. 
 
But the public, the public don't believe you any more and that's 
what they're saying.  They don't believe when they're telling 
you that that's what the budget is going to be because there's 
too many places to hide. There's too many places to hide. 
 
This budget address dealt with 60 per cent of government 
spending -- 60 per cent of government spending.  But where 
did the other 40 per cent go?  The other 40 per cent is not 
available to this Legislative Assembly to assess and judge 
whether it is spent in the way that the people of the province 
want it to be spent.  That is what the people have to deal with. 
 
There is 40 per cent of this budget, or of the budget spent by 
this government, is not identified in this budget address.  Forty 
per cent is not there.  Three billion dollars is spent by the 
Executive Council of this government, $3 billion is spent by 
this executive and that, Mr. Speaker, is spent without this 
Legislative Assembly being able to address it. 
 
That's what the problem is.  Three billion dollars is hidden from 
the people of Saskatchewan, it's hidden from the members of 
this Assembly. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this budget talks 
about -- a hidden agenda in the utility rates. I read them. Fee 
increases.  All of that is all identified as a part of what has to be 
looked at in this legislature in the future.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, people want to have access to that.  The people of 
Saskatchewan want to have access to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raised the question from a constituent of mine 
yesterday.  A constituent of mine asked, in utility rate increases 
in the province of Saskatchewan, I would like to have 
somebody regulate and control that.  When was the last time 
that was heard, Mr. Speaker?  Was that heard in the 80s?  No.  
People in the '80s didn't say we had to have somebody looking 
after our utility rate increases.  No, they didn't say that.  But in 
the 1970s, they did.  Why?  The highest single increase in the 
history of Saskatchewan was in the energy component.  And 
that, Mr. Speaker, was phenomenal. 
 
People in the province of Saskatchewan have to have some way 
of controlling the socialist agenda of the province of 
Saskatchewan in dealing with utility rate increases.  And 
they're asking for it again, Mr. Speaker, from the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan; are saying to this government, can 
you give us a chance to have somebody review the utility rates.  
Somebody has to review the utility rates. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly, this Assembly should have 
the opportunity to do that.  Members of this Assembly should 
have the opportunity to do that.  Members of this Assembly, 
whether they're government members, back-benchers, or 
opposition, should have some way of knowing what those 
utility rate increases are.  They should also, Mr. Speaker, 

know, as sure as I stand here, what the budgets of those Crown 
corporations should be.  That's what they should know.  We 
should know what they are. 
 
What we review on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, is this.  
Two years after, as long as three years after, we get to review 
some of the budgets that have taken place and the financial 
statements that have occurred because of budget spending.  We 
don't know what the budgets are.  Can we find them?  No.  
Should this Assembly have a view of 40 per cent of the 
province's spending?  People of Saskatchewan are saying yes.  
People of Saskatchewan are saying yes, I want an opportunity 
to see them just as well as anyone else. 
 
I have to have a responsibility as a member of this Assembly to 
show the people of the province of Saskatchewan where the 
money is being spent in utility income.  I need to know.  I need 
to know, as people of the province of Saskatchewan need to 
know, where that money is being spent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, do we know, for example, last year where 
$64 million were spent in the Crowns?  Do we know?  Do we 
have a way of finding out?  The capital projects expected in 
this budget are $700 million.  Do we know where they're going 
to occur, Mr. Speaker?  Is this Minister of Finance and 
Executive Council going to show us?  No, Mr. Speaker, they're 
proudly not. 
 
The minister responsible for SaskPower, the minister 
responsible for SaskEnergy, the minister responsible for 
SaskTel, and all of the other ministers with their Crown 
responsibilities, are they going to tell us where that capital 
project alignment is going to be?  I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What you will find, somewhere in a flash is they can open up a 
building, open up a facility.  Will they tell us where the Liquor 
Board is going to spend their money, putting in a Liquor Board 
store in northern Saskatchewan when the hospital is made up of 
ATCO trailers, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That's the kind of spending these people do.  And the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan don't want to have that any 
longer.  That's where it's at, Mr. Speaker.  And we want to 
represent that opinion in this Assembly and we believe in it.  
We believe in it fundamentally.  That's why we have suggested 
changes to the people of this Assembly, and hopefully we have 
some way of making them realize, some way of making them 
realize that they have to take and do what the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan elected them to do. 
 
They didn't elect them to hide and cover up.  Forty per 
cent -- 40 per cent of what the people of the province pay to 
this government is not identified in this budget.  Forty per cent 
is not identified.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  And it has 
always been done that way and I still think it's wrong. 
 
The people of this Legislative Assembly should have the right 
to identify where those projects are going to 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

have their money spent, what they're going to be, whether they 
have value.  And people of the province need to know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this opposition caucus has suggested some very 
important changes to this Assembly, and I believe that they 
should be identified.  And I'm going to do that. 
 
I want to start by saying that the Minister of Finance made a 
statement and said: 
 

 We have opened the meetings of the Board of Internal 
Economy to the public and will appoint an independent 
commission to review the salaries and the benefits paid to 
MLAs. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the Leader of the Opposition, it was 
the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Thunder Creek, 
who first initiated that statement that the Board of Internal 
Economy should be opened up.  It was the member from 
Thunder Creek who said that first.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
being . . . the credit is being taken. 
 
We'll let them have the credit.  But will they go the step further, 
Mr. Speaker, will they go the step further and allow members 
of this Assembly to regulate and have a voice, have a voice, 
Mr. Speaker, in how the utility rates of this province are set. 
 
We have asked this Assembly to consider a Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
to consider a Bill that would allow the people of this Assembly 
to have a view of the utility rates and their increases and the 
benefits they would be to the province of Saskatchewan.  We 
have asked this Assembly in a Bill before this Assembly to 
address that, to allow the members of this Assembly to see 
those utility rate increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and what do those members opposite say?  No.  
Do you know why, Mr. Speaker?  The back-benchers on this 
Assembly might not be capable; that's what they said.  The 
back-benchers in this Assembly may not have the intelligence 
to deal with utility rate increases in a very pragmatic, political 
way.  They have said that about themselves. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the opposition 
caucus that we believe our members are capable of identifying 
the need or not the need of increasing utility rates or whether it 
is there for strictly a partisan purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the reason why we have suggested it.  But 
there is a lack of confidence on the Executive Council, the 
cabinet, the Premier and his cabinet, to allow his back-benchers 
any view of what those utility rate increases . . . What they 
probably were told -- go out and sell it.  Go out and sell the 
fifteen and a half per cent increase in natural gas costs.  Go out 
and sell it, all of you.  Go out and sell it.  See whether it sells.  
Go up and down the malls in your communities and Main 
Street and coffee shop and see whether it sells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn't.  It doesn't sell at all, and they 

know it.  Does an increase in SaskPower rates sell out in your 
community?  Do the people realize what they're getting?  No, 
Mr. Speaker.  Each one of these members of this Assembly has 
come to the place where they say, what does the cabinet tell us 
to say? 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, comes and leads to the next point that 
we need to start in this Assembly.  We need to start to say, do 
the individual members who represent their constituencies in 
each and every one of you, do you represent your 
constituencies and the people who elected you?  Are you 
having a voice in this Assembly on how this Assembly should 
be run?  Are you having a voice in this Assembly on how and 
what should be done in it? 
 
Now that's a very, very important question because the 
perception in your minds may be that you are, but the 
perception out in the country is that you don't listen.  You don't 
listen.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very significant in this 
discussion. 
 
We are proposing more free votes in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, and that gives me an opportunity to represent my 
constituency as they wish.  And it gives each member in this 
Assembly the right to represent his constituency in the way that 
they wish -- which is very, very important, in my opinion.  And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is where we need to go. 
 
We are also suggesting some, I believe, innovative ways of 
reducing cost of administration.  Mr. Speaker, the people of this 
province in the next election are going to have eight less 
members of the legislature -- eight less.  So that really the load 
is going to be carried by eight less people for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we have also suggested, Mr. Speaker, is a reduction 
in the cabinet ministers equivalent to that.  We have suggested 
that if there is a limit to what should be . . . let's take an 
arbitrary number like 25 per cent, of a quarter of the people of 
this Assembly should be cabinet ministers, then they should 
have a reduction today of cabinet ministers. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure just what one cabinet minister costs, 
I'm not sure of what two cabinet ministers cost, but what we 
would have is a substantial saving in this Assembly and for the 
people of Saskatchewan.  If the ministerial offices were closed 
down and shifted the responsibility to other ministers, it would 
reduce the volume of load on the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the tax they would pay, very, very 
significantly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another observation I would make is this.  Is 
there a way we can reduce the costs further?  Is there a way that 
we could do this in many other ways?  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
have a whole lot of suggestions that could be made in how we 
could reduce the costs. 
 
For example, members of this Assembly being allowed to be on 
boards of directors on Crown 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

corporations.  Mr. Speaker, today, today we have people in this 
Assembly who are individuals who have responsibilities -- and 
some of them assume them -- to their constituents.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, other than that they do nothing.  And I think it's time, 
Mr. Speaker, that they be allowed to sit on boards of Crown 
corporations.  I think they should sit on those boards and they 
should give direction. 
 
There should be a committee of this Assembly reviewing those 
utility rates.  Members of the opposition should be allowed to 
be on that committee.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is the way we 
would systematically allow the people of the province some 
control, the people of the province control, of what the rates are 
going to be, how they govern, and that's what the agenda today 
is, Mr. Speaker.  And if this government, if this cabinet, the 
Premier and this cabinet, do not recognize that, they are going 
to lose and lose big time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, society today is not going to stick, society today 
is not going to stick with the political party that they were a 
part of yesterday.  And that has nothing to do with whether I do 
right or wrong.  It has to do with an attitude that is out there 
today, Mr. Speaker, and that attitude is that I am a consumer 
and I will shop, Mr. Speaker, I will shop for that political party 
that most likely is there to serve me. 
 
And if this Legislative Assembly wants to continue to hide 
behind the cabinet, the closed doors of the cabinet decisions 
and the boards of directors of Crown corporations, then they 
will be rejected by the consumers of the province of 
Saskatchewan, in a vote, because 40 per cent of their budgets 
are not being considered by this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the public today are going to say, as a 
consumer, I can't buy that any longer.  That's what this 
gentlemen said from the streets of Regina.  He said, I can't buy 
that any longer, and that is the reason why we are saying, Mr. 
Speaker, open it up, open it up.  The people of the province 
want to see; they want to see what we're doing.  They want to 
understand what we're doing. 
 
And the reason they don't understand is because we don't give 
them the facts.  The Minister of Finance has not given them all 
the facts.  She's 40 per cent short.  In a baseball game, if she 
was hitting 600, she'd be good.  But in the Legislative 
Assembly, she's not.  If she was writing a test at the university, 
she'd fail, Mr. Speaker, on a 60 per cent hit.  And maybe the 
member from Churchill Downs did make 60 per cent in order 
to get his law title, but the rest of us have to compete on a 
higher level than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is what we are suggesting to the members of this 
Assembly that we do.  Open it up to the public so that the 
people who are the consumers have a right to judge whether 
you're doing the right thing.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is where 
we have to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that we have suggested as 
a review of this Assembly -- and I have 

spoken considerable time on Crown corporations -- we would 
like this Assembly, in reviewing the financial statements, to 
have the individual appointed from the opposition to chair the 
Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it works in the Public Accounts Committee.  
Precedent has been established that the Leader of the 
Opposition has the freedom to appoint an individual from the 
opposition caucus to be the individual to be the chairman of the 
Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the Crown corporations . . . 40 per cent 
of the spending, 40 per cent of the spending of the Government 
of Saskatchewan in Crown corporations is only identified and 
reviewed after the fact?  After the fact, Mr. Speaker.  And that's 
what's wrong with it. 
 
The consumers of the province of Saskatchewan believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is wrong.  I want a say, is what people are 
saying to us.  I want a say in what's going on.  I want a say and 
I want to review what's going on.  I want to know why my 
utility rates go up.  Is it to offset income in the Consolidated 
Fund? Let me make the decision to do that then.  Is it 
cross-subsidizing other Crown corporations that shouldn't be 
subsidized? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we go through the process of identifying the 
issues, as we go through the process of identifying the issues 
that there should be a review made by the individuals of this 
government, the cabinet, the Premier and his cabinet, 
individuals on this side of the House will be identifying in the 
various areas their responsibility.  They'll be identifying in 
Health what they see needs to be fixed up.  They'll be 
identifying in Education things that need to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over and over again we will be identifying.  And 
the reason, Mr. Speaker, that I have identified that Crown 
corporations is an item that we should assess in this Assembly 
is this, that that is my responsibility.  My responsibility is to 
ask this Assembly about the spending of CIC, Crown 
corporations, and my responsibility is to make sure that the 
people of Saskatchewan are getting their money's worth. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe they are.  We need to have a 
way for the people of Saskatchewan, the consumers in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to know what's going on.  And we 
don't have it.  And what we are going to do as a part of our 
responsibility here is ask the government over and over again, 
can we have an opportunity to have a chairman on Crown 
Corporations Committee?  Can we have members of this 
Assembly review the spending of Crown corporations?  Can we 
have that?  Is that the way for the consumers of Saskatchewan 
to have it? 
 
And I believe it is because the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan have to pay.  They have to pay their telephone 
increases, they have to pay for how utility rates are increased.  
They have to . . . they'll 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

understand that.  They want to understand that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I've made these points this morning to the 
members of this Assembly, I can only say to you that if you 
want to be identified with the consumers of the province of 
Saskatchewan, which I want to be identified with, then I 
believe, I firmly believe it's time for you to change your 
agenda.  Change your agenda so that we together, that we 
together can walk into the 20th century having the people who 
are the consumers of the province of Saskatchewan identify 
with the load they've got to carry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are prepared to carry a 
lot of weight in this province.  Traditionally they've been . . . 
they have cared for their community.  Traditionally they set up 
those telephone companies at the beginning of time.  They set 
up hospitals.  They set up nursing homes.  They did all that.  
They took it out of their pocket over and above the taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We're prepared to share the burden, the responsibility, but, Mr. 
Speaker, the consumer today says, he says over and over again, 
I want to understand from you what the implications are going 
to be.  And we in this province need to understand it and we're 
all as consumers saying, allow an opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan to become involved in this Assembly.  They're 
asking that, Mr. Speaker, all across Canada, all across 
democracies in the world.  They're asking, can we as 
consumers become involved as people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we're going to push for as 
members of the opposition in this budget debate as they talk 
about health care, as they talk about utility rates, as they talk 
about education, as they talk about labour responsibility, 
employment responsibility, business responsibility, economic 
growth.  People want to take the opportunity to create wealth. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if on every corner they get it twisted and 
wrung out of them, they're not going to do that.  And I believe 
that as a part of a group of legislators, we need to take the 
opportunity that we have today and deliver on that opportunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting for this budget; I don't believe 
it identifies in a very clear way what we should be doing in 
jobs; I don't believe it identifies what we should be doing in 
health care; I don't believe it identifies what we should be 
doing in education, job creation -- any of those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's a dismal failure in allowing the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan to view what they should be 
viewing in the terms of covering only 60 per cent -- 60 per 
cent -- of the budget of this province, the spending of the 
budget of this province.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not 
support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Merci, M. le Président.  I want to first of all to say welcome to 
all the members of the legislature in this current session.  I also 
want to congratulate and welcome the new member from 
Regina North West.  I know that she's participated in the 
democratic exercise and certainly I hope she fulfils her role 
responsibly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the Minister of 
Finance, the cabinet, and my colleagues for putting together 
this particular budget.  And I want to say that, at the outset, I 
will be supporting this budget.  I will be supporting the 
direction this government has taken from the outset and I most 
certainly am supporting the direction and delivering on the 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a great politician once said, I must find out which 
way the people are going, so I can get in front of them and lead 
them.  I do not totally subscribe, Mr. Speaker, to that story, but 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, we as a government, when we were 
elected in October of 1991, faced some monumental challenges 
and had to make some very important decisions for the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, took 
some very, very decisive decisions.  And, Mr. Speaker, we did 
that, and again I applaud the minister for that direction. 
 
When we were first elected in 1991, we promised to open the 
books.  And we did that and we let the light shine into those 
books.  And what it revealed to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan was that this province was in dire financial 
consequences. 
 
And because of those dire financial consequences and the 
financial situation, we had to implement a very very, very, very 
ambitious and very difficult direction, and we did.  And I want 
to say that for the most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
people in the province are very supportive of the promise.  And 
that as I go around my constituency and I speak to business 
people, to families, to working men and women, I can tell you 
that they are supporting and they are understanding what this 
government has to deal with, and they most certainly are 
determined to support us to the end. 
 
(1115) 
 
As I said at the outset, that when we took office we inherited a 
very dire financial picture.  The projected budget deficit for 
1991 had been pegged at 265 million, projected.  However we 
quickly discovered after opening the books that the actual 
deficit was going to be $1.3 billion -- a slight miscalculation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again we took some very deliberate action to counteract this 
grave financial situation.  People of the province said, you must 
address this and you must get the financial affairs of this 
province in order.  And, Mr. Speaker, we have done that. 
 
We've looked at internal operations in government.  And we've 
looked at every possible cost-cutting measure we could 
implement.  And in the first year we 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

took dramatic steps to try to trim some of those expenditures.  
And some of these reduced costs have been, cutting cabinet 
ministers' salaries by 5 per cent, cutting MLA communication 
allowances by 25 per cent.  By making common sense, 
day-to-day changes, we have saved an extra $30 million over 
two years.  One of these, as the Finance minister indicated 
yesterday, is by just instead of providing new health cards each 
and every year -- just sending out a sticker -- we have saved 
$200,000 to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are going to be introducing legislation to reduce the 
number of MLAs by eight.  Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to 
hear the member from Morse say that this was an assault on 
rural Saskatchewan and that the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan were going to be the losers in the reduction of 
MLAs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we instructed an independent commission 
to look at the demographics and to take into consideration the 
changing demographic picture of the province.  And they did 
this independently, and they reported back, and then they held 
public hearings on their findings.  And if we believe in the 
concept of one voter . . . one person one vote, Mr. Speaker, we 
cannot find too much at fault with the report. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this again speaks to major initiatives; all of 
these cost-cutting measures speak to delivering the promise, 
and that is, delivering a more effective, more efficient, more 
responsive government at less cost to the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we'd welcome that the other members, the 
opposition and in particular the third party, would do the same.  
The Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
supporting and doing her part to save money for the taxpayers, 
instead has increased the money coming to her by 37 per cent.  
And, Mr. Speaker, in a year-end interview with some of the 
media, the Leader of the Third Party said that this government 
had not cut costs enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday as she was being interviewed, the 
Leader of the Third Party said that this government should 
increase funding for education and other areas.  Well which is 
it, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Does she want this government to cut 
costs further, or does she want it to increase spending?  Which 
is it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, again it points to this leader sitting on the fence 
and eventually, as the minister in question period said, she's 
going to end up with some slivers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that we have reduced costs has been 
renegotiating some of the previous administration's deals, and 
in particular the megadeals.  Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that 
some of these deals were probably formed for the good of the 
province.  However, unfortunately some of them did not, I 
believe, have a proper due diligence done on them, in 
particular, on the financial viability of these projects. 

And that $1.7 billion guarantees that we had on these 
megaprojects, Mr. Speaker, was not looked favourably in the 
eyes of our investment community and as well by the bond 
rating agencies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it was not right and it was not fair for the 
taxpayers of this province to accept such deals.  And we moved 
swiftly and we renegotiated these megaprojects, these deals, 
and that has reduced the taxpayers of Saskatchewan's exposure 
to these particular deals by $400 million.  That is delivering on 
the promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that one area that 
the previous administration . . . and certainly they have 
damaged the financial situation of this province.  But there's 
also another important area, Mr. Speaker, that they have 
damaged even more seriously, and that is the credibility of 
government, the credibility of the political institution. 
 
And wherever you go, Mr. Speaker, in this province -- in my 
constituency, certainly, and my constituents are probably the 
same as anywhere else -- they look to their leaders, their 
elected leaders, to guide them and lead and govern for them.  
But they're also sceptical because of the past 10 years under the 
former administration. 
 
So we've taken initiatives and we've implemented measures 
internally in government to make government more 
accountable to the people and the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Some of those measures, Mr. Speaker, are releasing mid-year 
financial reports so that the people and the taxpayers have an 
opportunity to look at our projections, to look at the financial 
projections that this government makes, and to judge whether 
we're on course.  Dramatically different, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
than the previous administration. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've also taken some initiatives as far as 
financial reports on the Crown corporations, agencies, boards, 
and commissions.  They're timely, they're precise, and, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they definitely reveal the financial state of 
these particular agencies. 
 
We as well opened up the Board of the Internal Economy to the 
public; again, so the public and the people of this province 
could see exactly how government and how we spend their 
money on administration in the legislature.  Again, 
dramatically different than the previous administration. 
 
We're going to be appointing an independent commission to 
look at MLAs' (Member of the Legislative Assembly) salaries 
and per diems and benefits. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're providing summary financial 
statements which provide the Provincial Auditor, again as I say, 
with timely, precise financial 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

statements. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's ironic that the member from Morse in 
his presentation this morning claims that the government is not 
showing all of the financial picture to the auditor.  Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I have a quote here from the Provincial 
Auditor in which he states: the province's financial statements 
are the most useful financial statement issued by any senior 
government in Canada.  And that's delivering on the promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we're delivering on another promise.  
There's another, equally important reason for delivering the 
promise.  Over 70 per cent of provincial government spending 
goes to third parties -- to local governments, schools, 
universities, and so on.  They too have shared in the necessary 
pain of the past two years but they have not been surprised.  
And that is because we have announced in our annual budgets 
what these third-party governments would be getting for the 
previous . . . for the next two years.  So as I say, there is no 
surprises, and certainly they appreciate that. 
 
The level of funding promised in last year's budget remains 
unchanged.  Planning for them was certainly difficult, as it was 
for us, but they knew exactly what they had to plan with.  Mr. 
Speaker, because we have endured, because they have taken 
part in this remarkable fiscal turnaround, this budget promises 
that barring any unforeseen problems, this will be the last year 
third parties will receive funding reductions." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly on how we are delivering 
the promise for jobs and economic renewal.  At the beginning 
of our mandate, we put together a blueprint, an economic 
blueprint for this province.  That blueprint was called 
Partnership for Renewal.  And in that document, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we identified 31 initiatives that had to be 
implemented.  And I might add that this document was 
consulted . . . we consulted extensively with all of the major 
stakeholders in the economy and they all agreed on the 
blueprint. 
 
And one of the features of this economic strategy is that it has 
specific time lines.  It states quite clearly in the document 
where this government's priority as far as economic 
development and job creation are going.  It has put that 
emphasis on small business and cooperatives and putting the 
emphasis on the small and medium-sized business instead of 
the megaprojects. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again you can see the resemblance 
between our Partnership for Renewal economic document, 
the blueprint for the economic future of Saskatchewan, again 
identifying the initiatives in conjunction with our stakeholders, 
putting it out for them to see, putting out the time lines, and 
you can see the resemblance with the budget, our balanced 
budget plan. 

We have put out for the people of this province the budget plan, 
the balanced budget plan at the beginning.  And they can see 
for themselves that we are meeting our projections and our 
targets, and we're going to be doing the same on the economic 
side.  And that again is delivering on the promise. 
 
(1130) 
 
Some of the major initiatives in our economic renewal strategy 
paper are the Trade Development Corporation.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there's no doubt when we went around and consulted 
with business people, with labour, and with associations and 
interested stakeholders in the economy, there's no doubt that 
business people -- small, medium, large business, but in 
particular small business -- identified the need to have some 
type of corporation or agency to go out and identify and 
develop markets for our products. 
 
They felt that was one of the resources that they were lacking.  
And our government has responded to that request.  And I'm 
very proud to say that the Trade Development Corporation is 
going to improve provincial marketing services, and I think 
will lead to a substantial increase in export opportunities for 
Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan products. 
 
As well, we've announced the Tourism Authority -- Mr. 
Speaker, again one of the initiatives in our blueprint.  What this 
does is that we've identified tourism as a major catalyst in the 
economy of Saskatchewan.  We believe however that the 
partners, the stakeholders in tourism, should come together so 
that they can collaborate and cooperate more closely to expand 
the opportunities in tourism.  And that is being implemented. 
 
And one of the most important pillars in our strategy paper, our 
blueprint, is certainly the development of regional economic 
authorities.  And as we head, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
towards -- and I should say as we rush -- towards the 21st 
century, it is going to be imperative that we refit, we restructure 
our economy to better meet the new challenges of the 21st 
century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that speaks to is more 
cooperation, more collaboration, amongst the stakeholders in 
the economy.  And that's what regional economic development 
authorities speak to, is identifying the resources that you have 
in a given area.  And once you've got it identified, the resources 
and the strengths, and you also have identified the weaknesses, 
you come together as stakeholders and work more closely to 
pool these resources so that you can better meet the challenges, 
as I say, of the 21st century. 
 
I am proud to say that we've already announced a regional 
economic development authority in Prince Albert, and there's 
more to come and they will be announced in due course, Mr. 
Speaker. 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

We're also working on a research and technology 
commercialization plan.  And it's ironic that when you look at 
some of the most developed nations and some of the most 
industrialized nations in the world, there's something very 
clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that is, these nations spend more, 
both in terms of the public and the private sector and the 
cooperative sector, on research and development than any other 
nations. 
 
And if we are going to meet the challenges, as I say, of the 21st 
century, which is going to be a knowledge-based society, then 
it is imperative that we put more money . . . and we work more 
closely together with our stakeholders to identify more funds 
for research and technology. 
 
We're also working on a comprehensive transportation policy.  
And this is very important because I believe and it's my sense, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the pace of change that is going to 
happen in the next number of years is going to be very, very 
dramatic; in particular if the federal government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, starts to offload more and more of its traditional, 
historical responsibilities on the backs of the provinces and of 
the people. 
 
And one such area that I want to identify is the Western Grain 
Transportation Act.  And the link here between this Act and a 
transportation policy is that since the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade was implemented, there is tremendous 
pressure on the federal government to dismantle or 
dramatically reduce the amount of money that goes into this 
particular program. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan 
where we have some of the most extensive branch line and rail 
line systems and we're seeing it being dismantled, if the change 
in the Western Grain Transportation Act should pass or if they 
should decide that they're going to eliminate it -- which I fear, 
and I would advise them not to even consider -- it is going to 
have a dramatic impact on our rail line system and the way we 
transport goods in this province, in particular, wheat and grain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- And it's ironic, it's ironic that the federal 
government -- and we participated in the national infrastructure 
program -- it's ironic that on the one hand they might be cutting 
back on such a program, the western grain transportation 
subsidy, that will dramatically put pressure on our 
infrastructure, no doubt about it.  It's going to increase the costs 
dramatically because more and more of the grain transportation 
is going to be by truck-trailer, thus putting pressure on our 
infrastructure -- our highway infrastructure.  Isn't it ironic that 
when they're going to be contemplating cutting back on that 
side they're going to be putting some money on the 
infrastructure side? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that they're working at cross purposes 
here if they're considering dramatically 

cutting back on the transportation subsidy.  So we're working, 
and I know my Minister of Highways is working, very 
arduously and diligently on behalf of the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan, on a comprehensive transportation policy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also are advancing with two new 
uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan, a $250 million 
expansion.  And we're also participating in a multi-party 
training plan to train Northerners for at least 60 per cent of the 
resulting jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I pointed out earlier, as we prepare our 
economy, as we prepare our society for the new economic 
order we're going to live in and the new challenges of the 21st 
century, it's going to be imperative that in any economic 
development plan . . . and when we talk about the economy and 
when we talk about the creation of jobs, I think we're going to 
have to recognize that a lot of the new jobs are going to be 
driven by technology -- high-tech jobs and knowledge based. 
 
And it's interesting to note that if you look at the Canadian 
economy, from 1990 to 1993 there was an increase . . . or I 
should say a decrease, an elimination of jobs; 185,000 jobs 
were eliminated in the Canadian economy in that three 
_year period between 1990 and 1993.  But if you go below that 
number and you start to dissect exactly where the job gains and 
the job losses happen, it's very interesting.  It tells another 
story. 
 
If you look at individuals who came out of university with a 
university degree, the expansion of jobs in Canada was actually 
300,000, so there was actually 300,000 new jobs for this 
particular group.  If you then go to individuals who are coming 
out of colleges and technical institutes, these individuals that 
had trades, the increase in jobs was 185,000 -- 185,000 for this 
particular category. 
 
When you go down to individuals who had a grade 12 
education, the loss of employment opportunities or jobs was 
actually 16,000.  And then if you go down to individuals who . 
. . high school drop-outs -- and again, sad; we must do 
more -- but the job loss for this particular sector was a 
whopping 600,000. 
 
So what does it say?  It's imperative that we put more 
emphasis, and I certainly want to point to the federal 
government, that we put more emphasis on training, on 
education, and on preparing our young people for the future 
and the 21st century.  And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that our government is working on that and that is a priority for 
us in the coming years as we prepare this province for the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, no economic recovery can 
fully be realized in Saskatchewan without getting agriculture 
and the agricultural industry back on track.  And to that end we 
have released our strategy paper, our vision for agriculture not 
only in the coming years but again, as I say, for the 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

21st century. 
 
And one of the priorities in this strategy paper is, again, 
identifying the sector, the unit that has been the most 
productive for the agricultural industry and for Saskatchewan.  
And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the family farm unit.  And 
we're priorizing that because we have seen in the history of 
Saskatchewan and we're going to see in the future of 
Saskatchewan that this is the most viable, the most efficient, 
and the most productive unit in the industry and anywhere in 
the world. 
 
And I'm proud to say that Saskatchewan farm families and 
Saskatchewan farmers have been the most productive in the 
history of this province, and they're going to be the most 
productive in the coming years.  And they will meet the 
challenges of the 1990s and of the 21st century.  And our ag 
strategy paper speaks to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Our strategy paper, Ag 2000, also speaks about 
diversity.  And that is absolutely crucial to the future recovery 
of the ag economy.  And we've seen in the past couple of years 
some dramatic steps forward as far as diversifying the 
agricultural industry. 
 
And to that end I'm proud to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 
government is implementing the agri-food equity fund.  This 
fund will support diversification and establish new, value added 
agribusinesses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've said it many times but I'll say it again. 
I'm one of those proud Saskatchewan farmers, and I for years 
have been involved in growing specialty crops.  And I started 
this rotation on my farming operation many, many years ago 
because I believed there was a future, and certainly the future 
sustainability of my farming operation.  And I've seen the rise 
of interest; I've seen the rise of new uses for specialty crops.  
And our government is encouraging that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have in my home community of Bellevue some of the most 
innovative, some of the most ambitious specialty crop dealers 
and business people that you will find anywhere.  Belle Pulse, a 
company from Bellevue, has been in operation for nearly 20 
years in purchasing and selling pulse crops right around the 
world.  And they tell me that the future in this particular sector 
is unlimited and in some ways untapped. 
 
I find it sad that we see that where we have a resource like this 
that we're not adding the full value to that product.  I find it sad 
that we see pulse crops being exported out of Saskatchewan to 
wherever it is -- Montreal or Winnipeg -- and the value added 
is done in those communities and in those cities. 
 
And I'll give you an example.  Prior to 1986, the peas and 
lentils were sent out of province, and in particular, peas -- to be 
be polished and split, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to polish and split peas.  Nobody can tell me 
that we can't do that in Saskatchewan.  We can and we are 
doing it because we have placed a priority on value added and 
taking our indigenous natural resources and resources like peas 
and lentils and adding value right here in Saskatchewan.  And 
that's diversity. That's one example. 
 
They're now talking about looking at a soup, an extension of 
pulse crops, peas and lentils.  Why should we send our peas 
and lentils to eastern Canada and they make soup and they send 
it back to us or they send it around the world?  Why don't we 
look at producing the soup right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, we have to be responsible; we have to do our due 
diligence on this.  We mustn't be like the former 
administration -- go headlong into something and then realize it 
was a failure and a catastrophe.  We got to be responsible and 
we're going to be. 
 
So those are some of the new types of industries, a new type of 
value added economic activity that we can create and we can 
have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're also working because we believe so 
firmly and so fervently and strongly in Saskatchewan farm 
families and the Saskatchewan agricultural industry.  We're 
working on renegotiating with the federal government a whole 
farm safety net program. 
 
And discussions are under way, as farmers and most other 
people in Saskatchewan realize.  By 1995 we will be exiting 
from the gross revenue insurance program.  And as I said, 
because we believe in our farm families, we believe that we 
must implement another whole farm safety net program. 
 
Now I just want to go back here a little bit and look at this 
particular program which was the gross revenue insurance 
program.  And I want to identify some of the deficiencies in 
this particular program so that members opposite, in particular 
the members from the Liberal Party, so that they can mention it 
to their colleagues in Ottawa, some of the deficiencies in the 
former gross revenue insurance program. 
 
When this program was designed, it was designed to shift the 
funding of agriculture and particular safety net programs from 
the federal government to the backs of the province and the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And we will not 
accept that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- When you take a look at the levels of funding in 
the gross revenue insurance program, you see provinces like 
Quebec and Ontario that had per capita spending on this 
program, $30 and $18 respectively, and then you come to the 
province of Saskatchewan that has been the bread basket of this 
country -- I might add, of the world -- and you see that the 
federal government, in this particular program, has put $146 
per capita on the backs of Saskatchewan people when we have 
50 per cent, 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

almost 50 per cent of the arable land in this country and we 
have less than one-fifth of the population, the smallest tax base 
anywhere in this country. 
 
The responsibility, the constitutional responsibility of 
agriculture has always been with the federal government -- in 
partnership, certainly, with the provincial governments, but 
none the less agriculture is a national issue and a national 
responsibility.  And here they are offloading nearly 35 per cent 
of the costs of safety nets on a small, beleaguered province like 
Saskatchewan.  Shame, shame on them. 
 
And I want to tell the members from the Liberal Party here in 
the House to make sure the message gets through to the federal 
Minister of Agriculture and to the federal government, the 
Prime Minister, to ensure that they take back their historic 
responsibilities in funding of agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we're also looking, when I speak of 
diversity, we're also looking at putting more emphasis on the 
livestock industry.  And in that vein and with that view in mind 
we have put together a beef export marketing agency. 
 
And again cattlemen from across the province of Saskatchewan 
have been telling me for years again there is tremendous 
opportunity in this particular sector.  Unfortunately we have not 
been paying the kind of attention and we have been not 
identifying and developing markets the way we should. 
 
And what have we done?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 
answered their concerns.  We are developing a beef export 
agency that will go and identify and cultivate these new 
markets.  We again are delivering on the promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Again, it's all part of a very comprehensive 
agricultural strategy paper, Agriculture 2000, the future 
direction of agriculture in Saskatchewan.  And I think members 
opposite and the people of Saskatchewan should monitor very 
closely the success of this particular document and the progress 
as we implement the measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a bit on health and families and 
the commitment that our government is making in this 
particular area.  When we moved to reform health care, phase 2 
of medicare -- and I think members in the House have 
commented many times about how fragmented, about how in 
some ways health care and health care deliverers were 
disorganized in some ways.  Four-hundred-and-some health 
boards across this province delivering a variance of programs 
and services, but in lots of ways not communicating with one 
another; in lots of ways when they were delivering the very 
same services and programs or similar programs, but not 
communicating with one another -- a duplication. 

And we moved to restructure and to reform that kind of health 
care delivery.  The communities across the province decided 
for themselves how they would reorganize their particular 
districts.  We left it up to them to decide because we wanted to 
be developmental and evolutionary. 
 
And we've done that.  We have 30 health care districts in this 
province and for the first time their funding . . . the provincial 
government will fund these district health boards directly.  And 
with that in mind, the announcement yesterday by the Minister 
of Finance, our government is committing itself to spending an 
extra $10 million for rural health initiatives -- initiatives such 
as emergency, palliative, and community-based services in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to ask the members opposite, in particular the 
member from Shaunavon who said that rural Saskatchewan and 
rural health care was being eroded and that the needs of the 
people were not being looked after, I want to ask that member 
what he has to say about this particular initiative and delivering 
on the promise for better health care for people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we're also providing province-wide 
breast cancer screening programs, another major initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the families.  And if we are going to have all of 
the things that we desire -- a sound fiscal financial picture, 
economic growth, jobs, a good agricultural industry -- all of 
this depends that we have a strong family environment.  And to 
that end I'm proud to say that the Minister of Finance has 
announced some again major initiatives with respect to this 
particular issue. 
 
We are announcing the action plan for children.  And this will 
focus on prevention and support for children in situations of 
need.  I think that is absolutely crucial, and it's important I 
think in the context that 1994 is the International Year of the 
Family. 
 
(1200) 
 
We're also putting into place a children's Ombudsman.  And 
this, Mr. Speaker, again answers to children who unfortunately 
in our society are being marginalized, who do not have a voice. 
And we won't accept that.  That's insensitive, uncaring.  And 
again our government has its priorities in order, and one of 
those priorities is families and children. 
 
We're also implementing a Unified Family Court which will be 
implemented in the coming year. 
 
Again, all of this speaks to a government that has its priorities 
straight, unlike what is happening in the neighbouring 
provinces.  Let's look at friendly Alberta.  And you know, the 
members opposite and some people out in the general public 
spoke in such glowing terms of Alberta.  Well let's take a look 
at 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

glowing Alberta.  We have seen a Premier and a government 
take a severe, harsh, almost brutal approach to reducing 
expenditures, in some respects not cutting programs but whole 
amputations of programs with no considerations for the 
ramifications.  What's going to happen to these people? 
 
Is that the kind of government, is that the kind of priorities that 
the members opposite want to have?  I don't think so. 
 
And that is why, when we did our restructuring, we did our 
reforms, it was based around priorities.  And those priorities 
are, number one, a quality health care system.  People have said 
how we must have quality health care, and we're answering 
that. 
 
People have said that the family and social safety nets are 
important.  And that's one of our priorities and we're answering 
that, Mr. Speaker.  People have said that economic 
development and jobs are important.  And we're answering 
that, Mr. Speaker.  People have said that agriculture and family 
farms are important, and our budget speaks to that as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Monsieur Roy: -- Monsieur le président, j'aimerais prendre 
une opportunité de vous donner des remarques à des membres, 
les députés de la législature sur l'objet que madame la ministre 
a délivré hier ici dans la Chambre. 
 
Monsieur le président, les premières deux années pour notre 
gouvernement ont été assez difficiles.  On a hérité, monsieur le 
président, une dette accumulée de quasiment $14.5 milliards.  
Incroyable, quand tu regardes à la grosseure de la Province de 
la Saskatchewan, quand tu regardes la commande produits et 
services qui sont produits dans la province.  Quand tu regardes 
le montant des contribuables dans la province, c'est incroyable 
de considérer la magnitude du problème du défit qu'on avait 
quand on a pris les re pènes du gouvernement.  Et, monsieur le 
président, et mes chers collègues, hier, la ministre des Finances 
nous a délivré un budget qui démontre clairement que notre 
gouvernement a pris contrôle et a implementé des mesures pour 
renverser la situation grave fiscale dans la province.  Il y en a 
certainement dans la province qui nous disent "mais vous allez 
trop vite; vous êtes trop sévère avec les compressions".  Mais je 
peux vous dire, monsieur le président, que si on n'aurait pas 
implementé les mesures, pris les initiatives qu'on a pris, notre 
province serait quasiment banqueroute.  Et si on n'a pas, si on a 
pas une société, comme une province, la flexibilité fiscale, 
comment qu'on va délivrer et rencontrer les attentes que les 
gens de la Saskatchewan ont. 
 
Alors, on a implementé les mesures pour le bienfait des gens de 
la Saskatchewan.  Puis, ça été difficile, oui, je comprends, puis 
je suis en accord, oui, je suis sensitif à les premiers deux ans.  
Ca été difficile, oui, puis je remercie les gens de la 
Saskatchewan d'avoir compris, ou d'essayer de comprendre 
pourquoi on a implementé les mesures qu'on a implementées. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Monsieur Roy: -- Monsieur le président, quand on a pris les 
mesures, quand on a implementé nos initiatives, c'était très 
important d'avoir nos priorités identifiées.  Puis, je dirais que le 
budget qui s'en vient, le 22 février ici la semainrochaine, 
l'honorable Jean Chrétien, le premier ministre du Canada qui va 
délivrer, et aussi, monsieur Paul Martin et aussi monsieur 
Chrétien, le premier ministre, qui vont délivrer le budget 
fédéral.  Je souhaite bien, que eux, ont leurs priorités bien 
identifiées.  Parce que je peux dire que les priorités pour le 
gouvernement de la Saskatchewan, c'était une qualité de 
services médicaux qui était premier, le premier clause dans le 
budget du Canada; puis certainement, si on regarde le 
restructurage qu'on a fait, c'est pour sauver et garder le meilleur 
système de santé qu'on a dans le Canada. 
 
Deuxième des priorités, c'était les familles et les enfants de la 
Province.  Monsieur le président, je peux le dire que dans notre 
budget, on a des mesures et des programmes et des services 
pour les gens de la Saskatchewan, pour les familles et pour les 
enfants.  Ca, c'est une autre priorité. 
 
Monsieur le président, une autre priorité, c'est des emplois; du 
développement économique.  Et, monsieur le président, on a un 
plan pour le futur quand ça vient à des emplois et du 
développement économique.  Le plan, c'est appelé Partnership 
for Renewal.  Puis je peux vous dire qu'on a 31 initiatives dans 
le plan.  Ils sont bien identifiés, ils sont clairs, ils sont dret là 
pour les gens de la Saskatchewan.  Les hommes et les femmes 
d'affaires, ils peuvent regarder avec confiance et dire oui, ils 
sont là, on peu les voir, puis quand c'est qu'ils vont êtres 
implementés.  Je peux vous annonçer avec fièreté, avec 
confiance, que dans le budget qu'on implemente, il y a 
beaucoup d'initiatives qui sont clairement identifiées dans le 
plan.  Encore, monsieur le président, on renèguas sur la 
promesse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Monsieur Roy: -- Monsieur le président, je veux dire un mot 
sur notre économie agricole, certainement une relève de notre 
économie, ça ne peut pas se faire sans l'agriculture.  La 
province a toujours été basée sur l'activité dans le système 
agricole, dans l'industrie agricole.  Puis je suis fier, monsieur le 
président, et mes chers collègues, d'annoncer qu'on a une ligne 
de conduite; on a une stratégie pour le futur et pour le vingt et 
un siècle, puis ça, cette stratégie là c'est appelé Agriculture 
2000 et je peux dire que là dedans, les priorités ont étées 
identifiées et sont annoncées.  Puis, une des priorités, c'est les 
fermes familiales.  On a identifié celà comme priorité parce que 
la ferme familiale ça toujours été un des coins de la fondation 
qui a été très importants dans la province de la Saskatchewan. 
 
Et on a des mesures et des programmes pour aider les fermiers.  
Cette année on va faire des changements a des programmes 
d'assurance récolte.  Certainement, il 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

y a des producteurs dans la province qui nous ont dit qu'il y 
avait des inquiétudes, des graves inquiétudes à propos du 
programme d'assurance récolte.  Je peux vous le dire, monsieur 
le président, qu'on répond à ces inquiétudes la pà.  Il va y avoir 
des changements, et je pense que les producteurs vont voir très 
clairement que les fermiers de la province, que oui, on répond 
a pà leurs demandes, qu'on répond à leur concernes quand c pça 
vient aux programmes d'assurance récolte. 
 
Aussi, monsieur le président, on essaye d'agrandir le secteur de 
boeufs et de cochons, de porcs.  On veut agrandir ce secteur-là 
puis en ce secteur là, je suis fier d'annoncer qu'on va 
implementer une agence de développement pour le boeuf.  Puis 
cette agence lé va aller dans le monde entier, dans les pays 
autour du monde pour identifier, pour développer des marchés 
pour notre boeuf et des produits pour notre boeuf.  
Certainement, ça, c'est quelque chose que les producteurs, les 
fermiers de boeuf nous ont dit que dans la province, qu'ils 
voulaient qu'on fasse.  Encore, monsieur le président, on 
répond, on délivre sur notre promesse. 
 
En terminant, monsieur le président, je voudrais dire a pà mes 
chers francophones dans la province, que notre gouvernement 
est aussi sensitif a pà les attentes et les besoins des 
communautés francophones.  Durant l'année passée, on a 
implementé, on a passé le projet de loi numéro 39 qui vise a pà 
implementer une composante d'école francophone.  J'étais très 
fier d'avoir été une partie de ce projet de loi, de cette initiative 
et je suis très heureux que nous, les francophones de la 
province on va être finalement capable de gérer nos propres 
écoles et notre système d'éducation.  Oui, c'est pas 
complètement implementé, on a encore des obstacles, mais on 
va continuer et je souhaite que par l'automne de 1994, qu'on 
aye la composante en place.  Et je vais travailler très fort pour 
réaliser cet objet. 
 
Dans l'année qui s'en vient, monsieur le président, notre 
gouvernement, certainement va être en consultation, en 
communication et on a des discussions présentement avec des 
communautés francophones pour essayer d'améliorer les 
services pour les communautés et les gens.  Et je suis fier de 
voir que les communautés francophones ont identifié et ont mis 
en place leurs attentes et leurs besoins.  Et certainement, mon 
gouvernement va travailler très fort pour essayer d'implementer 
une ligne de conduite pour des services en français pour les 
francophones de la province, monsieur le président. 
 
Alors, en terminant, je veux remercier pour tous les voeux de 
support et certainement les gestes d'amitié que vous m'avez 
envoyés et le support que vous m'avez envoyé durant l'année 
dernière.  Et je regarde avec une . . . je regardositivement pour 
travailler avec vous dans la prochaine année.  Alors, je vous 
remercie pour avoir travailler avec moi et certainement, je 
pense que l'année prochaine et les années qui suivent vont être 
très bons pour les communautés francophones. 
 
(Translation: 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity 
to give some comments to members, deputies of the legislature, 
on the subject that Madam Minister delivered yesterday in the 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first two years for our government have been 
very difficult.  We have inherited, Mr. Speaker, an accumulated 
debt of $14.5 billion.  Unbelievable, when you take a look at 
the size of our Province and look at the services and products 
within the Province.  When you look at the number of 
taxpayers within the Province, it is inconceivable to imagine 
the magnitude of the problem that we have undertaken.  And, 
Mr. Speaker and colleagues, yesterday, the Minister of Finance 
delivered a budget that clearly demonstrates that our 
government has taken control of the situation and taken 
measures to reverse the serious fiscal situation of our Province.  
Some may say, you are going too fast; you are too strict or 
severe with all of your cut-backs.  But I can say, Mr. Speaker, 
that if we would not have implemented all of these measures, 
taken the initiatives that we have taken, our province would 
surely be bankrupt.  And if we don't have as a society, as a 
province, fiscal flexibility, how are we going to deliver and 
meet the expectations of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Therefore, we have implemented these measures for the 
welfare of the Saskatchewan people.  It has been difficult, yes, 
I understand, and I agree, yes, and I am sensitive to those first 
two years.  It has been difficult, yes, and I am grateful to the 
people of Saskatchewan for having understood or for trying to 
understand why these measures were implemented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, when we took those measures and 
implemented those initiatives, it was very important to have our 
priorities identified.  Then I would say that when the federal 
budget of February 22 will come down next week, that the 
Hon. Jean Chrétien, the Prime Minister of Canada who will 
deliver this budget and also Mr. Paul Martin who will deliver 
the budget, I would venture to say that they have their priorities 
set.  Because I want to say that the priorities of our 
Saskatchewan government have been a need for quality 
medical services, that was our first priority in the budget of  
Canada; and certainly, if we look at the restructuring that has 
occurred, it was set to safeguard the quality and the best health 
care services that we have in Canada. 
 
The second priority was that of family life and for the children 
of our province.  Mr. Speaker, I can say that in our budget, we 
have taken measures and implemented programs and services 
for the people of Saskatchewan, for the families and for the 
children.  That was another priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another priority was that of employment and 
economic development.  And, Mr. Speaker, we have a plan for 
the future when it comes to employment and economic 
development.  This plan is called Partnership for Renewal.  
There are 31 initiatives in that plan.  These initiatives are well 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

defined, clear, and are there for the people of Saskatchewan.  
Business men and business women can look with confidence 
and say, yes, the initiatives are there, we can see them and we 
can see when they will be implemented.  It is with pride and 
confidence that I can say that in the budget that will be 
implemented, there are many initiatives that are clearly 
identified in the plan.  Again, Mr. Speaker, we kept our 
promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on 
the agricultural economy, certainly a renewal of the economy 
cannot be made without touching on agriculture.  This province 
has always relied heavily on its agricultural industry.  And I am 
proud, Mr. Speaker, and so are my colleagues, to announce that 
we have undertaken a line of conduct, or a strategy for the 
future, towards the 21st century, and that line is called 
Agriculture 2000.  The priorities have been identified and 
have been announced.  One of those priorities is family farms.  
Family farms have been identified as our number one priority 
because farms have always been known as the foundation of 
our economy and play such an important role in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have measures and programs to help farmers.  This 
year, we are planning to make some changes to the crop 
insurance programs.  Certainly, there are producers in the 
province that have expressed anxiety, serious worries 
concerning crop insurance programs.  I can say, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are responding to those anxieties.  There will be change 
and I believe that the producers will see very clearly that the 
farmers of the province, that yes, we are responding to their 
needs and that we are responding to their concerns when it 
comes to the crop insurance program. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of expanding the beef 
and pork sector.  In this area, I am pleased to announce that we 
are planning to implement an agency to deal effectively with 
the development of beef markets.  This agency will go across 
the whole world, across the countries of the world, to identify 
and develop new markets for our beef and beef products.  
Certainly, this is something that the producers, the beef farmers 
have said, that in the province, that they wish that we could do.  
Again, Mr. Speaker, we are responding and delivering on our 
promise. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words to our 
francophone population within the province, that our 
government is also sensitive to their expectations and the needs 
of the francophone communities.  Last year, we implemented 
and passed Bill no. 39 towards the implementation of a 
francophone school component.  I was proud to have been a 
part of this Bill, of this initiative and I am pleased that the 
francophones of this province, we finally will be able to 
administer our own schools and system of education.  Yes, it is 
not completely implemented; there are still some obstacles, but 
we 

will continue and it is hoped that by fall 1994, that this 
component will be in place.  I will be working extremely hard 
to make this project succeed. 
 
In the year to come, Mr. Speaker, our government will certainly 
be in consultation, in communication, and is planning many 
discussions with the francophone communities to try to 
improve the services for their communities and services for the 
people.  I am proud to see that the francophone communities 
have identified and implemented their expectations and needs.  
Certainly, my government will be working diligently to try to 
implement a pipeline for francophone services for the 
francophones of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, to end, I would like to thank all of my fellow colleagues 
for the support and friendly gestures towards me, throughout 
last year.  I see, with... I look forward to positive results in the 
following year.  So, I thank you for having worked with me and 
certainly I think that next year and the years that follow will be 
very good for the francophone community.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, and fellow colleagues, in closing I just want to 
say that the past two years have yes, demanded a sacrifice from 
the people of Saskatchewan.  And I understand that our 
measures have brought on some hardship for some people.  
And I sympathize with them and I thank them for their 
understanding.  Because as I go around in my constituency and 
I talk to people, people are of the view, Mr. Speaker, that 
without financial freedom there is no future for the people and 
the province of Saskatchewan, and in particular the future 
generations that will come behind us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- I want to say that I will be wholeheartedly 
supporting this budget.  I will be supporting the Finance 
minister.  And again I thank the people of Saskatchewan for 
their patience and their understanding and their contribution.  
And I thank my caucus colleagues for helping us to deliver on 
the promise.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by congratulating the member 
from Kinistino for an excellent speech.  Indeed I think it is fair 
to say that the quality of the speeches given this year in the 
throne speech and so far in the budget speech have been well 
above what I remember in past years.  Government members 
and opposition members have made some excellent speeches.  
And I think the public have been well served by their 
representatives in this Chamber. 
 
I also want to congratulate the member from Regina North 
West for her recent election.  I was active in the campaign 
although we didn't always . . . we were pursuing the same 
objective but she got it.  And I really 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

want to congratulate you for what I thought was a 
well-organized campaign. 
 
And I want to congratulate the member for so far what has been 
diligent attendance in the House.  You've been here most days 
and I want to congratulate you for that. 
 
It is this Chamber which is really the essence of democracy.  It 
is here that the government is called to account; it is here that 
you get to present your alternatives.  And I want to congratulate 
her for what has been a diligent attendance to date. 
 
I wished I could congratulate the Liberal Party for their 
campaign in Regina North West.  I was frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 
was frankly appalled by it.  The Liberal campaign in Regina 
North West was just simply a disgrace.  It was built upon 
half-truths, upon mistruths and misinformation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Ned, you just talked about all the good 
speeches.  Now let's do something more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well this then, I say to the member 
from Moosomin, this is going to be a change of pace.  
Nobody's promising you a good speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite, including the 
member who just spoke from his seat, when those members 
were in government they had no rules and no regulations with 
respect to payment of MA (ministerial assistant) salaries.  It 
was all over the ballpark and it depended pretty much on how 
aggressive their minister was in getting the salary.  If there was 
any other system to their payment of MAs besides how 
aggressive their minister wanted to be on the subject, it totally 
escapes me. 
 
And like many of the problems which that group bequeathed 
us, this one has taken some time to sort out.  But we finally did.  
We finally put in place a grid for the payment of MAs.  And 
that is what . . . that badly needed reform is what the Liberal 
Party used to campaign in North West -- outright intentionally 
misrepresenting a badly needed reform. 
 
I know the members opposite think they're cute.  And I can tell 
you that you sometimes win an election with that sort of a 
fraudulent campaign.  What you can't do is ever build a good 
government on that kind of a campaign.  Witness the members 
opposite.  These were the people who ran in 1982 a campaign 
which reached a low watermark, an absolute low watermark.  
And look at the government which they built upon that. 
 
You build upon how you campaign.  And if the Liberal Party 
continues to campaign in such a fraudulent fashion -- you had 
to have known that it was fraudulent -- if they continue to 
campaign in such a fraudulent fashion, the public can expect 
from them pretty much what they got from the PCs 
(Progressive Conservative). 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- So I want to say to the member from 
Regina North West who has been diligent in attending this 
House -- I assume you do so because you hope to make a 
contribution to public life in Saskatchewan -- you can't make a 
contribution to public life and run a campaign of that sort. 
 
You might have raised the issues of wellness, you might have 
raised the issues of fiscal reform, you might have raised the 
issues of agriculture, you might have raised the issues of 
unemployment.  None of those were featured.  And I've got all 
your literature if you want to argue the point. 
 
You have none of that.  What you have is twelve and a half per 
cent increase, a fraudulent campaign. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, I assume that you're relatively 
conscientious or you wouldn't have been here as much as 
you've been.  And I've noted that.  But do think carefully about 
the style of campaign you ran, because you can't build a 
government on that. 
 
I want to congratulate as well the Minister of Finance for her . . 
. for the budget and the speech yesterday.  I thought it was a 
command performance, just a command performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I could not help 
thinking yesterday as I listened to the speech what a remarkable 
achievement the public of Saskatchewan have to their credit 
with this budget delivered yesterday.  This is a remarkable 
achievement by the people of this province.  And it is the 
achievement of the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
What this government attempted to do was nothing that John 
Crosbie didn't attempt to do at a point in time, was nothing that 
Allan MacEachen didn't attempt to do a generation earlier.  But 
only in Saskatchewan were the public prepared to make the 
sacrifices and to carry the freight and to do the things that had 
to be done to achieve the reform.  Only in Saskatchewan.  And 
the people of this province have to their credit a truly 
remarkable achievement. 
 
This is the province, Mr. Speaker, which was a basket case, as 
we learned to our horror on November 1, 1991.  This province 
had the most serious financial problem of any jurisdiction in 
North American -- bar none -- with the possible exception, I 
suppose, of Mexico.  But we had the most serious problem. 
 
We now have the lowest per capita deficit in Canada and a 
province which is well on its way to fiscal health.  That is a 
truly remarkable achievement that I think the public of this 
province should be proud of. 
 
And I say to the members opposite if you have any . . . if you 
know anybody in Ottawa, you might pass the word on: if the 
public of Saskatchewan, with all of the 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

difficulties we have, can get their finances in order, there is no 
excuse for the federal government continuing to make the 
situation worse, as they are.  There is simply no excuse for 
what I hear coming from Ottawa. 
 
I hear coming from Ottawa Paul Martin's team out skilfully 
selling the notion of extremely high deficit.  Let's call it 
something under $40 billion.  I hear them out skilfully selling 
it.  They may sell it in the short run, but in the long run this 
country deserves better than that, because in the long run it is 
going to lead to some very serious problems. 
 
So I say to the members opposite, if you know anybody in 
Ottawa, pass on the word that if we can do it, you can do it.  
There's no excuse for what I see coming out of Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of 
Finance stated yesterday, fiscal reform is not an end in 
itself -- it is a means to an end.  The New Democratic Party, of 
which I've been proud to be associated, defines itself as the 
party which has led the drive for social justice in Canada.  That 
has been our contribution to this nation.  We have led the drive 
for social justice. 
 
As was observed by Mr. Blakeney, in a speech given to the 
1984 national convention of the NDP at the time we were 
celebrating our 50th anniversary, in 1934 the U.S. (United 
States) was a demonstrably more progressive society than 
Canada; in 1984 the opposite was true.  The difference over the 
half-century was the NDP-CCF (New Democratic 
Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation). 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what we still are.  We're the party which 
leads the drive for social justice in this country.  We have done 
so through the instrument of government.  We have used the 
provincial government of Saskatchewan, and other 
governments which we have been fortunate enough to be 
elected to, to achieve social justice.  And that's what this 
government is all about. 
 
But if we are going to use government to achieve social justice, 
the government's finances must be put on a sound footing.  And 
that's what we're doing. 
 
This is the first step to an activist program for social justice in 
Canada.  And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that this government will 
be re-elected at the next election, and thereafter it will be the 
province which returns to its historic role of achieving social 
justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're not waiting however until 1996, the start of 
our second . . . what I predict will be the start of our second 
mandate.  While we suffer from these extremely serious 
economic problems and while we have taken some fairly 
stringent measures to deal with them, we are, Mr. Speaker, 
active in the area of social justice. 

There's a number of initiatives which have been taken, Mr. 
Speaker.  We have done some things in the past.  We have 
provided additional funding for child hunger programs, we've 
provided additional grants to child day care centres.  There was 
in the past, Mr. Speaker, a home adaption program for seniors.  
We've approved additional money for water and sewer in 
northern Saskatchewan.  And those are things which have been 
done in the past.  That continues, Mr. Speaker, with this budget 
and with this throne speech. 
 
The throne speech announced, Mr. Speaker, amendments to 
The Labour Standards Act so that we might put in place laws to 
protect workers who do not have the leverage, the economic 
power, to protect themselves.  I'm going to be returning in a 
more comprehensive way in a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to 
what we hope to do with The Labour Standards Act. 
 
We're doing the same thing with The Trade Union Act.  
Members opposite did their level best to make it as difficult as 
possible for working people to achieve a measure of justice in 
the market-place.  Members opposite did whatever they could 
to make it difficult. 
 
The former member from Melville, who could I suppose not be 
more different from the current member from Melville, the 
former member from Melville seemed to take a pride in this.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, we're going to level the playing-field.  
Unlike members opposite, we're not putting a thumb on the 
scale, that is not our thought.  We believe, Mr. Speaker, that if 
we level the playing-field, workers and management can work 
together for their mutual benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague will be in due course introducing 
amendments to The Ombudsman Act which will go some 
distance towards assuring that the rights of children, those who 
cannot vote and who therefore in some ways are powerless 
within society, that their interests and rights are spoken for and 
protected.  This, Mr. Speaker, is yet another step in the drive 
for social justice in Canada and we're taking it this year with all 
of the difficulties which we face. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech also announced that we would 
be introducing amendments, or perhaps a new Act, which 
would give police and law enforcement officers the tools to 
deal with domestic violence.  I again, Mr. Speaker, will not get 
into this in detail.  Suffice it to say that I don't think there's a 
law enforcement officer and I don't think there's a battered wife 
in the province who doesn't think that this legislation is badly 
needed.  I don't expect it to be universally acclaimed and I will 
be pleasantly surprised if either opposition party vote in favour 
of this, but the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that this is a badly 
needed piece of legislation.  We need to provide law 
enforcement officers with the tools they need to protect the 
victims of domestic violence.  Mr. Speaker, we will, in 
addition, be approving additional funds -- as the Minister of 
Finance said yesterday -- we'll be approving additional funds 
for the action plan for 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

children. 
 
Those, Mr. Speaker, are some of the measures which 
government will be introducing in our drive to achieve social 
justice in Canada.  I predict, Mr. Speaker, many of these 
measures . . . all of these measures will be adopted in 
Saskatchewan and many of them, Mr. Speaker, will spread 
throughout this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few moments, I want to spend a 
few moments talking about the labour legislation.  I hope, Mr. 
Speaker, as the throne speech stated, I hope to introduce these 
Bills later in this session.  I obviously will not get into the 
detail of the Bills.  I do want to lay out however the 
background and the reasons for our action in this field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Labour Standards Act and 
the amendments to The Trade Union Act will mark the 
completion of a comprehensive program of reform of labour 
law.  This program, Mr. Speaker, which was initiated under the 
leadership of the Minister of Justice, is the most comprehensive 
program for reform of labour legislation in Canada bar none, 
bar none.  Mr. Speaker, we have the most comprehensive 
program in Canada to reform labour legislation.  Nobody is 
attempting to do what we are doing.  And in passing, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the people in my department 
who have worked so hard to make this program possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Justice himself could point out, 
when he left as deputy minister of that department in 1982, the 
department had 286 employees.  When he returned as Minister 
of Labour in '91, it had 147.  That, Mr. Speaker, is by far and 
away the smallest Department of Labour in Canada.  It is a 
fraction of the size of departments of Labour in Alberta and 
B.C. (British Columbia). 
 
And with that skeleton staff, we have managed to bring forward 
amendments to six major Bills.  This, Mr. Speaker, is a 
remarkable achievement by the officials in the Department of 
Labour. 
 
I'll leave the subject by saying that it has been for them, it has 
been a labour of love.  And if it had not been a labour of love, it 
would not have happened all.  There is no way in the world one 
could command the kind of performance we've got from that 
department.  You can call that department on Saturdays and 
Sundays; someone answers the phone because they're back 
there working on these projects.  And I want to pay tribute to a 
remarkably dedicated group of public servants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the department, through 
some consultations, and myself through a series of visits 
around the province which we've come to call labour tours, 
have engaged in extensive consultations with the Saskatchewan 
public.  And, Mr. Speaker, there are some things which are 
becoming 

clear and there are some comments which I can make with a 
fair degree of confidence because I've heard so many different 
people in so many different communities make these 
comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want legislation which will provide 
protection for those who are not able to protect themselves.  
There is widespread agreement around the province that we 
need legislation to protect the single parent family which is 
having difficulty coping with today's labour market.  They want 
measures which will protect the part-time worker.  They want 
measures which will protect families and which will foster and 
encourage a strong family unit and will enable parents to fulfil 
their duties to their children.  These things have become clear 
as I've travelled around the province. 
 
With respect to The Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, the 
amendments to The Trade Union Act, some things have also 
become clear.  It is clear that the vicious anti-union sentiment 
which the members opposite peddle in their approach of divide 
and conquer is simply not shared by the public of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have listened, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite while in 
government portray unions as some sort of an evil imposition 
from afar.  And I hear them doing the same thing in opposition 
as they ask the Deputy Premier questions about the contracting 
policies of SaskTel.  I have heard them continue to try to 
peddle the notion that unions are some sort of an evil 
imposition from the East. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, with respect to trade unions, 
they are democratic.  Union leaders get elected and union 
leaders get defeated, and they get defeated on a fairly regular 
basis.  Unions are voluntary.  Unions are certified and unions 
are decertified.  A trade union is a voluntary, democratic 
organization of workers who get together to promote their 
interests.  They are doing in the union halls precisely what the 
chamber of commerce are doing at their meetings, talking 
about their mutual interests -- nothing more and nothing less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the public of Saskatchewan are 
tired of the approach of members of the opposition; they're 
tired of the approach of members opposite who want to divide 
and conquer. 
 
It is clear the public of Saskatchewan want us to put in place 
some structures which will enable labour and management to 
work together, and the lobbyists who take extreme positions are 
simply offside with the public.  The public fully support the 
efforts of this government to level the playing-field, and in so 
levelling the playing-field, enabling labour and management to 
work together. 
 
I say to members opposite, if you want to be a part of the future 
as distinct from the past, you'd better rethink the strident 
anti-union language which we hear coming from the opposition 
daily.  That is simply not a part of Saskatchewan in the 1990s. 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard February 18, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, if you asked members of this government to 
describe in a single phrase what this government is about, I 
suppose you might get 56 different answers.  But if you asked 
me, I would use the word, restructuring.  We were elected to 
head a government and a society which was stumbling towards 
catastrophe, and our efforts have been directed to heading off 
that catastrophe. 
 
As we turn briefly to the budget yesterday, to say that it was 
clear that we have . . . at least the crisis is some further distance 
back than it was some time ago.  We are slowly but surely 
getting out of this bog that the PCs got us into. 
 
We are restructuring in health.  Wellness is not about saving 
money.  The percentage of the budget which will be spent on 
health will increase each year.  It is not about saving money, it's 
about putting in place a more effective health program.  And I 
predict by the time the Lieutenant Governor issues the election 
writ, it will be patently obvious to most people in 
Saskatchewan that wellness has produced a much better health 
system.  I make that prediction. 
 
And that may be why the members . . . the Liberal Party chose 
to campaign not on wellness, but on a phoney, fraudulent 
campaign.  Maybe that's why you didn't want to talk about 
health care -- because this government's program is working, 
and it is becoming increasingly obvious it's working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have put in place a program in agriculture 
which is restructuring the industry, and it has been a difficult, 
painful period.  But I sense it is beginning to produce some 
results.  I sense the rain clouds are beginning to lift a bit from 
the agricultural scene.  I sense there's a ray of light there. 
 
And we're doing the same thing in the economy, Mr. Speaker.  
We are restructuring.  Mr. Speaker, there is no question but 
what there is a  recovery in place in the economy.  There's no 
question about that.  In some areas, Mr. Speaker, it is 
imperceptibly slow.  In some areas it's slow, but perceptible.  
And I think I might mention the retail trade as an area which 
sees a bit of an uplift -- the clouds have lifted a bit, but they 
haven't cleared. 
 
But there are some areas of the economy, Mr. Speaker, which 
are enjoying a runaway boom.  Dimensional lumber, farm 
machinery, oil and gas, trucking -- those are industries which 
are going flat out, limited by ability to get the equipment and 
trained people.  When you think about those industries, Mr. 
Speaker, they have one thing in common -- they're all export.  
This is a recovery which is being led by exports. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we're going to continue, if Saskatchewan 
is to survive in the . . . if Saskatchewan is to do more than 
survive, if Saskatchewan is to thrive in the 1990s, it is essential 
that we be competitive on a global market. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Free trade. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Farm machinery manufacturers . . . 
well the member from Kindersley chimes, free trade.  I think 
many members of this caucus would have no difficulty with 
free trade if that's what the North American Free Trade 
Agreement were.  It is not in fact free trade; it's a highly 
structured trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are going to compete on a global economy, 
we must be competitive.  We don't have an awful lot of 
advantages in Saskatchewan.  We have some, but they're not 
many.  What we have, Mr. Speaker, is a highly productive 
workforce.  And that's why farm machinery manufacturers are 
succeeding and that's why many of the others are succeeding 
that are exporting. 
 
If Saskatchewan workers are to be productive so that we can 
compete, they must be highly motivated.  If they are to be 
highly motivated, there must be a cooperative relationship 
between management and labour.  And that is the way of the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about building cooperative 
structures between management and labour so they can work 
together, we are very much talking about the future.  And when 
we say we want to set aside the conflict which has so 
characterized the English-speaking world in 
labour-management relations, when we say we want to set 
aside the conflict, we want to set aside the past and we want to 
prepare ourselves for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program of labour law reform which the 
Minister of Justice set in motion two years ago, is all about 
that.  Progressive labour law is not just something that 
produces social justice.  It is an essential part of economic 
restructuring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the industries which are succeeding are largely 
industries which have developed new technology.  That is true 
in dimensional lumber.  It is fascinating to visit my colleague 
from Meadow Lake.  It's fascinating to visit a mill in his riding, 
I think called NorSask lumber mill.  Highly computerized, 
technologically advanced for the world, and is succeeding, and 
succeeding grandly. 
 
That is true of the oil industry who have largely in this province 
developed horizontal drilling.  And that's why they're enjoying 
a runaway boom. 
 
These industries, Mr. Speaker, have been propelled onto the 
world stage by technological advances done here in 
Saskatchewan.  If they're going to work, the workers must buy 
into it and must work with it and be prepared to accept it.  That 
means that the workers have to be protected from the risks.  
They have to share some of the benefits in addition to sharing 
the risks.  This new technology inevitably involves a risk to 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we are to protect them from the risks of what 
succeeds in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, we must pass this labour 
law.  We must introduce these Acts which will enable workers 
to share in the rewards as well as the risks of the new 
technology. 



February 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

(1245) 
 
I noted with interest, Mr. Speaker, a paper published by the 
Canadian centre for market productivity . . . I haven't quite got 
the name right.  It is a body established by the federal 
government composed of equal representatives of business and 
labour.  It is called the Canadian centre for labour productivity. 
 
I noted in a recent document which they published, they made 
this very point that if we are to compete with the economies 
which are competing, we have to avoid the corporate cultures 
of the sort that I see coming into Canada.  And some, without 
naming them because they do not have an opportunity to 
respond in this Chamber, some of the retail discounters which I 
see moving into this province, Mr. Speaker, they import not 
just a method, they also import a culture.  And it's a culture of 
dealing with people that we ought to squarely reject.  We ought 
to reject it on human, compassionate grounds.  You do not treat 
people as some of those retail discounters treat people.  But 
more than that, we should reject those methods because they 
don't work.  That, Mr. Speaker, is very much in the past; that is 
old-style thinking. 
 
And these wars between retailers, Mr. Speaker, it is a war 
between a brontosaurus and a tyrannosaurus.  These are wars 
between dinosaurs. 
 
The future belongs to management and labour which can work 
together.  And that is the structures which we are putting in 
place with this labour legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to avoid going a lot further -- I'll be into 
the detail of it and I think I might offend a whole lot of people, 
I think, including Mr. Speaker.  At that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going 
to I think adjourn debate and I will make it clear before I do 
that, that I'm supporting this budget. 
 
I'm doing so with enormous pride, pride in what we have 
accomplished, but more important, pride in what the public of 
Saskatchewan have accomplished with this truly remarkable 
turnaround.  I support this budget with real pride.  And I ask, 
Mr. Speaker, for leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:48 p.m. 
 
 


