




















































Hansard: February 09, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 33 

 February 9, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Friday I shall 

ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation: 

please provide information on special warrant no. 6394 

authorizing an additional expenditure of 14.776 million for 

a write-off in the corporation, including why the write-off 

occurred, what the write-off was for, where these figures 

will be documented in Public Accounts, and when this 

figure will be documented in the Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have one question 

that I give notice that I shall ask on Friday next the government 

the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation: 

please provide information on special warrant no. 6494 

authorizing an additional expenditure of $83.902 million 

for the corporation including (a) what area the deficiency 

occurred; (b) why the deficiency occurred; (c) where the 

deficiency will be accounted for in Public Accounts; and 

(d) when the deficiency will be accounted for in Public 

Accounts. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation: how 

many farmers have dropped out of the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance program during the past year, and how many acres 

have been taken out of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

program during the past year that are no longer insured. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly a group of grades 5 and 6 

students -- 45 in total.  They're from Thomson School in my 

constituency and they're seated in the west gallery.  They're 

accompanied by two teachers, Loanne Myeah and Jeanne 

Reiley, and also by Mrs. Verity and Ms. Michel. 

 

It's my pleasure to see them here today and to join with them 

after the question period for a visit.  And I would ask all 

members to extend them a warm 

welcome here today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to members 

of the House a group of 22 civil servants sitting in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

These public servants are a part of a tour which occurs several 

times each year.  They're in the building today, in the Legislative 

Building all day with a program that is designed to show them 

how this building functions and familiarize them with some of 

the things that we do here. 

 

The people involved are from the departments of Finance, Social 

Services, Energy and Mines, Municipal Government, Economic 

Development, Justice, the Public Service Commission, the 

Property Management Corporation, and the Legislative Library.  

I'd like members to welcome the participants in the civil service 

tour to the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Casino Gambling 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government recently announced that it would 

be introducing casino gambling into our province.  This policy 

decision, which is going to have a major social and economic 

impact on our province, was made without any public 

consultation and without any debate in this legislature.  It has not 

been clearly demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, that the benefits of 

casino gambling will outweigh the costs.  And it has not been 

clearly demonstrated that the people of Saskatchewan indeed 

want casino gambling. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you allow that debate to take place during this 

session of this legislature, and will you allow a free vote on this 

very significant issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd be 

pleased to answer this question with respect to gaming in 

Saskatchewan.  Let me start by saying that this has not been an 

issue without a wide degree of public debate in Saskatchewan 

over the past months.  We've debated the gaming issue in this 

legislature almost on a daily basis in the last session. 

 

The last session the opposition continually asked, when are we 

going to make a decision?  Well we've made a decision and I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, not without consultation.  We've met 

with aboriginal groups, we've met with chambers of commerce, 

we've met with exhibition boards, we've met with church groups. 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I've been around this province, 

speaking with people from all areas.  As well, we've done 

considerable polling on the issue, and quite clearly the people of 

this province indicate that they will accept expanded gaming, 70 

per cent of them will, if it's controlled and well regulated by the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  And we intend to do just that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Member, Mr. 

Premier, a unilateral decision was made on this gambling.  We 

did not have the opportunity to debate; we did not have the 

opportunity to make individual decisions on this matter as 

representatives of the people. 

 

And I am sure that there are several members of your caucus, 

like the member from Regina Albert South, who do not think 

that casino gambling should be in our province.  I know there 

are members in my own caucus; we are not completely unified 

in this matter in our own caucus. 

 

So allowing these differences to be exposed in this legislature 

should not be viewed as a sign of weakness.  It would be 

viewed, I submit to you, a sign of strength of our parliamentary 

system that members are allowed to express the views of their 

constituents. 

 

Mr. Premier, I ask you: would you place a moratorium on 

casinos in this province until public hearings can be held and 

until MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) are allowed 

to express the views that they hear at those meetings through a 

free vote in this legislature?  Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, let me suggest to him that there will be lots 

of time for debate.  This forum quite clearly during question 

period on a daily basis will offer him the opportunity to ask 

questions. 

 

Our policy is quite clear with respect to casino expansion.  And 

we intend to expand, in partnership with aboriginal people and 

the exhibition associations, casino venues in both Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

And I want to say that this is subject to consultation with those 

communities and with the players involved.  I want to also say to 

the member opposite, if your government had consulted as 

widely with respect to your deficit budgeting in the 10 years that 

you were government as we have done on every single issue 

since we've been government, we wouldn't be facing $16 billion 

worth of debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The policy of deflection and blame throwing 

starts again, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately 

I'm going to stick to the topic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government has yet to release any studies that 

it has done on the social impact of casino gambling -- the impact 

that it will have on Saskatchewan families, particularly families 

whose members are unable to control their gambling. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'm sure that you know many Saskatchewan 

families will find it ironic that in this, the International Year of 

the Family, the federal government makes it easier to buy 

smokes and the provincial government makes it easier to 

gamble.  There's an irony in that, Mr. Premier, and I sense that 

you recognize that. 

 

But the only difference is, Mr. Speaker, that I've never heard of 

anyone spending their entire pay cheque on cigarettes.  But I've 

heard of many people who've spent their entire pay cheques on 

gambling.  Significant difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Premier, what studies have you done that measure the 

impact of your casino gambling policy on gambling addicts and 

their families?  Will you be able to table those studies for us 

today in this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I would be is be 

pleased to send a copy of the advisory committee, the Minister's 

Advisory Committee on the Social Impacts of Gaming, to the 

member from Rosthern.  This was presented by the chairman, 

Professor Harley Dickinson, who is well-known in this province 

for his research and for his background with respect to this area.  

And I'd be pleased to send that to him. 

 

I want to say that on behalf of . . . and because of that 

committee's advice, we are well on our way in terms of 

implementing the recommendations.  Some have been 

implemented and some will be, in the near future, implemented. 

 

I want to say that they have indicated that they wanted to do a 

base study and requested the government do a base study with 

respect to the prevalence of gambling.  We've done that.  I say 

that gambling has increased fairly dramatically in the 1980s.  In 

the 1980s the bingo revenue, as an example, increased from 

something in the neighbourhood of $4 million to something over 

a hundred million dollars without any study. 

 

We're taking a responsible approach to this.  We understand the 

implications of expansion of gambling.  And this government 

will high-profile and will determine in a very positive manner 

what needs to be done, and we will do what is required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just so we 

understand each other, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, I'm going 

to summarize with my last question. 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

Mr. Premier, once again you are telling Saskatchewan people, 

trust me; we've done these studies but we just won't show them 

to you.  That's what we were told last year about your video 

gambling partners.  And just recently one of your gambling 

partners, VLT (Video Lottery Technologies Inc.) was thrown out 

of Quebec because of the suspicious circumstances surrounding 

their business deals.  Quebec would not deal with these folks. 

 

If you really have done your homework, Mr. Premier, why won't 

you release your studies that your government has done, initiate 

public hearings on this issue, and hold a free vote in this 

legislature?  Will you do those things for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, the study will be made public.  I will be 

sending a copy to the Leader of the Opposition and to his 

caucus, and to the Leader of the Third Party and her caucus for 

their perusal.  But I just want to say, I find it ironic that this 

new-found caring for Saskatchewan families, from members 

who would put each Saskatchewan family $15,000 in debt, has 

little credibility. 

 

This government . . . Per person, I'm sorry.  This government 

will act in a responsible fashion with respect to this particular 

issue.  We will keep you apprised of the studies that we do.  And 

I say to you, Mr. Member, we will give you all of the 

information that you have asked for with respect to the 

prevalence study, and that will be forthcoming soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Premiums 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance.  I've been getting calls from farmers all over the 

province, including his own seat, and what they're concerned 

about is their plans for spring seeding.  They're concerned their 

premiums for crop insurance will be going up again but they 

don't know by how much.  By how much will their premiums 

increase, and when will you be passing on this important 

information to the farm families, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The question 

that the hon. member asked will be clarified very shortly at 

budget time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, last year crop insurance 

premiums increased up to 55 per cent for barley alone, and the 

coverage went down.  We could have dealt with that last budget, 

I guess.  We don't have to answer these questions in the 

upcoming budget.  However because of the high increases in 

premiums and low coverage from last year, farmers have been 

dropping out of the program at an alarming rate.  In fact to the 

point in the '92-93 years insured acreage was cut in half. 

 

Could the minister tell us: where is the plan that will make it 

more affordable for farmers to purchase crop insurance? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the hon. 

member, I'm sure he's aware that crop insurance is a 

federal-provincial program.  And again I stress that the crop 

insurance details will be here before us at budget time, and I 

wonder where the hon. member was last year when he supported 

those initiatives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- That, Mr. Speaker, is why I'm on this side 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, crop insurance has a deficit approaching some 

$600 million.  Because it is so high, would the minister tell us: is 

it true some risk areas in the province are looking at an 

additional 5 per cent surcharge to cover the deficit?  And can 

you identify these areas of the province that have to pay more 

once again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I want to 

tell the hon. member that those details will come forth at budget 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, we'll try and get an answer 

from the government on one of these questions.  Mr. Speaker, 

the decline in eligible acres under the crop insurance program 

even has members of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool questioning 

its viability. 

 

To the minister, if you won't draw premiums, will you write 

down the debt and start all over again so farmers can afford to 

insure their crops? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the hon. 

member, as mentioned earlier, crop insurance is a 

federal-provincial program, and I'm wondering if the hon. 

member did write to his federal counterparts in regards to his 

concerns.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have been in contact with the 

federal Agriculture minister.  And what I'm asking . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Will the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose please come to order. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, for the government member's 

information, I have been contacting the federal Agriculture 

minister.  However I see on the buildings in rural Saskatchewan, 

it says, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance office, and there's a 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

minister in charge.  So I would like the minister to give a 

response. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every farmer that drops out of the crop insurance 

program costs his neighbour more money.  The government was 

willing to write down debts of its Crown corporations, but it isn't 

willing to write down the debts for the crop insurance debt 

which affects the farmers. 

 

Mr. Minister, farm families feel you are attacking them.  Rural 

Saskatchewan feels alienated because you have a different set of 

rules for farmers than you do your own Crown corporations.  

Will the government do something to help farm families? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the hon. 

member, I'm wondering if he can share with us what the 

response was from the federal government, maybe perhaps by 

tabling the information.  And again I want to say the details of 

crop insurance will come out at budget time.  Thank you. 

 

Rural Physician Services 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the the Minister of Health.  I have some 

questions that I'd like to ask on behalf of Liz McKay, a young 

woman from Crystal Springs. 

 

Liz's grandmother, Mrs. Percy McKay, lived at Birchview 

Nursing Home in Birch Hills for 10 years before suffering a 

severe stroke on Friday, December 10.  Previous to your health 

care reforms, local resident doctors were called in to treat 

patients at nursing homes.  Since your reforms, Birch Hills 

doesn't have a hospital any more, and now physicians are called 

in from the Prince Albert Community Clinic. 

 

On the night of Mrs. McKay's stroke, the nurse in attendance 

phoned the Prince Albert doctor on call to come immediately to 

see Mrs. McKay, but the request was denied -- it was denied, 

Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, the doctor told the nurse Mrs. 

McKay was too old. 

 

Liz McKay says, wellness is a fine concept, but what do you do 

when you're not well?  She would like to know if there is an age 

cap on medical services in rural Saskatchewan today, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am not able to comment on 

the specifics of the individual the member raises in this House, 

nor am I prepared to comment on medical diagnoses which are 

made by professionals.  I am prepared to comment at all times 

on public policy.  And when the member wants to stand in this 

House and make grandstand statements about caps on age, I'm 

not sure that deserves a response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me say, in terms of health care broadly, and in particular, 

long-term care needs, the member will be 

aware that HSURC (Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission), the utilization review commission, has just 

provided its own study of the issue with some very important 

observations and recommendations which we, as government 

and working in conjunction with the district boards, will be 

looking at very seriously. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, I think Liz McKay will pass judgement on who is 

grandstanding here this afternoon.  She says and I quote: I can 

get a doctor out to treat my cattle faster than I can get a doctor to 

treat me. 

 

Mr. Minister, that's a pretty sorry state when people in our 

province in rural Saskatchewan can have their cattle treated 

faster than the people of rural Saskatchewan.  That's a strong 

statement, Mr. Minister, but understand Mrs. McKay's 

grandmother passed away.  That's exactly where your health 

care reform has left this province today. 

 

What are you doing for the people of rural Saskatchewan like 

Mrs. McKay who fall through the cracks of your wellness 

model, just like Liz McKay's grandmother did?  What are you 

doing for those people, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, for the individual situation 

the member raises, for people across our province of all 

generations, we are endeavouring to build, with the resources 

available to us, the strongest health care, the best quality health 

care, the long-standing health care that can carry us into the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I might add, Mr. Speaker, this task would be made easier, would 

be made considerably easier, if we were not living with a $16 

billion debt, not living with interest payments of $850 million a 

year -- a direct legacy, Mr. Speaker, of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's all fine 

and dandy to say that you are talking to people, district health 

boards are making decisions, these changes will improve health 

care, and the rest of your health care script, but the bottom line 

here is reform is not improving health care services to rural 

people.  In fact, Mr. Minister, Liz McKay says your health care 

reforms are a disaster. 

 

Mr. Minister, rural Saskatchewan has fewer doctors with heavier 

patient loads, fewer hospitals, with more cuts on the way, and I 

understand now that you are looking at a health care services 

utilization study that will shift even more elderly from long-term 

care to home care in order to save $15 million.  Doctors aren't 

even showing up at nursing homes, Mr. Minister; I doubt they'll 

start making house calls. 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

Mr. Minister, when will a decision be made on the health care 

utilization study? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I noted with interest, 

listening to some news broadcasts this morning, that Dr. Robert 

Murray, Dr. Bob Murray, who the members opposite will 

remember headed the Murray Commission, commissioned under 

their government, asked to comment on the recommendations 

and findings of the utilization commission, said that they were 

right on track, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now here is the difference, Mr. Speaker; here we have a 

government on this side of the House that has the courage and 

the will to act, to reform and renew health care for the future.  

We lived for 10 years, Mr. Speaker, with a government that did 

not have the courage or the will to act, to reform.  What they did 

was to try and build themselves into re-election.  It didn't work, 

Mr. Speaker.  What we are trying to do is weave the rope of 

reformed health care for the next century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I wonder 

if you would also have the courage to speak with Liz McKay.  

She wrote to your office; she also wrote to the member for 

Kinistino, to her MP (Member of Parliament) and has not heard 

a word from any one of you. 

 

She's not even received a phone call from your office.  At least 

the Leader of the Third Party had the courtesy to answer Liz 

McKay.  The only problem was the letter she returned said: if 

things get worse, let me know. 

 

Mr. Minister, Liz McKay is just one more example of rural 

people who are looking for your help.  They are looking to you 

for compassion and fairness, and their requests are falling on 

deaf ears. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you commit today to calling and talking to Liz 

McKay personally and looking into this very serious matter?  

Will you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm naturally troubled when 

reports come to this House or to any circumstance that indicate 

letters have not been responded to, and I will follow up on that 

immediately.  And I will make the commitment to the member, 

if he provides for me again today the name, I will most certainly 

be in contact with the family involved. 

 

Cigarette Taxes 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, it is the official 

opposition's belief that the federal government has imposed a 

national solution in this collection of 

 taxes for the tobacco industry, for what is essentially a problem 

in Ontario and Quebec.  Once again, we see the federal 

government implementing solutions to help Quebec, which will 

hurt everybody else, especially those in western Canada. 

The fact that these provinces will have different taxation levels 

will only shift an international problem, Madam Minister, to an 

interprovincial problem.  And as such, Madam Minister, I would 

like to know what your government has done in the last 24 hours 

to inform the federal government of our opposition to this 

initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have 

made it clear to the federal government, going way back to our 

meetings in Halifax, that we oppose any reduction in the tax on 

cigarettes.  And letters to the federal government will be mailed 

in the very near future to emphasize that point. 

 

What we said to the federal government was, we do believe that 

taxes have to be enforced, that smuggling has to be cracked 

down on.  But we also said that if they are going to enforce the 

taxes on the books, they also have to ensure that those taxes are 

fair.  So we have called on them in their upcoming budget to 

start plugging the loopholes and to do it quickly. 

 

We have also said to them that we will not participate in some 

quick fix on the GST (goods and services tax).  We want the 

whole tax system reformed so it's fair. 

 

The final thing we said to the federal government was this: if in 

fact the federal government, despite its deficit problems, has 3 or 

$400 million lying around to spend, we have much better 

suggestions as to where we would have spent that -- things like 

lowering the tax burden. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Crop insurance. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes.  We are quite . . . lowering the 

tax burden on middle income families or paying off the deficit.  

Quite frankly, we are . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, did you specifically talk 

about the $200 million that's going to go to informing the people 

of Canada the hazards of health in increased smoking and what 

it's going to cause on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Did you ask the Minister of Finance from 

Canada whether in fact he was going to provide some of that 

money to the province of Saskatchewan so that we could tell the 

people of the province the seriousness of the health situation in 

relation to the consumption of tobacco? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

We do support the idea that you need to have education with 

respect to smoking.  But what we are concerned about is the 

Liberals' predisposition to high taxes in this country.  They have 

said with respect to the GST that they are going to get exactly 

the same revenue out of the GST.  They have said that in their 

budget there are going to be tax increases. 

 

What we have said to them is we have made the commitment to 

this electorate to not raise taxes on individuals and families.  

What we expect from them is a similar commitment, but at the 

same time we expect them to make the system fair by plugging 

loopholes and by looking at a comprehensive reform of the tax 

system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day I wish to table 

pursuant to section 62 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act the 1992-93 annual report of the 

Saskatchewan Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Name Substitution on Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, I would like 

to change and update a couple of our legislative committees and 

to that end I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Johnson be substituted for that of Mr. 

McPherson on the list of members on the Standing Committee 

on Agriculture. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I wish to inform the Government House 

Leader that the member from Saskatoon Nutana does not wish to 

second that motion because that's the Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, inadvertently we put 

your constituency down.  It should have been the farmer from 

Broadway. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to try this 

again, seconded by the member from Melfort, that by leave of 

the Legislative Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Upshall be substituted for that of Mr. 

McPherson and that the name of Mr. Koenker by substituted 

for that of Mr. Van Mulligen on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for The Battlefords that by leave of the Assembly: 

 That the name of Ms. Hamilton be substituted for that of Mr. 

Solomon on the list of members on the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, finally, I move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Churchill Downs that by the 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Lorje be substituted for that of Mr. 

McPherson on the list of members on Private Members Bills 

Committee. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 

Whitmore. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

members of the Legislative Assembly, it's an honour for me to 

rise in response to the Speech from the Throne on behalf of the 

official opposition today and I believe on behalf of a lot of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and voters. 

 

It's my first statement of the fourth session of the twenty-second 

legislature and I would like to recognize and welcome once 

more the new member from Regina North West.  My sincerest 

congratulations go out to the new member on her election 

victory and wish . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could we please have the 

courtesy of toning down the House a bit and letting the member 

have his privilege of speaking in the House. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, I 

was extending my most sincere congratulations to the new 

member from Regina North West.  Her victory was attained in 

extremely difficult climatic conditions and it's a tribute to the 

member's staying power that she was able to campaign through 

that period of time in probably the toughest winter we've had in 

this province in over 20 years. 

 

I'm sure that she will find many of the debates and 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

duties in this Assembly to be just as rigorous.  The only 

difference is that somebody will probably be throwing the 

snowballs in her direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and hon. members, when I listened to the delivery 

of the Speech from the Throne, I imposed a fairly rudimentary 

and unassuming test on the blueprint of the government, a 

blueprint that they laid before the Assembly Monday last. 

 

The test consisted of one question and one question only.  And if 

that question had been answered, Mr. Speaker, I think this 

session could have been one of the most productive, efficient, 

and cooperative sessions that this House has ever seen.  Because 

the challenges that face this province, Mr. Speaker, are of that 

magnitude.  They are of such a magnitude that you must have 

cooperation, you must have productivity, in order to handle 

them. 

 

And that question was: has the government been listening?  Has 

it been listening to the people of this province?  Mr. Speaker, I 

sat very patiently during the Speech from the Throne and during 

the two speeches delivered by government members -- the 

mover and the seconder of that throne speech.  I listened for the 

signs and the signals that the government has been listening to 

the people that they have been duly elected to serve, the people 

that they have sworn to serve in their cabinet oaths. 

 

And what did I hear?  I heard from government members that it 

was time to change the rules.  Not to create jobs, but to once 

again benefit their friends, to benefit the union leaders of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Job creation, Mr. Speaker, is a 

number one priority with the people of this province.  As I said 

in my opening comment, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues facing 

us today are of an extreme, emergent nature.  And yet the 

government of the people decides its priorities; its wishes are the 

wishes of a very few, of the union leaders of this province. 

 

And I ask the question, Mr. Speaker, because there must be tens 

of thousands around this province asking that question, what is 

broken that needs to be fixed?  What in The Trade Union Act 

and The Labour Standards Act needs immediate - 

_ immediate -- attention of this Legislative Assembly over the 

immediate needs of taxpayers, of farm families, and of the 

electorate of this province? 

 

Are we behind, Mr. Speaker, the other provinces in western 

Canada?  Are we out of step with our major trading partners in 

North America and around the world?  In fact, Mr. Speaker, this 

province remains the envy of our country in terms of employee 

working conditions, hours of work, minimum wage, etc., etc., 

etc. 

 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, this province has sacrificed 

business investment and job creation to maintain the workplace 

quality that we have today, that quality that has become a sense 

of pride, Mr. Speaker, for all Saskatchewan citizens.  There are 

some that would criticize this policy; others who 

applaud it.  But the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that employment 

conditions today in our province are not a priority with 

Saskatchewan people.  Employment is a priority with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The latest government numbers verify this, Mr. Speaker.  They 

show that there are 12,000 fewer people employed today than 

there was in 1991 -- 12,000, Mr. Speaker.  Employment levels 

that are at the lowest they have been in 10 years.  Job creation is 

an issue, Mr. Speaker.  It is an issue that all members of this 

Assembly should be concerned with.  Union creation is 

something that is on the minds of only a few in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the verification of that, Mr. Speaker, is in the government's 

own polling -- the polling that this government spends taxpayers' 

money on every quarter.  It's no secret. The people were not 

hiding their thoughts on this issue.  It showed up clearly.  So I 

say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to all members of this 

Assembly, why on earth does the throne speech speak of 

spending taxpayers' time and money making it more difficult to 

attract investment? 

 

Once again I ask the question, what is broken with The Trade 

Union Act and The Labour Standards Act that would compel 

this government -- a government, by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

which has pledged 30,000 new jobs by the end of the 

decade -- why would they want to add more cost to doing 

business in this province? 

 

Thirty thousand jobs was the pledge by the end of the decade.  

You add 12,000 more to that, because that's the number that has 

dropped, Mr. Speaker, since 1991, you are looking at an 

immense task -- a task that is going to require cooperation, as the 

Premier is fond of saying.  It is going to require Saskatchewan 

people pulling together under very trying circumstances.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that you could argue that changes could be 

made to The Trade Union Act which could help increase 

employment instead of decreasing it. 

 

(1445) 

 

There was a recent situation, Mr. Speaker, in my home 

community of Moose Jaw, with the Woolco store.  I think it is 

something that all people around this province have become 

aware of. 

 

My information is, Mr. Speaker, and I believe it to be true, that a 

majority of the employees in that store have been trying for 

several months to decertify their particular workplace.  But they 

have been unable to achieve that because of the rules, which are 

clearly in the favour of the union. 

 

This situation, Mr. Speaker, has become even more desperate for 

those people since it has been learned that the Wal-Mart store 

chain is not picking up the Woolco store in Moose Jaw.  And I 

believe they are doing that, Mr. Speaker, because of what has 

transpired with the Labour Relations Board in this province, 

with the fact that that particular place is 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

unionized against the wishes of the majority of the people who 

work there. 

 

And when the Labour Relations Board refused to decertify, it 

means that 150 jobs are in jeopardy -- 150 jobs that the city of 

Moose Jaw can ill afford to lose; 150 jobs, Mr. Speaker, that this 

province cannot afford to lose.  Those are in many cases single 

parents, those are the sole breadwinners, those are taxpayers, 

Mr. Speaker -- all in the name of union solidarity. 

 

So I go back to the test, Mr. Speaker, the simple test: was the 

government listening?  Obviously not.  But even worse, Mr. 

Speaker, a criticism that the former NDP (New Democratic 

Party) opposition levelled so often is that you are only listening 

to a few.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is even a worse 

indictment of the government's throne speech than if they simply 

weren't listening at all. 

 

People are demanding that their representatives concentrate on 

job creation before job enhancement.  And as such I can assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, as I can assure the Premier and his 

government, that the official opposition will do everything in 

their power to protect the jobs of people like those employed at 

the Woolco store in Moose Jaw.  And we will not allow the 

union movement in this province to have rules which go against 

the very basic tenets of democracy. 

 

Those people should have the right to vote, Mr. Speaker, and 

they should be able to vote with a secret ballot to determine the 

rules of their workplace.  The guiding tenet has to be, jobs 

before union leaders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government's own Partnership for Renewal 

economic strategy has as its key goal, and I quote: "Creating a 

positive environment for economic renewal." 

 

In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I did hear the government 

talk about working with the private sector in conjunction with 

the initiative to lower trade barriers across Canada.  They talk 

about the economic goal in conjunction with those lower trade 

barriers, of working with the private sector.  And yet what we 

have seen are nothing but steps backwards, because this 

government has hiked every utility rate and tax rate in this 

province in the last two years. 

 

So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, we talk about creating new 

bureaucratic institutions to work with people as trade barriers 

come down, when the government is busy creating barriers to 

business, creating barriers to job creation, by raising utility and 

tax rates all across the province. 

 

And the strategy, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, described in the 

throne speech doesn't address that.  The only job creation 

strategy I saw through that particular document, Mr. Speaker, 

was the creation of jobs in the bureaucracy.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, will simply not create those 42,000 jobs that this 

government has pledged to this province by the end of the 

decade.  I see committees and boards and councils 

that will make great work for officials but very little else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we will be holding the government 

to its own plan to create a positive environment for business and 

jobs.  And we will also highlight economic development projects 

that the government has failed to realize for this province. 

 

There's another area, Mr. Speaker, that I watched for very 

carefully in the Speech from the Throne.  It's an area that has 

been highlighted in this Assembly already. I listened for the 

evidence of compassion for the people that the government has 

sworn to serve. 

 

Our caucus, Mr. Speaker, during the long debates in this last few 

years over health care, have said time and again that there needs 

to be a rationalization of health services in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  But the number one consideration of any 

rationalization must be the effects it has on the people, not 

necessarily the treasury. 

 

And I remember well, Mr. Speaker, as do many in this House, 

that when the former administration attempted to rationalize 

health care the howls of derision from the opposition -- the NDP 

opposition -- were deafening. 

 

Do you remember when there was that small deductible added to 

the prescription drug plan and the now Hon. Minister of 

Education said, and I quote: seniors are now having to make a 

decision between buying groceries or prescription drugs.  

Groceries or prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's a very serious charge.  That means that people are going 

to starve in our province because they could not access 

prescription drugs.  And at the time, Mr. Speaker, I was stunned 

by that statement because I thought there had been a fair degree 

of homework done, that there had been a lot of consultations 

done with seniors' groups and there hadn't been any evidence at 

all to back up a statement like that, that seniors were going to 

give up eating so that they could have prescription drugs. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  That charge necessitated a 

second look.  That meant that it had to stop and people had to go 

back and reaffirm that seniors in this province were not going to 

go without groceries.  And a result of that, the prescription drug 

plan had to take into account special needs considerations. 

 

So the opposition was doing its work and said seniors were 

going to starve.  Government, go back, reassess, rethink, come 

back with a better plan.  And it was brought up in this House 

question period after question period so that seniors would not 

go without groceries. 

 

What do we find today, Mr. Speaker, when we put the test to the 

throne speech?  We find a government that has more than tripled 

the prescription drug plan deductible.  Calling it a drug plan any 

more is really a 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

fallacy, Mr. Speaker.  For the average person out there, it simply 

doesn't exist any more. 

 

The dental plan has been cancelled.  There have been user fees 

added.  There's 52 rural hospitals closed.  Every fee including 

home care, ambulance services, nursing home rent, insulin, 

oxygen -- they've all gone up, some of them quite dramatically.  

And the list goes on.  Our office is flooded with calls and letters 

all the time, Mr. Speaker, with people complaining, as we saw in 

question period today. 

 

The member from Kindersley raises real concerns of 

Saskatchewan residents.  Because the test of compassion is not 

being met.  What has been the response to the concerns of these 

people?  What does the Premier of the province say when people 

say, slow down?  The Premier proudly says, the train has left the 

station.  Not we'll look into it, or perhaps there's a better way, 

just the train has left the station. 

 

I wonder what the Minister of Education says today when those 

seniors that she was so concerned about not having food on their 

table, that couldn't access drugs because they would have to give 

up their groceries, when her own leader and Premier says: I'm 

sorry, Madam Minister, the train has left the station. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how quickly the defenders of medicare have 

become the champions of I don't care.  I don't care, the Premier 

says, the train has left the station.  Well it's left the station all 

right, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately more and more 

Saskatchewan people are getting on it and they're leaving this 

province.  That's why our population is going down, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's why the jobs aren't here.  They can talk all they 

want about the unemployment levels in this province, but if you 

don't have anybody left to employ, Mr. Speaker, you won't have 

a high unemployment level. 

 

And you know what?  The unfortunate part is, Mr. Speaker, that 

most of our seniors who spent their lives building and sweating 

and raising their families in this province don't have the 

wherewithal or, at this stage in their life, the courage to get on 

the train and leave.  They have to stay here, Mr. Speaker, and 

face the I-don't-care attitude of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this upcoming session the official opposition 

will continue to monitor the unfair and ill-advised changes to 

health care that are being enforced by this government.  And I 

think we will bring enough examples into this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, of the kind of real hurt and damage that 

this attitude of I-don't-care approach can have on the people of 

this province. 

 

And we hope, Mr. Speaker, that as those concerns, the concerns 

of real people who will be bringing their questions to this 

Assembly . . . that the government will take the time to reassess, 

re-evaluate, and do some of the things that would allow the test 

of compassion to be put on the throne speech of this province. 

I listened very carefully, Mr. Speaker, along with about 60,000 

farm families, to the long-awaited plan for what is still the 

number one industry in our province -- that is, agriculture. 

 

For over 10 years, or nearly 10 years, Mr. Speaker, that I've sat 

in this Assembly, I've heard the NDP Party say that they know 

how to bring prosperity back to rural Saskatchewan.  So far, Mr. 

Speaker, the plan hasn't dealt with prosperity; the plan has done 

with the complete gutting of the revenue insurance plan.  It has 

meant that nearly every input that farm families use in the 

production of food in our province has increased. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you're a farmer and your input costs all go 

up, it means that at some point in time during the year you're 

probably going to have a cash flow problem.  And in the case of 

agriculture, those cash flow problems are fairly immediate.  

They can cause large debt situations to occur.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, without there being a government that understands, 

they can be absolutely ruinous. 

 

But the government says, don't worry, farm families, don't 

worry; we have the answer.  It's called Agriculture 

2000 -- Agriculture 2000.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure if 

that's the name of the report or the number of farm families that 

will be left in this province after the NDP government is through 

with them.  But because of its vagueness, Mr. Speaker, and the 

fact that most of the government members avoid it like the 

plague, I suspect it is the latter rather than the former. 

 

(1500) 

 

So when you look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and you look at 

what else is going on in rural Saskatchewan, from the closure of 

52 rural hospitals to the closure of rural service centres to the 

elimination of electoral . . . eight rural constituencies, cuts to 

transfer payments to towns and villages, the hijacking of federal 

infrastructure money headed for small communities, it almost 

would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, and to those listening to the 

throne speech, that the abandonment of rural Saskatchewan at 

every turn by this government is real, it's tangible, and some 

would say, Mr. Speaker, that it is deliberate. 

 

I have an example, Mr. Speaker, that I think confirms a lot of 

what I have said, and I bring you back to the issue of the 

government's handling of The Hospital Revenue Act.  Last year, 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier told the delegates to the SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) convention 

that his government would not continue to enforce . . . or force 

municipalities to pay for hospital services they no longer had. 

 

My hon. colleagues in the opposition took the Premier at his 

word and we introduced legislation to repeal that particular Act.  

Simple private member's Bill; could have been dispensed with, I 

think, fairly expediently, Mr. Speaker, because we were simply 

backing up the Premier's pledge to SUMA.  Unfortunately it was 

defeated by the members of the 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

NDP government and the hospital levy continues to this day. 

 

Now once again, Mr. Speaker, SUMA delegates have asked the 

government to remove health care funding directly and 

indirectly from the responsibility of urban governments and the 

property tax base.  And once again, Mr. Speaker, the official 

opposition will act on their concerns and the pledge of the 

Premier of Saskatchewan and we will introduce legislation in 

this session to repeal the levy from 2 mills to 1 mill and then 

zero. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if what I said about the government's 

agenda for rural Saskatchewan isn't true, then I see no problem 

with that particular piece of legislation going through this House 

very quickly.  Because we believe, Mr. Speaker, we believe 

strongly that the families and the individuals in places like Eston 

and Nipawin and Dorintosh and Porcupine Plain and hundreds 

of others have every right to expect equal treatment from their 

government.  And we will be reminding, Mr. Speaker, 

government members that life does exist outside of Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we went through that throne speech 

delivery, as I listened to the member from Biggar and the 

member from downtown Regina, I listened in the area of 

education about how we would modernize our education system, 

rather than the so-called rationalization that they're doing in 

health care, so that we could live up to the commitment of this 

Premier and this government that they will have an educational 

system in place that will train Saskatchewan people for 

Saskatchewan jobs -- the 30,000 that have been pledged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the throne speech for 

the government's plan to eliminate poverty as they in opposition 

pledged each and every year except for the last two when they 

are now in government.  Or perhaps an indication from this 

government in the throne speech that there would be a 

commitment to the real needs of the families in this province 

that are on welfare, and there would be some reform of the 

system.  And perhaps instead of a welfare system that degrades, 

we'd talk about a family income system that educates and 

re-employs people, Mr. Speaker.  But I heard nothing that would 

tell me that that test was passed in the throne speech. 

 

So when you put all of those components together, Mr. Speaker, 

you put all of the components together and you put the acid test 

to it and it comes up empty, then the only conclusion that you're 

left with, the only conclusion that anyone could be left with, is 

that the Speech from the Throne has failed in what it supposedly 

set out to do.  In other words, the government has misread the 

agenda of Saskatchewan taxpayers and Saskatchewan's voters.  

And I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that it takes a deaf person, a deaf 

person, to hear what that agenda is, to hear what the people have 

been asking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the defeat of the former provincial 

government, my government, and the election of the present one 

in 1991, I think was a very powerful message, one that I have 

constantly tried to learn from in the past two years.  In 1992 the 

voters in this province voted no to more than just the unity 

question in the referendum.  They voted no to a lot more than 

that simple question.  The reasons for the defeat of the federal 

government in 1993 were a culmination, Mr. Speaker, of what 

happened in '91 and '92 and those reasons became very clear to 

the average person in this province.  They should be very clear 

to the people who are sworn to serve them as their elected 

representatives. 

 

And I think what was even more telling, Mr. Speaker -- at least 

it was to me -- just last week we had a by-election in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  My party ran a poor third.  But the 

real story was not the fact I think that Ms. Bergman won, 

although we congratulate her -- the member from Regina North 

West, sorry, Mr. Speaker, won, and I congratulate her on her 

win -- but the fact that only 45 per cent of the eligible voters, 

and I think in fact there was only 43 per cent in fact, got out to 

vote. 

 

That means, Mr. Speaker, that more than half the people weren't 

interested in who represented them.  That hasn't happened in this 

province since the Second World War, Mr. Speaker; 57 per cent 

of the people in that riding said it makes no difference which one 

of them I elect.  They aren't worth me taking the time to leave 

my house and go down to the polling station and cast my 

democratic vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when people in those kind of numbers tell 

us, none of the above, then we have a serious problem on our 

hands as political parties in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 

Speaker, people are demanding a change in the way government 

is run.  They just don't want us to change the rules; they want us 

to change the game.  It's not just the rules, Mr. Speaker; it's the 

game they want changed. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They want a hockey game. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And the Premier flippantly says they want a 

hockey game.  Then, Mr. Premier, I say to you, start listening to 

the 57 per cent that said that none of you qualify.  None of you 

qualify to give me the leadership and the direction that I demand 

of my political parties and my political system.  That's what they 

said.  They said, get out of town if you aren't prepared to change 

the game. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for over two years I have listened.  I have 

listened.  And proudly member after member of the New 

Democratic Party government has stood in this house and said, 

we are the party of democratic reform.  We even produced a 

handy-dandy little pamphlet before the last election.  We told 

everybody about how we were going to change the system. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  So far what we have seen 

from the Premier, from the member from Riversdale, and his 

party are little snippets around the edge.  Because most of the 

reform that people are 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

demanding out there, the people of Regina North West and 

elsewhere, most of the reform they're demanding would get in 

the way of the manipulation of political power by the Premier 

and his Executive Council.  That's why we haven't seen it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've also seen the Liberal Party, the member from 

Saskatoon University, before the last provincial election, talk at 

great length about these things -- talk at great length.  But you 

know what, Mr. Speaker, other than coming into this Assembly 

and saying, I'm different, trust me, for the last two years, 

members of the Liberal Party have simply let the opportunities 

slip by. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that it is time that the issues be put 

and that those issues become unavoidable for all of us, 

regardless of our political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session of the Legislative Assembly, the 

Progressive Conservative caucus will bring forward a number of 

reforms designed to bring democracy and the government 

process closer to the people it is sworn to serve.  So instead of 

all the talk we've heard from all political parties, it is now time 

to make our democratically elected institutions more accessible 

and accountable.  Because I honestly believe, Mr. Speaker, there 

is universal agreement on this issue.  Legislative reform in the 

past has been very infrequent -- if it has changed much at all. 

 

So I think it's time that all of us . . . And I give you the pledge 

today, Mr. Speaker, that at least the Progressive Conservative 

caucus in this Assembly will stop all the rhetoric and present 

what we think are logical answers to the 57 per cent of electors 

in Regina North West who didn't bother to exercise their 

franchise. 

 

Number one, we will be introducing a formal mechanism to 

bring Saskatchewan residents' questions directly into question 

period.  People have said over and over again that question 

period sometimes is not the best forum to discuss their views, 

that neither the questions nor the answers seem to have a lot to 

do with the real issues that they face in their everyday lives.  

And as such, we will be inviting Saskatchewan residents to write 

us with questions that they would like to ask directly to the 

Premier and his cabinet ministers.  Each week a portion of 

question period will be dedicated to asking these questions of the 

government.  We will then send that person the government's 

verbatim answer from Hansard. 

 

The process has already begun, Mr. Speaker.  The questions are 

beginning to come in, and we really look forward to being able 

to present those as a responsible opposition should do, and we 

look forward to the answers that the government will be giving, 

as a responsible government should do. 

 

Number two, Mr. Speaker, we will be proposing an all-party 

committee to make appointments to government boards and 

commissions.  The Premier once pledged that he would 

eliminate patronage from government services if he were elected 

Premier.  Not 

once, but I'm afraid time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we've 

heard that mouthing from the member from Riversdale, the 

Premier.  And we can only conclude, Mr. Speaker, is that it has 

failed.  The initiative that the Premier promised when he was 

Leader of the Opposition has failed. 

And I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe for a moment 

that you can entirely eliminate patronage from the British 

parliamentary system.  But I do think, Mr. Speaker, I do believe, 

that this mechanism will ensure that most appointments are 

made based on merit rather than political affiliation.  And I say 

most, because there will be times, Mr. Speaker, when even a 

committee of the most astute will not be able to eliminate 

patronage. 

 

Number three, we will introduce legislation to establish an 

all-party committee open to the public and the media to review 

proposed utility rate increases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of recent developments, there isn't a 

politician in this province can honestly say that people are 

bringing this issue to the fore; they're demanding protection 

from unilateral and unwarranted increases -- things like their 

phone, their power, their gas, their insurance rates.  And I think 

it's incumbent upon all of us as duly elected members to allay 

those concerns that people have. 

 

(1515) 

 

I think it would make sense, Mr. Speaker, in these days of tight 

money to say to them that we don't need to create a new 

bureaucracy.  You're already paying MLAs, so why not have a 

committee of MLAs with a majority of government members, I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, who would review and debate the 

increases on behalf of those who pay them.  So we don't have to 

have the expense and the bureaucratic stuff that went on with 

PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission); we don't have to 

have some of the problems that other jurisdictions have run into 

as they addressed this issue.  Why not have Saskatchewan strike 

out with a new format and see if we can come up with a system, 

Mr. Speaker, that allows Saskatchewan residents to feel 

comfortable about the rate increases that they now perceive to be 

nothing more than hidden taxation? 

 

Number four, Mr. Speaker, we will be moving amendments to 

The Legislative Assembly Act to allow for fixed election dates 

every four years.  And I do congratulate the Premier on the 

changes that were made vis-a-vis by-elections.  I think that was a 

move that was long overdue in this province, and the Premier 

and his party and his government are to be congratulated on it. 

 

The current legislation, Mr. Speaker, stipulates that an election 

must be held within five years of the last election, at the 

discretion of the government.  We believe that discretion needs 

to be removed.  And I would say to the Premier, if an election 

had been held in June of 1991 instead of October, I believe that 

his 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

majority would be much slimmer, that closer to four years would 

in fact have been much better for my party than it turned out by 

going the full term.  Four years, Mr. Speaker, seems to be a 

number that appeals to a lot of people in our province.  And we 

will bring that legislation forward. 

 

Number five, we will be seeking a legislated reduction in the 

number of cabinet ministers, specifying that the number be 

proportionate to the number of MLAs in the Legislative 

Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is quite different than 

anything that I have heard proposed in any other jurisdiction.  If 

we limit the number of cabinet ministers to 25 per cent of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- 25 per cent -- that would mean that 

the Premier's cabinet would be reduced to 16 members.  And 

that would save approximately $2 million annually.  When this 

Assembly is reduced to 58 members, the cabinet would be 

reduced by two more members, and that would save an 

additional $1 million annually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now those are not big numbers, Mr. Speaker, in the scheme of a 

budget in this province that is in the billions of dollars.  But if 

we agree -- and the Minister of Justice most eloquently said last 

year in debate, that reducing the number of MLAs to 58 is 

feasible and worth doing, Mr. Speaker.  It's worth doing because 

of the savings that we will achieve in delivering government to 

others -- then why should the difference in the number of cabinet 

ministers be no different, Mr. Speaker?  Because the arguments 

made by the Minister of Justice and others should hold true. 

 

And I think taxpayers around the province of Saskatchewan 

would view this as another positive step in the reform of their 

political institutions, so that premiers in the future do not abuse 

the privilege of naming people to cabinet simply to pacify 

certain political considerations or geographic considerations or 

promises made prior to an election.  These would be viewed as a 

very positive result by the average taxpayer. 

 

Number six, Mr. Speaker, we will be seeking to convert votes on 

all pieces of legislation in a free vote by stipulating that a 

government may only be defeated by a specially designated vote 

of non-confidence. 

 

I honestly believe, Mr. Speaker, that in addition to the pressure 

within one's own caucus, many MLAs, and indeed many MPs 

that I've known in my political career, refused to vote against a 

piece of government legislation because of the consequences of 

bringing down the government, even when the wishes of their 

constituents clearly, clearly indicate that a no vote is the 

preferential vote for that particular constituency. 

 

And I only think back, Mr. Speaker, on this issue to a very close 

friend of mine, a very dedicated public servant, a member of the 

Parliament of Canada for 12 years, by the name of Doug Neil, a 

man who represented the Moose Jaw constituency from 1972 to 

1984.  Mr. Neil was one of 16 individuals who voted against the 

Official Languages Act in the Parliament of Canada.  And I 

honestly believe that that stigma stayed 

with that individual throughout his parliamentary career. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was no more dedicated MP than that 

individual who represented Moose Jaw so ably for all of those 

years.  But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, in visiting Ottawa and 

talking to people, the fact that that vote occurred . . . and Mr. 

Neil was simply living up to the expectations of his constituents.  

If you had polled that constituency, they would have demanded 

overwhelmingly that Mr. Neil vote against that particular piece 

of legislation, which he did.  And, Mr. Speaker, it should be no 

different in this Assembly here today.  There are many questions 

of morality, of issues that are even beyond the main budgetary 

items of government, which should be opened to members to 

express their views in a more open manner. 

 

And that is one of the major criticisms of our system, Mr. 

Speaker, that everything is done behind closed doors; that the 

whip is in control, that the leader is in control, that executive 

government is in control of your everyday life. 

 

We intend, Mr. Speaker, to put that to an immediate test if it 

passes -- an immediate test.  And it was brought up today, and I 

hope the Premier listens very closely because he has expressed a 

personal view in this issue. 

 

Once again our government has launched off on a major 

decision affecting the lives of Saskatchewan people, with very 

little consultation.  For all the protestations of the member from 

Prince Albert about his travels around the province and how 

many people he's talked to, the simple fact is that the issue of 

gaming and gambling and casinos has not been widely discussed 

with Saskatchewan people. 

 

This has basically been done behind closed doors, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think that there is enough there on the social and economic 

and moral side of the issues to demand a wider presentation of 

the facts.  No debate, no questions, no answers, no reviews, 

nothing. 

 

The average taxpayer is saying, oh, open and accountable 

government have struck again.  That's why, Mr. Speaker, people 

in the majority stay home at election time.  So regardless of what 

one's position is on this casino issue, I think the public needs to 

be brought into the decision-making circle. 

 

I know there's a debate going on amongst the NDP caucus. It's 

been well documented in the media.  And I know there's a 

difference in my own caucus, Mr. Speaker.  I know that there are 

strong differences in my own caucus on this issue. 

 

What we need to do, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do then is 

debate it in the legislature.  And with these new rules in place, 

Mr. Speaker, we could do that.  We could have that wider scope, 

a more honest debate, and I believe a more productive debate on 

this issue than the way it's presently being handled.  The way it's 

being handled, Mr. Speaker, is simply to satisfy the 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

wishes of executive government.  The wishes of executive 

government, I believe on this issue, are monetary ones -- strictly 

monetary ones, Mr. Speaker -- and that should not be the only 

criteria attached to this issue, not the only criteria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we do these proposed changes, issues such as 

casino gambling and their presentation in this Assembly will 

become routine in their delivery.  Members will not hesitate to 

rise to their feet no matter what party they represent, and they 

will discuss those issues in a way that the public will feel once 

again comfortable in placing trust in their political 

representatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I brought today to this Assembly and to this 

debate on the throne speech is not all-inclusive.  There are lots 

of other issues, there are lots of other initiatives out there, but I 

believe what has been brought today is a certain amount of food 

for thought that can get the ball rolling. 

 

A lot of people out there question me on things like the recall of 

members.  I'm not sure about that, Mr. Speaker, but if it needs to 

be added to the list and discussed in here, then we should do it.  

We should do it before it is forced upon us by an angry, an angry 

electorate, an angry group of taxpayers who are simply going to 

say a pox on all of you, out you go. 

 

Some of these things, Mr. Speaker, my political party has talked 

about every weekend over the last month and a half as we do our 

round of policy sessions in this province.  My party continues to 

demand of me as the leader of a political party, change, and they 

will not accept anything else. 

 

Some of these initiatives that I talked about today, Mr. Speaker, 

come from other political parties.  Some of them come from the 

party led by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale.  Some of 

them come from the party led by the member from Saskatoon 

University.  Some of them come from the members of the 

Reform Party, but regardless of where they come from or what 

jurisdiction they come from, Mr. Speaker, they are issues that 

must be dealt with, they are issues that are on the minds of 

people. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because all too often the argument 

boils down to who came up with the idea first.  Whose initiative 

was it?  Well, Mr. Speaker, what I heard on the doors of Regina 

North West was that they don't really care.  They really don't 

care, Mr. Speaker, who thought of it first or whose initiative it 

was first.  They're simply saying, get it done. 

 

And I say to the Premier today, if he wants to stand up and claim 

credit for all of them, so be it.  If the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale wants to claim credit for all of them, so be it.  But I 

can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the feeling of this caucus and I 

think the Progressive Conservative Party and the majority of 

people around this province is stand in your place and get it 

done.  That's what they're saying.  Stand in your place and say 

yes to those initiatives and get it done.  They're not new ideas; 

they've been around, some of them, for a 

long time.  But start to get it done.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

challenge before us, the challenge before this Assembly. 
 

And I say to the select members of the media and some in the 

political system in this province who always, always criticize 

initiatives, who always say why didn't you do that 10 years ago 

when you had the chance, who always say well your political 

party has no credibility, what you have to do is just pose that 

simple question, the simple question that I put on the throne 

speech: is the government listening? 
 

 (1530) 
 

And you will know, Mr. Speaker, that it's on.  I give you an 

example, Mr. Speaker.  I give you an example.  You can think 

about moving your chair, Mr. Speaker.  You can think about that 

in the future.  And you can think, I should have moved my chair 

in the past.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  There's only one 

time when you can physically move that chair, and that is right 

now.  That's the only time you have the power, Mr. Speaker, to 

make that happen. 

 

That, and I say to the naysayers in the political system of our 

province and in the media, the time is now.  Look at the issues 

for what they are, and look at the opportunities for what they are, 

and look at the benefits of the political system for what they are, 

and judge them on their merit.  Not like some person who's on a 

far-off star, looking down and passing judgement, but actually 

being a participant in the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to say to the Premier -- and I'm glad he's 

here today to hear these words -- that it's time for his party and 

the members of it to not be stuck on simply criticisms of the 

past. 

 

And I say to the members of the Liberal Party, the third party 

now represented in our Legislative Assembly, it's time to stop 

simply dreaming about your chance to form government in the 

future.  And it's time for my party to remember the mistakes 

made in the past. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you put all three of them together, 

when you put all three of them together, if they will give up a 

little bit of that political ground, you know what?  The now is 

very doable and possible.  And that's the challenge in front of 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

We have the ability to make fundamental change.  The 

government can honestly say in its next throne speech that we 

have learned from the mistakes of the past and we won't repeat 

them.  We can honestly say we can have the acid test of are we 

listening, do we have compassion, are we looking to the future 

with a positive agenda, not simply helping out a few of our 

friends to their agenda. 

 

Then I think, Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech in 1995, the 

government could honestly say: here are the tests that the people 

are placing in front of us, and we are addressing them and we are 

passing them.  And then, Mr. Speaker, we won't have to go 

through this 



46 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

awful exercise again of debating a throne speech which is vague 

and seems to fail every test being put to it by the taxpayers of 

this province today. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we will be doing what all of us should be 

proud of being and that is elected members of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan who truly represent the interests of 

the constituents they were elected to serve. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day that pride and that 

honour is really what counts in the delivery of our political 

system.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's going to require some 

soul-searching and that is going to require some give and take.  

But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that is what is important.  

Because that is the only test that ultimately each one of us as 

elected members goes through every four years:  were you 

serving the interests of the people you were elected to represent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech has not done that.  And I believe 

it's time that we started putting in place systems that allow those 

throne speeches to do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to enter into this debate in response to the Speech from 

the Throne for 1994. 

 

I'd like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by offering my congratulations to 

the mover and seconder of the speech, the member for Regina 

Lake Centre as well as the member for Biggar.  Mr. Speaker, I 

listened very carefully to their addresses yesterday afternoon and 

found them to be thoughtful and was impressed with the fact that 

both of them, in moving and seconding the Speech from the 

Throne, spoke with optimism and they spoke with compassion 

and they spoke most importantly, Mr. Speaker, with faith in the 

future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of us have not had the honour that they have had to move 

and second a speech which outlines the plan for the government 

for the year.  But I want to add my words of commendation to 

both the member from Regina Lake Centre and Biggar and say 

that I commend you for having performed the honour with 

distinction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope as well for you that this 

proves to be not only a spirited but a purposeful fourth session of 

the twenty-second legislature, over which you'll preside.  And I 

express my voice of confidence, Mr. Speaker, that you will have 

the combination of patience and decisiveness and a sense of 

serious purpose as well as a sense of humour that will allow you 

to preside over the proceedings here with just that right balance 

that enhances the respect for democracy, and that democracy 

will prevail in this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join as well the other 

members who have offered their congratulations to the newly 

elected member for Regina North West.  I say to you that I hope 

that your time in this House will be rewarding for you and that it 

will be felt to be responsible representation by your constituents.  

However I'm sure that you will understand as well that I stop 

short of wishing you a lengthy stay in this House.  But 

congratulations to you. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the words of the 

Leader of the Opposition.  The Hon. Leader of the Opposition is 

. . . A friend and colleague from Rosthern tells me he also even 

listened to parts of that speech and there were others as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I listened carefully to the words of the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, my good friend and colleague, the member from 

Thunder Creek.  And I listened carefully to the things that he 

talked about as priorities when he addressed remarks to the 

response to the Speech from the Throne. And he expresses 

concern for democratic reform. 

 

And he recognized, Mr. Speaker, that when commenting upon 

the by-election that was held in Regina North West, in fact that 

by-election was held because this government, two years 

ago -- two years ago -- passed a law that said, never again in 

Saskatchewan will the representation of the people be betrayed 

as it was by the Leader of the Opposition's party when he was in 

government.  And that never again will people in this province 

go more than six months without representation.  That law was 

passed by a New Democrat government and the by-election was 

held.  And we are into a new era of democratic participation and 

reform in the province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I listened carefully as well to the kinds of 

suggestions that the Leader of the Opposition made as to what 

he describes as democratic reform.  And I find it kind of 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, that they have a vague resemblance, 

and in fact some of them not such a vague resemblance, to what 

goes on in the version of democracy that rules supreme south of 

the border in the United States of America . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . My colleague points out, Mr. Speaker, direct 

democracy, not representative democracy. 

 

In many ways diversions away from our parliamentary system 

that in fact celebrates, celebrates in the Canadian and the 

Saskatchewan, throughout the Commonwealth, the legitimate 

and noble role of political parties as a way of providing a voice 

for ordinary people to these chambers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the changes in 

structures that the Leader of the Opposition suggests, in many 

ways puppeting what Mr. Manning has been saying for some 

time.  And in doing that, Mr. Speaker, I think betraying some of 

the commitment to the tradition of representative democracy, 

responsible 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

democracy, that are so much a part of our proud tradition in this 

province. 
 

And so I listened to them, Mr. Speaker.  I trust that we will have 

opportunity to debate them.  But as a representative of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, and truly committed to parliamentary 

democracy, I must say that I listen with a bit of trepidation. 
 

I also note with interest the Leader of the Opposition neglects to 

recognize one of the most active forums of participatory 

democracy that has been undertaken by this government over the 

last two years.  Because, Mr. Speaker, it is known, it is debated, 

but it is known very clearly from this day forward, it is the case 

that when it comes to health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the decisions made for the priorities and the 

delivery of health care will be made by local people with local 

priorities taking care of themselves and not out of the city of 

Regina. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- That's democratic reform that has been taken 

already. 
 

And I listened carefully, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the 

Opposition said that he was wanting to see compassion in the 

Speech from the Throne, and he couldn't see it.  Mr. Speaker, I 

say to the Leader of the Opposition, through you, if he didn't see 

it, it was because he didn't want to see it.  Because it seems to 

me that compassion was a central thread that was woven through 

the Speech from the Throne that I heard on Monday of this 

week. 
 

And so I'd like to touch on the Speech from the Throne in three 

contexts, Mr. Speaker, which I think were characteristic of it in 

the context of history and also in the context of compassion and 

cooperation.  I think there were some lessons to be learned as we 

reflect upon the Speech from the Throne, both about our past 

and our present, but most importantly our future. 
 

In 1994, we mark two important 50th anniversaries representing 

two important victories for democracy.  World War II, 

representing a victory for democracy, for freedom for Canada 

and our allies.  And on behalf of the constituents of Moose Jaw 

Palliser, Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to express my 

humble thanks to those men and women who served at home 

and abroad and a special gratitude to those who were afflicted 

and those who paid the ultimate sacrifice. 
 

On the home front, Mr. Speaker, in 1944, there was a victory for 

social democracy with the election of the first social democratic 

government on the continent, the first social democratic 

government led by Premier Tommy Douglas in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm proud, I'm proud to stand today 

as a political descendant of that social democratic government as 

a New Democrat about to begin . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- He would never stand with you, what 

you've done today. 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- The member from Morse, his remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I know that he doesn't have the same opportunity to 

express his pride in the traditions of the government that he was 

a part of; I know that.  But I stand proud to be a New Democrat, 

Mr. Speaker, on the verge of beginning the second half-century 

of social democratic government in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: -- The question was, would Tommy stand 

with you.  That's the question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well the member, Mr. Speaker, wants to know 

about Tommy.  And so, Mr. Speaker, maybe I can just spend a 

little time sharing with the member some of the words of 

Tommy.  It's been an interesting phenomenon in recent times.  

Tommy Douglas, there's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, was the leader 

of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), the 

forerunner of the New Democratic Party.  But, goodness 

gracious, even the member from Morse, his party has claimed 

ownership of Tommy at times.  The Leader of the Liberals also 

claims affiliation with Tommy at times.  There's only one party 

that can do it with legitimacy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And as I look at the history of Saskatchewan, I see it, the history 

of Saskatchewan since 1944, as containing compassion and 

cooperation that is a part of this Speech from the Throne. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member asks, what did Tommy say?  

Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know in this House and across the 

province of Saskatchewan, no one loved a good story better than 

Tommy Douglas.  And I'd like to refer to one his favourite 

stories known by many people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

entitled "Mouseland."  Mr. Speaker, a tale that I think has 

lessons that continue to be true today. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as we all recall, the Mouseland fable, as it came to 

be known in the province of Saskatchewan, began with these 

words: 
 

 It's the story of a place called Mouseland. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's a good thing we had a change of the 

session.  They could repeat what they said last year. 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that they are waiting with enthusiasm to hear the words of 

Tommy because they are just as relevant today as they were 

then.  I can understand why they're a little troubled with the tale 

of Mouseland, Mr. Speaker.  They are just as troubled by 

Mouseland today as their predecessors were 50 years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, as their predecessors were. 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

I won't read the story verbatim, Mr. Speaker, for two reasons: in 

the interests of time, but no one could tell the story like Tommy 

Douglas anyhow.  But Tommy Douglas went on, Tommy 

Douglas went on to talk about Mouseland, the place where mice 

lived.  And they had this unfortunate habit, Mr. Speaker -- they 

has this unfortunate habit . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Even your Premier can't stand any more 

of this; even the boss can't stand it. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Oh, oh.  Now, Mr. Speaker, my goodness 

gracious.  The members opposite do seem to be a bit troubled by 

Mouseland, and I can understand that.  But if they listen 

carefully, Mr. Speaker, if they listen carefully they may learn a 

lesson here and find an opportunity to prevent having to learn 

the lesson yet again in the 1990s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Mouseland, Mr. Speaker, in Mouseland they had this 

unfortunate habit.  Every now and then they'd have an election.  

And what they would elect unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, were 

cats -- cats -- governments made up of big, fat, black cats.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, in the words of Tommy: 

 

 Now if you think it's strange that mice should elect a 

government made up of cats, you just look at the history of 

Canada . . . and maybe you'll see that they weren't any stupider 

than we are (today). 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we're kind of getting to the point.  Because, 

you see, what would happen is over a period of time as the 

elections would come, election after election, the mice would 

march out and they would elect a government made up of cats.  

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, they voted out the black cats and they 

put in the white cats. 

 

(1545) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I've heard this before. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, now there's the member of the 

Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, there is a new-found Liberal 

here in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and he takes great interest in 

this story about the cats too, because he knows that he too is one 

of the stars of the story of Tommy Douglas who talked about the 

cats . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He must have heard it in your caucus 

before. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well some cats don't know what colour they are, 

Mr. Speaker.  Some cats keep changing colours.  Well we've got 

black cats; we've got white cats; we've got some over there that 

aren't sure what colour cats they are but cats they are 

nevertheless, Mr. Speaker -- cats they are nevertheless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact we had that phenomenon, interesting 

phenomenon here in the province of Saskatchewan last October 

when, depending on your 

point of view, the people of Canada voted out the black cats and 

voted in the white cats.  Or did they vote out the white cats and 

vote in the black cats?  We don't know, but cats they got, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

And in fact, as Tommy told this story, Mr. Speaker, there were 

cats; there were white cats, there were black cats -- every now 

and then they had coalitions.  They had coloured, they had 

blacks and whites together.  But, Mr. Speaker, he also 

recognized the phenomenon -- and listen carefully here -- that 

there were cats that tried to make a noise like a mouse. 
 

Mr. Speaker, and these noises that were made like a mouse were 

often made -- is it any surprise, Mr. Speaker? -- at election time 

when the cats would talk like a mouse.  Mr. Speaker, it seems to 

me that some things never change. 
 

But what did they do?  They ate like cats.  Because at the end of 

the day a cat is a cat is a cat. 
 

Tommy went on to say, as he concluded the story, Mr. Speaker, 

and I quote: 
 

 You see, my friends, the trouble wasn't with the colour of the 

cat.  The trouble was that they were cats.  And because they 

were cats, they naturally looked after the cats instead of mice. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are taking great 

interest in this story, and I think they're enjoying it because they 

are recognizing that they are part of this play, that this ongoing 

saga unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan continue to be 

subjected to today. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most recent example of cats taking care of 

cats was just yesterday -- just yesterday.  Mr. Speaker, we all 

heard, we all heard about the cats in Ottawa telling us that they 

were going to reduce the price of a carton of cigarettes by $5.  

Now who are they doing it for, my colleague asks.  And this is a 

good question, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now was it for the mice?  My good friend, the member from 

Swift Current, he asked if it was for the mice.  Well let us see, 

Mr. Speaker.  I picked up the Leader-Post today and it said right 

there on the front page:  "Cigarette price-cut confusion".  

Confusion; confusion reigns supreme.  It was a catastrophe, as 

my . . . Mr. Speaker, and if I may be allowed just the slight 

liberty of the English language, Mr. Speaker, it ain't "purr-ty", it 

ain't "purr-ty" either. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it made it very clear in this article where the mouse 

stood, where the mice were.  In referring to, Mr. Speaker, in 

referring to the Minister of Finance for the province of 

Saskatchewan, the article says that: 

 

 . . . she's also concerned Ottawa is sending a message that it's 

acceptable to break the law and not pay taxes. 

 

 "So we support their increased enforcement with respect to 

smuggling.  We support the tax 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

on tobacco companies.  We support the anti-smoking 

campaign. 

 

And she concludes: 

 

 "What we do not support is the cut in taxes on cigarettes and 

we will not be following suit in Saskatchewan." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, surely the cats in Ottawa wouldn't be making 

a decision that was not in the best interest of the mice.  But I 

look in the Leader-Post and I find again another article entitled 

"School board adds its voice -- Opposes gov't move." And I 

quote in part: 

 

 The Regina Public School Board added its voice Tuesday 

night to those opposing the federal government's move to 

reduce taxes on tobacco. 

 

 . . . a letter to be sent to Premier Roy Romanow in support of 

the province's stand against reducing the price of cigarettes. 

 

 "If you lower the price of cigarettes it encourages more 

smoking, particularly among young people" . . . 

 

And another article, Mr. Speaker, that says:  "Tax cuts 

attacked -- Big mistake, groups say".  It says in part and I quote: 

 

 "I'm not pleased.  There's no excuse for this," said Paul Van 

Loon, director of health education for the Saskatchewan Lung 

Association." 

 

 "I don't think you'll find one health organization in the country 

that agrees with this plan." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this is a decision of the cats that's for the 

good of the mice, then who's it for?  Who is it for?  Mr. Speaker, 

could it have anything to do with the fact that cats of the same 

colour have got an election coming in another province distant 

from here, Mr. Speaker?  Could this have something to do with 

cats taking care of cats, Mr. Speaker?  Might it have anything to 

do with cats putting cats ahead of the mice? 

 

Well, Tommy said, sometimes they make a noise like a mouse, 

but they end up eating like a cat.  And I noticed today, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberal member opposite stood in question period 

and he asked the question about crop insurance.  He made a 

noise like a mouse.  He made a noise like a mouse. 

 

But while he made that noise like a mouse he conveniently 

ignored that the Liberal government in Ottawa is giving up 

millions of dollars that it could put into farm safety programs if 

it chose -- to the farm safety net -- but instead he is content to 

make a noise like a mouse while his country cousins in Ottawa 

continue to be cats serving cats. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Tommy concluded, and I 

quote: 

 

 Presently, there came along one little mouse who had an idea.  

My friends, watch out for the little fellow with an idea.  And 

he said to the other mice, "Look fellows, why do we keep on 

electing a government made up of cats?  Why don't we elect a 

government made up of mice?"  "Oh," they said, "he's a 

Bolshevik.  Lock him up!"  So they put him in jail. 

 

But Tommy always concluded, Mr. Speaker, with this point: 

 

 But I want to remind you:  that you can lock up a mouse or a 

man (or a woman) but you can't lock up an idea. 

 

And what a powerful idea it was, Mr. Speaker.  It's obvious to us 

all the Mouseland was Saskatchewan.  And the cats are the two 

old, blind parties that take such great interest in this story about 

Mouseland. 

 

But the idea simply put, Mr. Speaker, was this -- the idea was 

social democracy; social democracy based on three precepts.  

One, that government has a noble role to play, to influence the 

quality of life that is truly available to all citizens, as the 

equalizer of opportunity and security. Secondly, that good 

government acts with compassion for the most vulnerable and 

the least powerful among us. And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the most 

powerful way to overcome barriers is through cooperation.  

What a powerful idea. 

 

It was a powerful idea in 1944 and for the next 50 proud years 

for the province of Saskatchewan.  And that belief in the noble 

role of government with the principles of compassion and 

cooperation brought a number of things to Saskatchewan over 

that time. 

 

Hospitalization was introduced for the first time here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker -- I believe it was 1947 -- where 

people could have hospital care without having to first of all 

open their wallets as they walked into the door of the hospital. 

 

And the Public Service Commission was introduced, Mr. 

Speaker, because up until that time Saskatchewan had to have 

government only by cats.  And when the black cats would come 

in, Mr. Speaker, then the black cats would work and out would 

go the white cats.  And when the white cats were elected, Mr. 

Speaker, the white cats would work and out would go the black 

cats. 

 

And Tommy Douglas said, Mr. Speaker -- and the member from 

Morse knows precisely what I'm going to say -- Tommy 

Douglas said that this waste has to end; the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to be served by professional, competent 

public service employees.  And the Public Service Commission 

was introduced in the province of Saskatchewan to ensure that 

people 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

who worked for the government worked on the basis of their 

competence and not on the basis of their political loyalties. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, rural electrification was introduced in the 

province of Saskatchewan to bring convenience to many people 

throughout the rural part of our province, to be able to enjoy one 

of the newly developed standards in quality of life. 
 

And provincial social assistance came into being.  Social 

assistance was moved from being a municipal function, which 

provided the level of comfort -- not comfort, heavens only 

knows, it was more accurate to describe it as a basic means of 

existence -- that it would become a right of Saskatchewan 

citizenship, that there would be a standard across the province 

not dependent upon either the wealth or the charitable intentions 

of the local municipality. 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office came into existence 

to provide general and affordable auto insurance as well as 

general insurance, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that Saskatchewan 

people had an affordable way of giving themselves the basic 

level of security. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the proudest times in Saskatchewan 

history in 1962, one of the most beautiful gifts from the people 

of Saskatchewan to the people of Canada -- medicare -- 30 years 

ago, 32 years ago.  Here we are 32 years later, the people in the 

nation south of the border the Leader of the Opposition likes to 

epitomize as having the characteristics of what he calls good, 

democratic reform 32 years later those folks, Mr. Speaker, are 

trying to decide whether they should have medicare.  That's what 

they're trying to decide. 
 

President Clinton spoke to the governors of the United States of 

America back in August, and when he did he said to those 

governors, those most powerful people in the United States of 

America, that it was a shame that in the United States of 

America, where they were spending 14 cents, 14 per cent of 

their gross domestic product in health care in the United States, 

as compared to 10 cents, 10 per cent on the dollar in Canada, 

that there were 30 million Americans -- 30 million 

Americans -- without medicare. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say, you turn over our system to the 

democratic system in the United States and that's where we're 

heading.  Because in the United States of America, the lobbyists 

and the big corporations become very, very dominant in the 

political decisions and priorities in that country.  When members 

of this House have opportunity to rub shoulders, members who 

live within a parliamentary democracy have opportunity to rub 

shoulders, over and over again they tell us, don't give up what 

we've got.  Where we can in this system that we live, we can 

represent with our constituents' priorities first, not the lobbyists. 

 

And we remember in this House, Mr. Speaker, we remember the 

actions of the Leader of the Liberal Party in 1962 who was 

happy to be associated with the Keep Our Doctors committee 

and the march on 

the legislature, one of the largest marches on the legislature that 

this Legislative Building has ever seen.  And he was happy to 

lead that revolt at the time, Mr. Speaker, against socialized 

medicine -- medicare.  And he came and he kicked on the door 

as the Leader of the Liberal Party.  One of the cats came and 

kicked on the doors of the Legislative Assembly to show his 

disgust for this wild and crazy social democratic notion that was 

intended to be introduced in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1600) 

 

And all of these things, Mr. Speaker, all of these things were 

done while the government continued to work to eliminate the 

debt inherited from the old-line parties, from the fat cats, on the 

belief that we have the greatest freedom to act on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan when we're debt free.  Mr. Speaker, that 

truth is just as significant to us today in 1994 as it was in 1944. 

 

And over that 50 years, Mr. Speaker, we saw the introduction of 

human rights legislation to protect our citizens against 

discrimination.  And some of the most progressive labour 

legislation in the nation, providing minimum standards for those 

people who are working without representation by collective 

agreement, as well as legislation to permit the democratic 

organization of working people to group together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that 50 years we saw aggressive ownership and 

management of our natural resources, to keep down personal 

taxes, as the only means to pay for our services.  And as we look 

at history today, we recognize that unfortunately privatization 

has been part of Saskatchewan's history, and that aggressive 

ownership and management of natural resources no longer 

exists, and as a consequence, the taxes have gone up -- a surprise 

to no one. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, we've seen the federated Indian 

college at the University of Regina and children's dental care 

and Crown corporations becoming world leaders in technology.  

The settlement of century-old Indian treaties, expansion of 

public health, and now finally, the third step of Tommy 

Douglas's dream for health care.  Hospitalization and medicare 

and now wellness, where our system strives to help us stay 

healthy and doesn't just involve us when we're sick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that idea is alive and well in Saskatchewan today.  

Mr. Speaker, social democracy is in good health in 

Saskatchewan today.  Mr. Speaker, the dream lives on and it 

beats in the hearts of New Democrats in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- You see, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan the fact of 

the matter is New Democrats' dreams come true.  In 1994 New 

Democrats still have dreams, Mr. Speaker.  In 1994, New 

Democrats dream of a time when there is truly equity in 

employment.  When racial discrimination is a plague of the past.  

When our 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

environment is a heritage we are proud to pass on to our 

children.  When education is truly available to all.  When 

children can grow up without fear in their homes and with hope 

in their hearts.  When governments will be trusted again to be 

about a noble task and to be a politician is considered to be a 

noble calling.  When women and men expect meaningful work 

with reasonable rewards and security.  When seniors all retire 

with dignity.  When Saskatchewan people enjoy physical and 

mental and spiritual health and strive to stay healthy and are 

confident in our health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as social democrats begin the second half-century 

of social democracy in Saskatchewan, there is no shortage of 

dreams.  But if there's anything that we've learned in the past 50 

years, it's how to make dreams come true.  The formula isn't 

complicated.  One, those dreams that cost money, you build as 

you can afford to pay for them.  And secondly, you set goals, 

you work hard, and you take one step at a time. 

 

And in this spirit, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to associate myself 

with this throne speech as a plan for the year ahead, putting into 

practice government acting with purpose and with compassion 

and cooperation.  I'm proud to associate myself with the progress 

towards a balanced budget in 1996 as promised.  And this is a 

political party, Mr. Speaker, that doesn't make promises it 

doesn't intend to keep -- there will be a balanced budget in 1996, 

I am confident. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to associate myself with 

the new structures that invoke the principles of cooperation and 

social democracy in the '90s, to develop our economy and jobs.  

Cooperation is just as important as a way to solve problems in 

Saskatchewan today as it ever was -- it's different times and so 

the structures are different -- and in this Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Speaker, it invokes cooperation in the formation of regional 

economic development authorities, bringing together 

communities in the province of Saskatchewan and people in 

those communities to cooperate in the building of our economy 

instead of competing with them each . . . with each other and 

tearing down our economy in the process. 

 

Cooperation in our new tourism authority, which will be 

introduced in this session, Mr. Speaker, bringing together the 

private sector as well as government, working to build a tourism 

industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which I believe has all 

kinds of potential to be so much more than it is today. 

 

Cooperation, Mr. Speaker, in this Speech from the Throne is 

invoked in the introduction of a new trade development 

corporation which once again brings together the private sector 

and government, working in cooperation in the distribution of 

Saskatchewan-made goods around the world to enhance our 

economy and create jobs for our people. 

Cooperation is invoked in this Speech from the Throne in the 

development of opportunities in research, information 

technology and telecommunications, bringing together different 

sectors of Saskatchewan industry, education, and government 

again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, cooperation is invoked in the starting of new 

enterprises with the aid of the newly introduced Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation that we will again see in this sitting of 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to be associated with the modernization 

of labour standards for all working people -- all working people, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I point out to the Assembly that this will be 

the first revision of labour standards to take place in this 

chambers for 17 years.  And how the world has changed in the 

last 17 years and the workplace has changed, and so I am proud 

to be associated with the modernization of our labour standards 

for all working people in the province of Saskatchewan, as well 

as legislative improvements to the laws that govern workplaces 

where employees democratically organize themselves. 

 

And we must remember, as we are tempted to get into acidic 

rhetoric in this House, Mr. Speaker, that this is what this is 

about -- a very important Canadian, and in fact, North American 

tradition, to give legal authority for working people to 

democratically organize themselves, and we will see 

improvements in that kind of legislation in this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this International Year of the Family I'm proud 

to associate myself with the action plan for children, bringing 

together, both within government as well as outside of 

government, different interests and agencies and departments all 

of whom put first, the interest of working for the benefit of 

children in the province of Saskatchewan.  And they put that 

ahead of the protection of their institutions and of their own turf 

and territory. 

 

And I'm proud to be associated, Mr. Speaker, with the 

introduction of the children's advocate to aid those most 

vulnerable children who come into the care of the government.  

Mr. Speaker, it was about seven years ago, when it was my 

honour to serve in this Assembly as the Social Services critic for 

the New Democratic opposition, I called for the introduction of a 

children's ombudsman at that time.  And I want to acknowledge 

today in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the committed and fervent 

support for a children's advocate, for this important initiative for 

children who are in special need of love and security, that was 

brought to this Chamber by the former critic for Social Services 

for the New Democratic government, Peter Prebble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say and associate myself with the fact 

that Peter's dreams for vulnerable Saskatchewan children will 

come true with the introduction of the children's advocate this 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be irresponsible if I didn't in my 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

concluding say thanks to the people of Saskatchewan.  The 

democratic reality is this: progress is only made by governments 

which act as instruments for the people they represent.  In 

democracy, changes only remain when people want them to 

remain.  So for the support for progress for 50 years, and 

particularly, Mr. Speaker, for the extra sacrifice of the last two 

years made by the people of Saskatchewan, I want to say thanks. 

 

When we come to vote on the Speech from the Throne, I trust it 

will be a recorded vote.  And, Mr. Speaker, I will stand -- proud 

to stand -- in my place on behalf of the constituents of Moose 

Jaw Palliser.  And when I stand in support of the Speech from 

the Throne, I will stand to say yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- I'm very thankful for this opportunity to speak 

today on behalf of constituents from the Sutherland-University 

constituency and bring to this Legislative Assembly some of the 

concerns that I have heard from them. 

 

First let me say that personally this Speech from the Throne is a 

breath of fresh air.  I say this for two reasons.  First of all, it 

comes as a breath of fresh air after 10 years of government on a 

binge with the excesses of privatization and megaprojects and 

silly escapades like M.A.S. Medical and Joytec and the like that 

bankrupted the province. 

 

But not only a breath of fresh air from that form of government, 

but a breath of fresh air from the kind of government we've seen 

the last two years that for all practical purposes has been under 

siege because of that legacy of debt and bankruptcy; a breath of 

fresh air to a government that has been forced to deal almost 

solely to the exclusion of many, many other pressing social, 

economic, and political issues, with the issues of debt 

management and putting the province on a firm financial 

foundation. 

 

And so this Speech from the Throne marks a breath of fresh air 

within the life of this government.  The deficit monster is now 

under control; it's on a leash.  And with the 1996 budget there 

will be a balanced budget for the first time in Saskatchewan for 

over a decade. 

 

And I want to say here that the times here in Saskatchewan the 

last couple of years, the last number of years, have in fact been 

very rough for all Saskatchewan people, especially for those 

who are poorest in our province.  There have been very, very 

difficult times, having to absorb the extra cost of prescription 

drugs and such things.  Farmers have made a lot of sacrifice.  All 

segments of Saskatchewan have made sacrifice. 

 

And I know that I speak for members on this side of the 

Legislative Assembly when I say that the people of 

Saskatchewan have our appreciation and our deep thanks for the 

heroic sacrifices in some instances that they have made the last 

couple of years in order to balance the budget. 

We need to say then, and give credit where credit is due, that the 

changes that have been brought about in the last two years have 

not simply been the result of government action, but have been 

the result also of public response and public sacrifice. 

 

The significant thing about this Speech from the Throne for me 

then is that it marks a bit of a turning point in the life of this 

government in the journey of renewal that we are on for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  A turning point also in public policy. 

 

There's no doubt about it that in this Speech from the Throne 

there is a marked emphasis on economic development.  

Economic development being emphasized now because the 

government has put first things first for the last two years and 

has dealt with the deficit and the budget balancing and has 

established a positive trajectory there.  Now we can turn to 

creating jobs and economic development across the province. 

 

And I'm very encouraged by some of the announcements in the 

Speech from the Throne, particularly that the government will be 

working in cooperative fashion with communities for regional 

economic development authorities and community development 

across the province.  There's no doubt but that this is the way to 

go in the years ahead with local Saskatchewan people and 

communities rebuilding the province. 

 

I'm also encouraged to see the announcement of a trade 

corporation being established.  I think we can take heart that the 

government was the first province in all of Canada to sign the 

federal-provincial infrastructure agreement, and we'll be 

pressing forward to bring those jobs and economic projects into 

the provincial economy these next weeks and months. 

 

(1615) 

 

It's also very positive that SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) with all the excesses of the past 10 

years is being replaced by a new vehicle for economic 

development. 

 

And so I'll say that for me there are all the signs of economic 

activity and renewal in this Speech from the Throne with respect 

to the private sector.  And with the small-business sector the 

government has had a good, solid agricultural policy in its Ag 

2000 document. 

 

But this focus, I dare say, is only one arena of economic activity.  

As someone is given to talk about only one engine of economic 

development, namely the private sector, there are two other 

engines or vehicles for economic development in our province 

that this Speech from the Throne really doesn't touch on.  I think 

it's important that they be noted to the public that the 

government is working in these two areas. 

 

In the months ahead they're going to see, the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to see developments with 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

respect to Crown corporations, and they're going to see 

economic initiatives in the Crown corporation sector . . . in the 

cooperative sector rather, as members of this caucus begin 

turning to those two engines of the economy and begin firing 

them up as the private sector has been fired up with our 

Partnership for Renewal document. 

 

Job creation and growth have to see activity in all three sectors 

of the economy.  In the public sector we need to look for in the 

months ahead, an expanded role for our Crown corporations.  

There's a hint of that in the Speech from the Throne when it talks 

about SaskTel's involvement in the chunnel project and some of 

its technological expertise, and the information highway and 

those sorts of things.  But we can expect a lot more from this 

government with respect to Crown corporations, and we will be 

seeing more from this government with respect to Crown 

corporations in the months ahead. 

 

Another area of public sector enterprise has to do with the field 

of job training, apprenticeship programs.  There's a crying need 

for that here in Saskatchewan.  A number of my colleagues, the 

member from Redberry and the member from 

Bengough-Milestone, have commented on their commitment to 

work on apprenticeship programs for the province.  And I can 

tell the people of Saskatchewan that in the months ahead they 

will be seeing work done by this government on apprenticeship 

programs because of the efforts of people like these two 

members from Redberry and Bengough-Milestone. 

 

I could tell them also that there is room for the public sector, in 

firing up the economy, to go back to an old program that is a 

good program.  A program like students in industry, graduates in 

industry, that had been funded years ago by the Saskatchewan 

Research Council and provided job opportunities for young 

people and support for employers, small-business people, 

especially in technology fields across the province.  And I intend 

to work on that sort of program with the minister responsible for 

the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

With respect to the cooperative sector, we've got a big role, a big 

job to do there to revitalize and to renew that sector of the 

economy.  I don't know that government members have even 

begun to turn their mind to the many opportunities that exist in 

that sector of the economy, but I can tell you that this is a task 

the government members need to be addressing and that they 

will be addressing in the months ahead. 

 

Simply put, we are not going to be content to see the economy 

limping along on only one engine or driven by only one vehicle.  

We need to get all segments of the Saskatchewan economy 

working together. 

 

It's with this perspective on economic development then that I 

feel I need to say a word about the issue of gambling in the 

province.  And I want to begin by saying that I appreciate the 

careful and deliberate manner in which the government has 

wrestled with this issue.  I think that the minister responsible for 

the 

Liquor Commission is nothing less than heroic with some of the 

efforts that he has put into wrestling with this issue.  And he 

deserves . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And he really does deserve the appreciation of 

the Saskatchewan public.  Now I know there's criticism of our 

policy with respect to gambling.  I know there are lots of 

concerns about our policy with respect to gambling, and I say 

that's as it should be. 

 

And people having those concerns need to raise those concerns 

with their individual members and make them clear.  And the 

government members have the responsibility to take those 

concerns to heart and to deal with those concerns and to 

communicate with the Saskatchewan people as to what the 

Government of Saskatchewan is doing with respect to casinos 

and other forms of gambling. 

 

It can't just be the minister responsible for gambling and the 

Liquor Commission that deals with those concerns 

single-handedly, as capably as he is dealing with them.  There's 

got to be an increased dialogue established between people who 

hold concerns with their individual members of the legislature.  

And I certainly encourage people to contact their government 

members on this score and discuss these very difficult issues. 

 

And they are difficult; they are immensely difficult as we know.  

Morally they are difficult; socially they are difficult; 

economically they are difficult.  And I say it's very easy for 

people to stand on the sidelines and to criticize and to take 

pot-shots at government policy on this score, but it's much more 

difficult to find a balance when you're dealing with these 

immensely difficult issues related to gambling.  And it's even . . . 

well we can deal with the issues, or try to deal with the issues, 

but to find solutions that appease all portions of the public, not 

even a heroic minister can do that. 

 

My wife says, people gamble nowadays in large measure, Mark, 

because they've lost hope.  And I think she's right.  And I think 

it's very important for us as elected members, no matter which 

party we're in, to recognize that there really is a crisis in hope 

across our province.  There are many people who feel that they 

will never make it in the above-ground, so-called real economic 

world. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The legitimate economy. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- The legitimate economy.  Because they're 

unemployed, they've been injured on the job or they're 

discriminated against, they're poor to begin with, they can't pull 

themselves up by their bootstraps.  They have no child care, as 

the member for Saskatoon Wildwood points out.  The cards are 

stacked against them and they've got nothing to lose. 

 

So why not go to the tables or the VLT or the casino and the 

break-open, the bingo, whatever it is, and see if we can't win.  

Any maybe, just maybe, if I win the 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

649 then my life would change.  But there's precious little hope 

of things changing when I'm unemployed and poor or I'm a 

single parent. 

 

And so we do have a crisis of hope and we have a responsibility 

to these people when it comes to the larger discussion of the 

gambling issue, and not to focus just merrily on the issue of 

gambling but to focus on the issue of economic development and 

what we're doing to provide real, palpable hope for people who 

need it, for people who don't have jobs or who don't have 

opportunities. 

 

Gambling in large measure is false hope.  We all know that.  We 

need to provide real hope for Saskatchewan people.  And I dare 

say, the last chapter on gambling policy hasn't been written yet; 

the last word hasn't been spoken.  Share your concerns with us.  

Share your concerns not only on gambling but share your 

concerns with government members, with opposition members, 

on ideas for economic development. 

 

Now I know that there are individual members like the member 

for Shellbrook-Torch River constituency who has a lot of small 

forest operators in his backyard.  These are people who often 

will employ only one or two other people in a small mill in the 

bush but they'll create a quality product from our Saskatchewan 

resources. 

 

There are problems there.  There are problems with respect to 

supply, with respect to allocation of wood, and these are 

problems that I can announce to the people of Saskatchewan 

with this Speech from the Throne that marks the breath of fresh 

air, getting away from our fixation with debt and the deficit. 

These are problems that are going to begin to be addressed by 

the Government of Saskatchewan in the months ahead. 

 

Because our priority is now putting jobs and economic 

development to work, and to look at questions like wood 

allocation.  And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan, members 

like the member for Shellbrook-Torch River are going to be 

looking at those issues, the member from Nipawin, the member 

from Kelsey-Tisdale, and they're going to be wrestling with . . . 

the member from Meadow Lake, and they're going to be 

wrestling with these issues and they're going to be coming up 

with solutions.  But not without the help of the Saskatchewan 

public and their constituents.  And you need to be talking to 

them. 

 

We're all in this same boat together.  Some of the members, like 

the member from Turtleford, the member from Redberry in the 

forest belt, have problems with beavers.  Their constituents have 

lots of problems with beavers.  It's not a big problem in 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University constituency; they're all nicely 

cooped up in the forestry farm pens.  But in some parts of 

Saskatchewan it's a problem. 

 

And I say there ought to be some opportunities here, some 

opportunities for economic development to use those pelts, 

maybe to use the meat.  I don't know who wants to eat beaver 

meat; maybe it's good only for 

dogs.  I'm told dogs love it.  Some people eat seal flippers.  But I 

want to tell the people of Saskatchewan, we need to work 

together to find markets and opportunities for some of the 

God-given resources right on our front doors and in our back 

yards.  And government members are committed to work on 

those things in the months ahead. 

 

That's on the micro level though.  Those are the small things.  

They're very important because that's how we're going to pull 

this province back into economic stability and security by 

paying attention to these small details. 

 

But it isn't just the small details.  This government is going to be 

doing it by paying attention not just to the micro economies and 

the front doors and the backyards, but to the macro economies as 

well. 

 

I'm thinking, for example, of revamping and renewing our whole 

forest strategy.  And that's on the books, folks.  If you want to 

see the draft forest-strategy document, contact any one of your 

MLAs.  They have it.  And in a few months the forest strategy 

for the province will be announced, just like the economic 

development strategy was announced, just like the ag strategy 

was announced.  And there are going to be some big changes in 

the province because of these things. 

 

On the macro level, I think of some of the opportunities.  I come 

back to the Crown sector again.  I think that we're going to be 

seeing . . . I hope that we will be seeing in the months ahead 

some activities maybe to -- well let's dream a bit -- to 

commercialize some of the medical opportunities, the health 

opportunities that we have with our expertise here in the 

province and with the health reform program that the 

government has embarked on.  Opportunities to commercialize 

some of the things that we're doing and share it with people who 

desperately need improved health services in the rest of Canada 

and in the rest of the world. 

 

(1630) 

 

So there are all sorts of possibilities for economic development 

in this province.  This Speech from the Throne highlights some 

of them, but the people of Saskatchewan have other ideas and 

we need to hear those ideas and concerns so that we maximize 

the opportunities. 

 

And I just want to say parenthetically here that part of 

maximizing the opportunities for our province is putting into 

place progressive labour legislation which protects people and 

ensures that there is stability and security in the workforce.  This 

is long overdue and I think it's a breath of fresh air to have 

amendments to The Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union 

Act as part of this Speech from the Throne. 

 

Finally, I want to comment in terms of economic development 

and activity on the importance of environmental matters.  We 

can't talk nowadays 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

simply about economic activity and jobs.  I know that that's what 

was done in the Speech from the Throne and I dare say it's an 

oversight.  But I want to assure people here in Saskatchewan that 

just because concern for the environment isn't mentioned in this 

Speech from the Throne, environmental initiatives are high on 

the government's agenda.  Just like we've inherited a financial 

mess from the previous government, we've inherited an 

environmental mess from our past generations, sometimes going 

back literally generations.  There are excesses that need to be 

cleaned up.  We need to be responsible about our stewardship of 

what we've inherited and what we pass on to future generations. 

 

And this government will be taking increased initiatives in the 

field of the environment to protect our environment and ensure 

that we maximize opportunities for economic development as 

well.  For example, with the forest strategy. 

 

In the months ahead I think the people of Saskatchewan can 

expect to see the marriage of opportunities using waste reduction 

and recycling technologies to promote economic activity in the 

province. 

 

And I might add here that I'm very anxious to hear what the 

Leader of the Third Party has to say in terms of elaborating on 

her support for the nuclear industry and a high-level nuclear 

waste storage site here in the province.  It'll be very interesting 

to hear what she has to say about that.  And I hope that she does 

share with the people of Saskatchewan precisely where she 

stands on this issue of environmental sustainability and 

economic activity in our province. 

 

Some members say from their seats that she's likely to just 

comment on the process.  That may well be.  Again, we need the 

public to enter into a partnership here and ensure that she is held 

accountable for her views on this subject. 

 

So these are just some of the musings I have on the Speech from 

the Throne, and more importantly, some of the directions that I 

see the government going in in the weeks and the months ahead, 

some of the government agenda now that we have the deficit 

beast on a leash. 

 

And I want to say that government members will be working on 

a very ambitious agenda in the months ahead.  We invite others 

to share their concerns and their comments with us.  This 

government is listening, and this government is willing to be 

corrected, it's willing to be informed, it's willing to learn. 

 

The bottom line to all of this is that we all are in the same boat 

together.  But we're sailing ahead into the future.  Life is 

stabilizing here in the province.  The room has stopped spinning, 

so to speak.  People can put their feet on solid ground, 

sometimes only tentatively, but it's solid.  And they can begin to 

plan their lives and begin renewing the province.  To do this we 

need to all pull together.  We need each other.  We need to deal 

with the real problems we have in front of 

us.  And we need most of all to build a better future, not only for 

ourselves -- we need to do that, that's for sure -- but also for our 

children. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with great pleasure 

that I rise in the legislature today to speak in support of the 

Speech from the Throne.  It is a privilege to represent the people 

of Redberry at the fourth session of the twenty-second 

legislature of Saskatchewan.  I would like to commend the 

Lieutenant Governor for a fine delivery of the Speech from the 

Throne and the Premier for clearly setting the direction for our 

government that is being emphasized by the public during our 

tenure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the member from 

Regina Lake Centre for moving the Speech from the Throne, 

and the member from Biggar for his seconding.  Both members 

spoke on many issues of major importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the new 

member from the Regina North West constituency on her recent 

election to the Chamber.  You ran as a Liberal, you won as a 

Liberal, and you have taken your seat in this Assembly as a 

Liberal alongside your leader.  Our political views no doubt are 

different, but we do respect both you and your leader for the part 

you play in Saskatchewan politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- In some ways it was rather unfortunate that in order 

to be compatible with my government's policy and the 

legislation that we passed, that the election had to be held within 

six months, so that some of the campaigning had to be done in 

less than ideal weather, as you no doubt noticed.  The 

by-election was held within the six-month maximum to be 

consistent with the democratic reform of my government. 

 

Congratulations.  I am sure that you will make a major 

contribution to this Assembly and find it a very interesting 

experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great satisfaction that I listened to the 

Speech from the Throne.  It was a speech that definitely outlined 

many of the major steps forward on the route that my 

government has embarked.  Responsible government was and 

continues to be the commitment of our government to the people 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- The major progress over the last two years in health 

care reform is a tremendous accomplishment, and it's also a 

matter of great pride to myself and to my government as we 

complete the 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

second major step forward in health care in Saskatchewan.  The 

compassionate matter of approaching a very delicate subject is 

much appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan.  It once again 

can be said that we in Saskatchewan are leaders in health care, a 

position that we held since the days of Tommy Douglas, 

Woodrow Lloyd, and Allan Blakeney. 

 

The health district members are a dedicated group of men and 

women who have the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan 

at heart.  The long hours and many miles these people cover in 

getting this program started is an indication of the commitment 

of Saskatchewan people to the well-being of their fellow 

citizens. 

 

It must also be recognized that Saskatchewan health care 

workers are adapting to the new system and are continuing to 

provide first-class health care for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- It would not and could not work without their 

cooperation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the field of education I am pleased to say that 

our government has implemented some major initiatives.  A 

review of all post-secondary education has been completed in 

the first two years of our government.  The issues are now being 

addressed by government and institutions themselves.  A report 

on the provincial high school system will soon be completed. 

 

An education council has been established to advise on key 

issues and options for education.  Overall an approach to 

education is being encouraged so that the process involves 

everyone -- parents, teachers, students, the business community, 

labour, and others with a real interest in education. 

 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, consisting of a cable 

network and a training network, began broadcasting some time 

ago.  For example, in the Redberry constituency residents in and 

around places like Radisson, Blaine Lake, Rabbit Lake, and 

Marcelin are benefiting from SCN's (Saskatchewan 

Communications Network) training network and the services it 

provides with the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment. 

 

The government's commitment to distance education provides 

the opportunity, through the use of television and SaskTel, for 

rural students to have the same access to education as students in 

large urban centres.  Distance education provides rural residents 

with the opportunity to take various K to 12 classes as well as 

various post-secondary and continuing education classes in a 

cost-effective manner to both the province and the students. 

 

In K to 12 education we have initiated a program to address the 

needs at risk, children, and their families so that government 

agencies and community 

organizations are involved in a coordinated and integrated 

approach. 

 

A new and fairer process to allocate capital funding projects has 

been developed.  The new process encourages the joint use of 

facilities within a community.  I am pleased to say that our 

government is funding a modest building program which is 

resulting in a new facility, K to 12, in Maymont in Redberry 

constituency. 

 

We are working hand in hand with small rural communities, not 

only to keep them alive but also to create an atmosphere where 

people can live, learn, raise their families, and retire with 

dignity. 

 

New Careers Corporation was transferred to Education, 

Training, and Employment in March, 1993 as part of the 

government's restructuring.  The corporation provides training 

and employment programs to Saskatchewan social assistance 

recipients.  The total community employment program funds 

grants by New Careers Corporation to Redberry constituency 

amounted to over $60,000.  It employed 14 people for 20 weeks 

in 1992-93.  In 1993-94, Redberry constituency benefited by 

community employment program funds amounting to over 

$80,000 employing 19 people at 20 weeks each. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along the same line of thinking, my government is 

assisting communities to join together in developing REDAs, 

regional economic development authorities, in order to bring 

rural communities together to jointly develop the economic 

advantages of a whole region. 

 

I am pleased that within Redberry constituency REDAs are in 

the process of being organized.  A great deal of job creation and 

business opportunities are being researched through this method.  

This program is consistent with Saskatchewan's tradition of 

neighbour helping neighbour, to everyone's advantage. 

 

The need for jobs for our unemployed and our youth is often 

brought to my attention.  It's brought to my attention by the good 

people of Redberry that 711 projects were developed within 

Economic Development; 2,235 jobs were created; 1,285 jobs 

were maintained. 

 

(1645) 

 

Delivery of programs and services for small business has been 

streamlined and enhanced by introducing a single-window 

system of access.  As phase 1 of this system, a geographically 

directed province-wide 1-800 number has been installed in the 

department's regional office for initial assessment of callers' 

requirements and appropriate pathfinding services for 

individuals needing information and support for economic or 

business development.  Saskatchewan people are becoming 

much more optimistic as the responsible approach of our 

government becomes more evident. 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

Mr. Speaker, more and more other provinces throughout Canada 

are following Saskatchewan's lead in attempting to regain 

control of their destiny.  Unfortunately for many Canadians, the 

cut-and-slash approach is being used instead of reform addressed 

with compassion, such as the methods employed by our 

Saskatchewan New Democratic government. 

 

June of this year marks a very important date in the political 

history of our province.  June is the 50th anniversary of the 

election of Tommy Douglas and the CCF government to 

Saskatchewan.  Humanity first -- the motto of the CCF - 

_ is still guiding our socialist movement to this day.  The 

socialist component of our movement is what guides our 

government in the decision-making process adopted by caucus 

when we assumed office, just the same as the CCF approach to 

the government some 50 years ago. 

 

Government has to have the deficit under control.  It cannot 

allow the province's finances to be uncontrolled if we are to 

govern with a social conscience. 

 

I am proud to say that our government is showing fiscal 

responsibility, and with the direction laid out by the throne 

speech, it also is proving, as the CCF did a half a century ago, 

that we can also govern with the view of humanity first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1930s when the Tories were thrown out of 

office, we were rid of them in Saskatchewan for nearly 50 years.  

I can only hope we as Saskatchewan people are as slow to make 

a similar mistake in the next century.  I am very optimistic, 

despite the comment I heard the other day, that the Tories are 

just like the measles -- you only get them once in a lifetime. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- And once is enough. 

 

However, another right-wing danger is of course the Liberal 

Party.  I remember discussions some years back about how big a 

disaster the Conservatives were in government.  A political 

observer of the day made the comment to me that the Tories 

were not so bad.  They simply did nothing.  While the Liberals 

were in power, they did something to you. 

 

I often think of that when I remember that it was the Liberal 

government that killed the Crow and changed the usury Act that 

allowed the interest to rise from a high of 12 per cent to over 24, 

not to mention the more recent broken promise, the more recent 

broken election promise by the Liberal Party of Canada to 

reopen negotiations on the North American Free Trade 

Agreement. 

 

It is just a grim reminder, as the Liberals take office in Ottawa, 

that they are in fact quite capable of doing something to you.  

Yes, doing it to you even if it is only passing into law an 

agreement drawn up by Brian Mulroney to fulfil the plans of his 

corporate agenda.  Yes, I expect that we will see major changes 

in 

Saskatchewan politics as the Conservatives line up with the 

other Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, known as the 

Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that my government is making 

every effort to be informed on regional issues.  I would like to 

thank the members of the cabinet and the Premier himself, for 

the approach and their willingness to meet with individuals and 

groups throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- The ministers have a wide range of issues to deal 

with.  The concerns of Saskatchewan people in downtown 

Saskatoon or Regina vary a great deal from the concerns that are 

brought forward through my office in Redberry constituency. 

 

I am pleased to say that the cabinet is now well aware of our 

national animal.  Beaver concerns were the number one source 

of calls to my office, and I am pleased to say that the minister in 

charge of Sask Water and the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management are cooperating in controlling what has 

become a national nuisance, at least in Redberry. 

 

The Agriculture 2000 outline and the report of the agricultural 

committee outlining three options to work on for farm support 

programs are a very useful foundation for our government to 

base our policies on. 

 

I would like to extend my thanks to the Minister of Agriculture 

and the 32-person committee of individuals and farm 

organization representatives on a job well done.  Partially 

because of your efforts, Saskatchewan farmers have a brighter 

outlook today than just one year ago. 

 

It has not been easy ever since the Mulroney government failed 

to come through on their promised third line of defence.  This 

was money that was designated to go straight into the pockets of 

Saskatchewan farmers.  Without it, those same farmers are 

forced to fight the treasuries of Europe and the U.S. (United 

States). 

 

Therefore the farm situation is still very difficult.  But our 

government is helping farmers work through a very awkward 

situation created by the world grain wars, repeated attempt by 

the federal government to offload their responsibilities onto the 

province and directly onto Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another more positive situation is being developed 

through such regional tourism associations as the Heart of the 

Old Northwest.  A great deal is being accomplished in the 

tourism field.  I mention the Heart of the Old Northwest because 

Redberry constituency is entirely included in this tourism area.  

We have a large number of big game animals, excellent fishing, 

hundreds of scenic camping areas, beautiful winter playgrounds 

for year-round tourism in Redberry constituency.  A very 

friendly population that makes every effort to make visitors 

welcome -- 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard February 9, 1994 

summer and winter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government continues to make progress in the 

social services area.  This is a tough area, as tough economic 

times place a great burden on this document. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one announcement in the throne speech that I am 

very happy to see is the announcement of action plan for 

children with the creation of a children's advocate in the 

Ombudsman's office.  This plan will allow preventive action 

instead of action after the fact.  Children at risk can be helped 

before, not after a crisis develops.  It is far easier to prevent 

tragedy than undo it.  This is a proactive legislation, not reactive; 

another example of this government responding to a perceived 

need. 

 

In response to the comments from the opposition members this 

may well be the B team. It's quite a relief from the BS team that 

we're used to hearing from your ranks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I think the 

member would do well to refrain from that kind of language.  It 

simply adds nothing to the calibre of the debate in the House.  I 

just warn the member to continue, but with parliamentary 

language. 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, in the highways and transportation 

area there have been several major accomplishments which have 

benefited Redberry constituency.  The strategic highway 

improvement program was developed.  A $70 million five-year 

joint federal-provincial program to improve highways identified 

under the national highways system.  This includes completion 

of four-laning between Saskatoon and North Battleford along 

No. 16 Highway. 

 

With the twinning of the Yellowhead Route, Redberry is 

receiving a good share of the highway construction.  This past 

year, Saskatchewan construction on the Yellowhead Route took 

place within Redberry.  I am pleased about this project because 

it not only creates jobs, but it also deals with the long overdue 

problem of death and injury on a very dangerous stretch of 

highway. 

 

We in Redberry have been fortunate also to have had a good 

share of resurfacing and maintenance projects.  In the interest of 

safety, improvements are being made in areas that are dangerous 

because of the lack of sight distance.  The directions that our 

government has taken with the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company is that it will move STC from a bus company to a 

transportation company. 

 

The results will enable STC to operate on a system of internal 

subsidization of passenger services by express revenues not 

exclusive to profitable passenger routes as originally conceived. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to have met our 

commitment with the first nations people.  The Saskatchewan 

milestone was reached with the passing of The Treaty Land 

Entitlement Implementation Act.  The Treaty Land Entitlement 

Agreement will provide 26 Saskatchewan entitlements bands 

with 450 million over the next 12 years to purchase land and 

mineral rights and will allow them to create a strong economic 

base from which to build. 

 

A tripartite framework agreement was signed in February of 

1992 by the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada and the 

Metis Society of Saskatchewan.  This agreement will enhance 

Metis administration and control over matters which affect their 

lives. 

 

Indian and Metis economic development programs were 

transferred from the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat to the 

Department of Economic Development.  The transfer will ensure 

more efficient and effective delivery of government services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a comprehensive review of the lottery 

system in Saskatchewan.  This review addressed key issues of 

accountability, accessibility, social relevance, efficiency, and 

effectiveness.  The new Saskatchewan lotteries community grant 

program, formerly TIP, has been designed to provide funds to 

community volunteers, volunteer organizations, who provide 

programs and services in sport, culture, and recreation. 

 

Through a cooperative approach between Saskatchewan 

municipal government, Saskatchewan Sport Incorporated, 

Saskatchewan Council of Culture Organizations, and 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, significant 

improvements to the program were made which will enhance the 

development of sports, culture, and recreation throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The additional components within the program which will 

include seniors and target populations such as the disabled, 

aboriginal, and women, will provide more opportunities for 

people to participate.  Sixteen communities in Redberry 

constituency have benefited through the Saskatchewan lotteries 

community grant program for the various projects, youth as well 

as seniors' projects. 

 

In the housing division, increased emphasis has been placed on 

providing adequate and affordable housing in Saskatchewan's 

North.  With respect to community housing, in order to make 

better use of existing housing units, many units are being moved 

from communities where they are no longer needed to others 

where need has being expressed.  This results in a significant 

saving to government while the particular community's needs 

are met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, non-renewable resource revenues are up 61 million 

over 92, helping meet the government's deficit reduction 

projections.  This money is more than welcome as it is the least . 

. . it helps to fill the void left by the federal offloading. 



February 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

(1700) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the oil and natural gas development has increased 

dramatically creating much optimism in the more westerly parts 

of Redberry.  I am also pleased that the SaskPower Corporation 

is relocating the 40-plus-year-old three-phase lines out of the 

farmers' fields. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- In conclusion, I would very much like to reiterate 

my praise for major players in health care in Saskatchewan.  The 

dedication and total commitment of the health board members, 

health professionals in Department of Health, is a matter that 

deserves the recognition and a show of support from all 

members of this Assembly.  The well trained and very 

professional workers are adapting very well to the changes that 

have resulted as the new districts are formed.  Health reform is 

alive, well, and able in Saskatchewan, no doubt in better shape 

than ever in history. 

 

The second phase of medicare is important to all of us.  We will 

have a better emergency care service and respite services in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Through consolidation we will be able to keep 

medicare affordable.  Remember, in the U.S. where health care 

is provided by private insurance it costs them 14 per cent of 

gross national product compared to our Canadian universal cost 

at 10 per cent. 

 

This government is setting a course of responsible development 

and consideration for all Saskatchewan people.  Because this 

throne speech commits the government to programs based on 

humanity first, it will be an opportunity to express my pride in 

the government actions when I stand in my place, as I will, and 

vote in support of the Speech from the Throne.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 

 

 


