




















































Hansard: May 16, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2309 

 May 16, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to introduce to you, and through you to all my colleagues in the 

Legislative Assembly, a group of Grade 12 students from 

Robert Usher Collegiate in north end Regina.  Accompanying 

this group of students of course is their teacher, Mr. Ast. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them in your boardroom, which 

I thank you for, sir, after question period, and look forward to a 

discussion with them at that time.  I ask all members to join me 

in welcoming the grade 12's from Robert Usher. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to welcome a very special group of grade 8 students 

from Rosetown Central High School and their teachers, Mr. 

Jake Wiebe and Glenda Covlin, to the Assembly. Its a special 

class by any measure, but it's an especially special class 

because my second-youngest daughter, Stacey, who is trying to 

ignore me up there right now, is in it. 

 

So I ask the members to join with me in welcoming them.  I'll 

be meeting the students for pictures.  And I think instead of 

going to 218, we'll go to my office; it's more fun there.  So join 

me in welcoming these people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you 

and to the members of the Assembly I'd like to introduce a 

group of grade 4 students from the Oxbow School, sitting up in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're here with their teacher, Mr. 

Earl Huenison, with chaperons, Kim Haacke, Brenda Miller, 

Darlene Scott, Connie Hannah, and Sheila Flahr. 

 

I would like to ask members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd also like to 

take this opportunity to introduce Lyle McDonald, who is 

sitting in the second row up in the Speaker's gallery.  Lyle is 

the RM (rural municipality) secretary for RM No. 32, and his 

office is right across the street from mine in Alida.  I'd like to 

ask the members to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly two very 

fine people in this audience that are sitting in  

the second row in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  Irene Stoy and 

and my wife, Jo, are here to watch the proceedings this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature our oldest boy, David, who has just returned with 

the Canadian navy from the Adriatic Sea.  He's part of the 

NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) forces over there, 

supporting the United Nations' efforts in that part of the world. 

 

And I know I speak for our whole family when I say how 

pleased we are to have him home and to have him here today, 

and I'd ask you to help me welcome him back. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Boundary Commission North-West Mounted Police wagon 

train and trail ride 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to announce that July 

2 to 8, phase 3 of the Boundary Commission North-West 

Mounted Police wagon train and trail ride, Saskatchewan 

segment, will take place. 

 

This ride, as you know, re-enacts one of the most stirring and 

one of the least-known combined episodes in western Canadian 

history.  From 1872 to 1876 the members of the North 

American Boundary Commission surveyed and marked the 

border which defined Canadian territory.  This commission 

linked up with the Mounties coming from the East in 1876.  It 

marked the peaceful, orderly establishment of Canadian society 

on the Prairies. 

 

Last year, it was a beautiful sight to see phase 2 of the 

re-enactment as the riders and wagons came over the hills of 

the Big Muddy.  One of the highlights was that Doug Miner, a 

member of the last RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

horse patrol of 1938, was able to participate.  This year's 

re-enactment trail ride leaves from Kelly's Outlaw Caves and 

arrives at Wood Mountain on July 8th, in time for the Wood 

Mountain rodeo. 

 

The ride will take wagons and riders through the Big Muddy.  

There'll be nightly entertainment, catered meals, water for 

horses and people, and wonders of wonders -- flush toilets.  

The planning committee's only worry is maybe the ride is 

becoming too successful and their challenge is to handle the 

large number of participants. 

 

This is a fine tourism event for southern Saskatchewan.  I 

congratulate the Coronach Tourism Association and all of the 

organizers making this year's event a great success.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

National Public Works Week 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to announce 

to the Assembly, that the week of the May 15 to the 21 is 

National Public Works Week.  This annual occasion allows 

members of the various public works agencies across North 

America to celebrate past achievements, feature ongoing 

activities and discuss future objectives. 

 

The American-Canadian Public Works Association is 

celebrating its centennial year in 1994.  This is a good time for 

those involved in this area to reflect upon the achievements of 

100 years of organized public works.  To help commemorate 

this occasion an essay contest has been established with the 

theme of: how public works are important for the future of my 

community. 

 

The Saskatchewan Public Works Association is a proud 

member of the 64 chapter American-Canadian Public Works 

Association.  This chapter is strictly a volunteer, non-profit 

organization whose members come from all areas of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, this government would like to 

recognize the accomplishments and efforts of the men and 

women in public works. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Paint Exchange Day 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It may not be very 

exciting to watch paint dry and I didn't do that Saturday, but I 

did go over to Parr Auto Body in my constituency and 

witnessed the first-ever Saskatoon Paint Exchange Day.  

Sponsored by Parr Auto Body, the city of Saskatoon, and 

SaskTel, who provided coveralls and respirators, these three 

sponsors each put in $1,500 seed money. 

 

Volunteers came from SaskTel Pioneers, Parr Auto Body staff, 

and even the Muskeg Lake reserve in the Sutherland 

constituency.  And they opened, sorted, dumped, and recycled 

hundreds and hundreds of cans of paint and varnish and the 

like. 

 

Some of the paint will be immediately used or reused by those 

people who picked it up that day; others will be reused by 

organizations like the Salvation Army, the SPCA (Society for 

the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals), Friendship Inn, and the 

Saskatoon Horses & The Handicapped organization.  Some of 

the less usable paint will still be used as barn paint or paint for 

grain storage bins.  The frozen latex and the old oil-based will 

be shipped to Sarnia and used as fuel, believe it or not. 

 

Special thanks then to Rebecca Elbourne, Roland Barrett, and 

Hubert Georget for their efforts, and also to the Sask Waste 

Reduction Council for this historic occasion in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gravelbourg Garage Sale 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, thank you.  We had another 

interesting event in Gravelbourg last Saturday, to wit, a 

quadruple garage sale.  Now there's nothing new about a garage 

sale, sir, but for a group of families to get together and arrange 

that the garage sales be held the same day and advertised in all 

the nearby towns, is an interesting new twist.  This made it 

worth while for people to come into Gravelbourg from 

surrounding areas for the day and spend the whole day cruising 

from sale to sale, and then eating, drinking, shopping in our 

Main Street stores.  My wife, who's an expert garage saler, tells 

me she met a lot of old friends at all her stops and picked up 

some lovely curtains for $8 and no tax. 

 

So I pass this information on to the members because it is 

apparent that garage sales are the in thing.  And it seems to 

make a lot of sense for people to cooperate and get together and 

to try and make a major event out of them.  I recommend that 

hon. members spread this idea around, especially in rural areas, 

where they could be held when, for example, the ball 

tournament is in town to act as an added attraction to bring 

people in. 

 

And finally, sir, I would like to point out the ultimate joy of 

garage saling is that it can be enjoyed in all weathers, even if 

there is no wind, and there's no danger of drowning.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Increased Utility Rates and Fees 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Conservative 

caucus is once again pleased to present at this time questions 

sent to us from members of the general public.  The first 

question today comes from Isaac Block in Saskatoon.  He asks 

this: Mr. Premier, when are you going to stop the hypocritical 

practice of additional taxation via the back door, i.e., Crown 

corporations, gasoline, licences and permits, etc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

member for the question.  I think it has to be clearly understood 

that when you pay your utility rates, that'd be electricity or 

power or gas, or buy your insurance, you're buying a 

commodity.  And that commodity in Saskatchewan is a fairly 

priced commodity.  It is competitive with any commodity 

anywhere in Canada.  And this is not a tax but it is a 

commodity that you purchase at a fair market price.  The utility 

rates in Saskatchewan are the lowest utility rates anywhere in 

Canada, and if they consider this a tax, I think it's a 

misconception that is being fueled by members of the 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

District Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Lyle McDonald of 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

Alida on behalf of the RM 32 Council. The question reads: 

union hospitals were given specific deadlines in forming 

regional health boards, with the understanding that failure to 

meet that deadline meant that boundaries would be imposed on 

them.  At the same time the government stated that board 

elections would be held in the fall of 1994.  Why is it that union 

hospital districts were bound by deadlines but yet all 

indications are that the provincial government is not going to 

meet its own commitment in providing for democratic elections 

in 1994? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 

question.  The commitment made by this government, after 

much discussion across the province of Saskatchewan, made in 

this House through legislation, is that for the first time in 

Saskatchewan's history district health boards would have 

elected members.  We're very proud of that commitment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At no time, at no time was the date of the first election fixed.  

So, as the member will know, we have a consultation 

happening across the province even as we speak, to recommend 

the timing of the first health board elections and a wide number 

of other issues. 

 

Because that consultation is happening, I would recommend to 

all members in the House and to all of their constituents, to be 

in touch with the commission to share their views. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prescription Drug Plan Benefits 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier as well, or to his designate.  It comes 

from L.D. Johnson of Milden, Saskatchewan, and the question 

is as follows.  Why were we not notified until November 1993 

that persons whose income was below $50,000 were eligible to 

have their share of drug costs reduced to 35 per cent?  There 

must be hundreds of cases like ours where persons whose 

income was under $50,000 who did not receive the guaranteed 

income supplement, were not aware of that provision. 

 

An employee of the Department of Health expressed surprise 

that there were so few applications from persons whose income 

was below that 50,000.  No wonder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say generally, that 

given the fiscal circumstance of our province, we are yet one of 

only three Canadian jurisdictions to offer a whole drug plan for 

the entire population.  And we're proud that we've been able to 

maintain that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of applications for benefits which exist under the drug 

plan, it did come to our attention as government that a number 

of people who should be eligible were not applying.  In that 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, we undertook a general mailing to 

all of those whom we could identify have high drug use.  Mr. 

Speaker, the response to that mailing was to add about 10,000 

new applicants to the drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, on Thursday the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce called on you to fire your Labour 

minister.  On Friday, 10 major Saskatchewan business groups 

called for a meeting with you to discuss the devastating effects 

your new labour laws will have on Saskatchewan's already 

suffering economy.  And on Saturday the Saskatchewan 

business coalition ran a full-page ad in the daily papers under 

the heading, "Would the last person to leave please pay their 

utility bills and the remaining taxes." 

 

Mr. Premier, the business coalition asked the following 

questions about your labour laws.  Is this any way to establish a 

positive climate for economic renewal?  Is this any way to 

encourage new business investment or create new jobs?  Is this 

any way to build partnerships? 

 

Mr. Premier, will you give the Saskatchewan business groups 

the meeting that they are asking for so that you can get together 

and discuss these very serious questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that not having been here during the period 

from 1982 to 1991 during the period that the Conservatives 

were in government in Saskatchewan, he cannot be blamed for 

the huge and massive deficit which is one of the big millstones 

around the economy of Saskatchewan, which is known and 

talked about by economists right across this country, the huge 

problem that that has caused for the people of this province. 

 

But I want to say, in dealing with the economy of 

Saskatchewan we have in fact worked closely with business.  

We've reduced the small-business tax from 10 to 8 per cent.  

We've removed the E&H (education and health) tax on 1-800 

numbers.  We've made other tax adjustments that have been 

beneficial to businesses, particularly small business.  And the 

economy is in fact responding. 

 

If you look at retail sales during the past year, they were up 

considerably.  Job creation in the non-agricultural sector of the 

economy were up between 12 and 14,000 jobs, when you 

exclude the reduction of 16,000 in the agricultural sector. 

 

And I want to say, when it comes to labour legislation you will 

find that the legislation coming from this government, as it 

would apply to business, as it would apply to labour, in terms 

of taxation you will find very moderate.  It may not satisfy the 

extremes in labour or the extremes in business, but I can tell 

you for the vast 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

majority of people in this province, they will find the 

legislation we bring in to be very, very middle of the road and 

conciliatory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Electronic Gaming Pay-outs 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the gaming minister.  Mr. Minister, could you tell 

this Assembly what the process is for determining the odds for 

video lottery terminals?  For instance, how are the odds for 

blackjack programed into a VLT (video lottery terminal); who 

determines those odds; and who or what government body 

oversees the programing of those machines and the central 

computer system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want 

to thank the member for the question. 

 

The odds and the payback are determined through electronics 

in a system that is put in place by the people who manufacture 

the electronic technology that we use in Saskatchewan.  The 

pay-out is 93 cents and the keep is 7 per cent or 7 cents out of 

each dollar.  That is all set electronically.  It is monitored 

through the central computer system in Saskatoon.  And I can 

say to the member opposite that since that program has been 

introduced, we have computer printouts available to us on a 

regular basis, and they have held true to form in all that I have 

seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

very interesting, Mr. Minister.  As you know, one of the first 

places to get VLTs in the province was the casino run by the 

Battleford's Exhibition Association.  We've been informed that 

during the period February 25 to March 1, '94, some machines 

were paying out well over 100 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, some have suggested that this was premeditated.  

Some have told us that this was done to ensure that your VLT 

introduction was a success.  They were so successful that long 

line-ups were experienced at each machine until the units were 

rejigged back to 93 per cent pay-out.  Mr. Minister, can you 

confirm this information? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only say to you 

that there is no jigging with the machines either in North 

Battleford or in any of the outlets that we have.  They are set 

and over a period of time they will pay back 93 cents for every 

dollar and keep seven. 

 

Now I want to say to the member from Rosthern that may have 

been the way the Tories would have ran a program, but that's 

not how this administration works. 

 

We put in place a program, and a VLT program, based 

on proven technology.  We have put in place the best 

equipment we can to monitor that technology.  And let me 

assure the member from Rosthern that we don't have people 

around jigging the machines -- they operate and they operate 

fairly and they operate properly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again the situation 

becomes more interesting.  Mr. Minister, this jigging of the 

machine that I am talking about, one can only assume that this 

was done intentionally. 

 

You verified yourself, on May 10, right in this Assembly, and 

your first answer this afternoon.  And you said on May 10: 

 

 . . . with respect to that particular program, we haven't had a 

glitch since it started running.  The central computer system 

is working well . . . 

 

And you said that again today.  But I say again, Mr. Minister, 

and I quote you: ". . . we haven't had a glitch since it started 

running." 

 

Now we know that everything that you say in this House is the 

gospel truth.  So the VLTs in North Battleford would have had 

to be set deliberately to be paying out over 100 per cent 

because there hasn't been a glitch in your system -- you said so. 

 

So I guess the question, Mr. Minister, is: are you misleading us 

now or were you misleading us on May 10?  Which is it, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 

the member for his question.  But first of all, let me explain to 

him how this functions.  These machines are not programed 

over a cycle of three hours or four hours; they're programed 

over a cycle that takes much, much longer than that.  There are 

times when a machine will pay out more than it's taking in -- 

that's how people win on them.  And there are times that it will 

pay out less than what people put in -- and that means they lose 

on them. 

 

But what I will say to the member opposite, that the kind of 

technology that we have brought to this province will pay back 

93 cents for every 100 cents over a period of time that a 

consumer will put in. 

 

What I will also say to him is, that these are not machines that 

were bought through Guy Montpetit.  These are not GigaText 

computers.  These are proven technology, and this technology 

is working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And to 

the same minister for gambling.  Mr. Minister, we have been 

informed otherwise.  We have been told 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

that the exhibition association in Battleford lost $14,531 

instead of making $3,850, which they should have made over 

that period of time.  You say it's cycle.  There's a low cycle and 

pay-outs are more, and then there's a cycle when the pay-outs 

are less. 

 

Well if that's the case, Mr. Minister, if that's the case . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . and the House Leader says: now 

I've got it.  Fine.  I'm glad, Mr. Speaker, that we all understand 

the situation now. 

 

When the association informed the commission of their losses, 

and the lottery foundation was informed, the folks in Battleford 

were told not to worry; that they would be taken care of.  They 

were told that, rather than removing the machines which would 

be an embarrassing situation for your VLT program, that they 

would be reimbursed for their losses. 

 

Mr. Minister, we were informed that the Battleford's Exhibition 

Association were subsequently advanced $10,000 from the 

lottery foundation and then were reimbursed for their 

remaining losses and given the profits that they should have 

made.  Mr. Minister, is this your official government policy?  Is 

it policy to allow machines that are paying out 100 per cent to 

run unchecked, then jig them back to 93 per cent on the q.t.? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Rosthern that I have learned in this House a long, 

long time ago never to trust at face value the statements that are 

made by the members of the opposition.  I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is dangerous to give either a Liberal or a Tory a 

computer, because they never are able to handle coming up 

with the right numbers. 

 

I want to say that over a period of time that the VLT programs, 

whether it be in the exhibition at North Battleford, the pilot 

projects that were run there, or whether it be some of the 

taverns or some of the beverage rooms in this province, that 

these machines run on a cycle and will pay back 93 cents from 

every dollar that is put in over a period of time. 

 

Now I will also say that there are times when machines will 

pay out more in a week or in a day than are put in by the 

customers, which means a net pay-out by the establishment.  

But there are also times when those establishments will make 

much more. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is his reference to the lottery 

foundation mystifies me because the lottery foundation has 

absolutely nothing to do with the video lottery terminal 

program.  So what I will commit to the member is that I will 

get the facts from the Gaming Authority, and I will pass those 

over to the member from Rosthern because I know what I will 

get from that operation will be the truth, rather than what he 

would present to this House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the facts that I'm quoting today 

are the truth because they are not my facts; they come from the 

North Battleford association.  Now answer this question:  if this 

is cyclical over a long period of time that it will even out at 93 

per cent, why did your organization, the lottery organization, 

pay the Battlefords' association over $18,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said to the 

member from Rosthern, I will find out the facts, as they will be; 

and I will report them to him, as they have happened.  I would 

far sooner deal with facts that would come from the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority than the member 

from Rosthern or any of his colleagues, who don't have a 

record of presenting actually the straight goods on many 

occasions in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, here are the facts:  after the machines were fixed, 

there were line-ups at the machines; staff at the casino noticed 

many people plugging hundreds of dollars into machines, 

thinking that they would continue to pay out at that high rate, as 

they had.  In effect, your slot machines hooked people, got 

them addicted, and then took their money. 

 

For a government to be involved in this kind of activity, Mr. 

Minister, is simply unconscionable.  It appears that you are 

making your gambling policies as you go along, and there's 

very little that the public can do to scrutinize them. 

 

Mr. Minister, the director for the study of gambling in Nevada 

recently reported that government-run gambling here has a 

number of very real dangers.  One is and I quote: 

 

 A potential for scandal because of the absence of checks and 

balances. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister: what checks and balances are in 

place for you and your government on gambling?  Your empire 

is impervious to the scrutiny of this legislature as we all know.  

What checks on your activities exist, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, what he might want to do is spend a little 

time talking with the executive of the Saskatchewan Hotels 

Association who have been hosts and housing the video lottery 

terminal program since its inception some eight months ago.  

And he may want to talk to any one of the those hoteliers.  Just 

pick one, any one, sir, and ask them over a period of time how 

the system functions, because I don't think you understand or 

maybe you don't want to understand. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite that there has been a 

great deal of monitoring.  We have one of 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

the most sophisticated computer systems in place in this 

province to ensure the integrity of the system. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Rosthern 

is concerned about the lack of access to the program or to 

information, I find it strange, the fact that of any members in 

this legislature I have answered perhaps questions in question 

period more time that any other member.  But what I want to 

say to the member opposite, if you don't believe me, what you 

might want to do is check with the hospitality industry in this 

province and ask them if they're satisfied with the integrity of 

the program because it's their reputation that hinges on how 

they function as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Infrastructure Works Program 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

today are for the Minister of Municipal Government.  An 

infrastructure works program for rural roads was recently 

announced that would supposedly see benefits all across 

Saskatchewan.  However the funding formula used by your 

government has a number of rural municipalities concerned. 

 

Madam Minister, the federal portion of the infrastructure 

program pays for 15 per cent of the cost of primary grid 

reconstruction.  The province contributes approximately 77 per 

cent in revenue sharing for these types of projects.  A quick 

calculation shows that if this is the case the two upper levels of 

government should pay about 92 per cent of the total cost with 

the RMs paying the remaining 8 per cent.  Yet RMs we have 

spoken to tell us that the benefits are far less than what they 

expected.  Madam Minister, why is that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, when we announced 

the program back in January, we said that through the 

infrastructure program the rural municipal portion would be 

$10 million. 

 

We also said when the program was announced that provincial 

government did not have the capacity to cost share that as a 

one-third, one-third, one-third.  But what we would do is allow 

them more access to the futures program.  And we have done 

that.  We put $4.6 million back into the futures program to 

allocate towards the grid road system in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the formula that is being used is a formula that has been in 

place for many years, used on the conditional grant program.  

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) is 

the one that requested it to be done that way.  We worked very 

closely with the administrators and with the SARM board, and 

they're comfortable with the way it is being delivered.  And I 

have not heard any of them criticize the program to this date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll tell you why 

these RMs are having to pay more, is because you're not 

funding 77 per cent of the total cost of each project.  You're 

funding 77 per cent of the cost that remains after the 15 per 

cent federal funding has been accounted for.  Your 77 per cent 

is out of 85 per cent, not of 100 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, in effect your government has found a way to 

keep almost all of the federal infrastructure money.  You're 

clearly not passing all of this on to rural municipalities.  So tell 

me, Madam Minister, where is the money going? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, when the infrastructure 

program was announced, we sat down with the president and 

executive of SARM and of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), and we talked about the cost share 

that would be allocated. 

 

The SARM asked for $10 million from the infrastructure 

program.  We gave consent to that $10 million.  And at this 

point in time, if you want to know where the rest of the money 

of the $57.7 million will be allocated, it will be divided 

between urban municipal government projects and other 

projects that will be delivered by the provincial government but 

for the benefit of many communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

The provincial government did not scoop that money, did not 

take it.  It's being used to benefit many communities in many 

different ways beyond the simple infrastructure program.  So 

most communities that I have talked to are very happy with the 

program as it is delivered and they do not feel cheated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, you know full well the 

monies I'm referring to are the monies that the province is 

holding back, your department is holding back. 

 

Madam Minister, the intent of the infrastructure program is to 

create jobs while undertaking road reconstruction that needs to 

be done.  By withholding some of this funding, you are limiting 

the amount of road construction work and employment 

opportunities that this program has to offer. 

 

It makes people wonder what schemes other departments in 

your government have found to withhold monies.  Madam 

Minister, why are you playing games with these numbers that 

are costing jobs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, the only one that's playing 

games is the member from Shaunavon opposite.  We are not 

playing games.  And SARM is very well aware of the $10 

million that has been delivered.  It is being delivered to the 

conditional grant program under a formula that has been in 

existence for many years.  They know exactly what they're 

getting.  We are not holding any money back.  And the 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

only one that does not have his facts straight is the member 

from Shaunavon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

and to enact a Consequential Amendment to The Forest 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 

moving second reading of The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, 1994. 

 

The amendments are housekeeping in nature but important 

none the less.  First is the repeal of the forest renewal and 

development fund which was set up to collect softwood lumber 

export taxes levied by the Canadian government on behalf of 

Saskatchewan during the softwood lumber dispute with the 

United States. 

 

The softwood export tax issue has been resolved.  The federal 

government no longer collects softwood export taxes.  In 

accordance with recommendations of the Gass Commission, 

the government has eliminated several special purpose funds to 

ensure proper accountability in the handling of public monies.  

Eliminating the forest renewal and development fund is 

consistent with this recommendation. 

 

Related to this is a consequential amendment to The Forest Act 

to allow management of forest renewal funds in instances 

where no forest management licence agreement exists. 

 

A second amendment to The Natural Resources Act expands 

the authority of the resource protection and development 

revolving fund to allow contractual services to be provided to 

other jurisdictions.  This change is one of many small but 

innovative initiatives across government that are directed at 

achieving financial stability. 

 

The current resource protection and development revolving 

fund legislation permits revenue-generating projects only 

within a very narrow range of services.  After extensive 

consultation, the opportunity to repair forest fire suppression 

aircraft for other western provinces has been identified.  Forest 

fire management branches, northern air operations unit, has the 

mechanical expertise and the facilities to do this work 

in-province. 

 

Revenues generated will help offset the high cost of protecting 

Saskatchewan's valuable forest resources.  In the past, 

Saskatchewan-repaired aircraft parts were purchased out of 

province, many as far away as Montreal and at costs as much as 

80 per cent higher than estimates under this initiative.  By 

repairing our own forest fire suppression aircraft and those 

from 

other western provinces, substantial financial benefits can be 

realized. 

 

Combined, these amendments to The Natural Resources Act, 

Mr. Speaker, will help ensure financial accountability and 

contribute to effective and efficient government operation.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of the 

amendment to The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments regarding the Bill before us, An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment to The Forest Act.  The minister has indicated that 

this is certainly a housekeeping Bill and that what the Bill is 

doing is basically just bringing the legislation up to date with 

current actions. 

 

I believe the minister talked about the forest renewal and 

division fund that was set up a number of years ago and the fact 

that the federal government used to collect an export tax on 

soft-core lumber.  And with the changes in the soft-core lumber 

industry and in the discussion that has taken place over the 

years between the federal government and our export partners, 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the province has come to an 

agreement and the federal government has come to an 

understanding of how to handle soft-core funds and the tax, and 

therefore it's no longer needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what we also note from this Bill even 

though it is . . . would seem to be a fairly insignificant Bill, the 

minister did indicate that there are some very important pieces 

of legislation to the Bill.  I've taken a quick review of the Bill 

and it would seem to me that certainly it isn't a long, withdrawn 

out Bill; it is a Bill that doesn't have a lot of amendments to it 

and subclauses, but was trying to bring up to date The Natural 

Resources Act and enacting the consequential amendments to 

The Forest Act. 

 

The minister talked about the province also entering into 

contractual services to repair forest-fighting equipment, namely 

aircraft.  And certainly I think we could take a moment to 

compliment forestry services for taking the initiative to look at 

and are looking at other ways of trying to recover some of the 

costs that are associated with their fire-fighting; looking at 

ways in which they could, rather than sending equipment 

outside of the province -- and most notably, it would seem to 

me that most of this equipment would probably head east for 

repairs, or we'd be bringing repairs in from eastern Canada -- 

that the province has decided and the forest industry has 

decided that we do have the expertise, we do have the abilities 

right within our own province not only to repair our own 

planes, but to even look at the other western provinces and to 

contract and to repair their forest fighting aircraft. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that's certainly something that's 

positive and it's beneficial, can certainly be a  



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

benefit to the province of Saskatchewan; and I'm sure to many 

people in Saskatchewan involved in forestry management, 

involved in the aircraft industry, and people who are working in 

the industry and looking at jobs and looking at some job 

security, to realize that some of the benefits and some of the 

expertise that they have developed over the years will be used 

at home versus sending equipment outside of the province or 

even buying parts from outside of the province. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it certainly is something good for us 

to note that we have the type of personnel that can look at ways 

of managing our resources -- not only managing our resources, 

but even managing the dollars that they have to work with. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, just what I've heard on the news 

lately about the problems northern Saskatchewan is already 

facing in relation to fires in the forest sector, I'm sure that the 

government and the minister will be looking at and be pleased 

to note that they've found some areas in which they can find 

some savings.  Because they're probably going to have to be 

asking Executive Council for additional funds to fight forest 

fires unless the good Lord gives us an abundance of rain in that 

forest fringe area to combat the dry conditions that are being 

faced up there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as we look at the forest industry, the 

forest industry in this province has been something that has 

been . . . had a major impact and has been . . . certainly played 

an important role in the economic activity and the economy of 

this province. 

 

And over the years, regardless of what government or which 

party is in power, Mr. Speaker, all governments have looked at 

ways in which they can work together to develop and continue 

to enhance our forestry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we're looking at and discussing with 

companies like Weyerhaeuser and Meadow Lake pulp, and 

talking about forestry renewal, and talking about being a little 

more restrictive in our cutting and a little more selective and 

taking the time to replant and re-establish forestry, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the essential services we need is a good 

forest-fighting equipment unit.  And the fact that we've got 

aircraft that have the ability and we can repair them here in this 

province and we can utilize them to protect our precious 

resource, and the fact that we can save some money by doing 

the repairs here, I think is certainly beneficial. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we have one of the . . . our forest fighting 

is second to none in the province of Saskatchewan or 

anywhere.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague, the 

member from Rosthern, can certainly verify the fact that we've 

got some excellent equipment, some good aviators.  When he 

had the misfortune of having a fire on his hog farm and was 

able to call in a water bomber out of North Battleford, or Prince 

Albert, I believe it was, and they came in and with precision, 

dropped a repellent, or not a repellent but a fire retardant on the 

fire, and certainly gave the 200-plus people the upper hand on a 

fire that was 

certainly ravaging his livelihood and his economy. 

 

And I think that just speaks very well, Mr. Speaker, of the 

industry and of the people in the forestry business and 

forest-fighting and the individuals who provide the services and 

provide the expertise to man these aircraft, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1415) 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what we saw displayed a week ago on the 

farm of the member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, is a sound 

indication of the type of personnel we have working for us.  I 

think that, as well, as I've indicated earlier, certainly goes a 

long ways to show what people in Saskatchewan can do for 

themselves if given the initiative, and if we would just take the 

time to acknowledge their expertise and their abilities and 

allow them to put those abilities to practice and put their 

expertise and put their experience and the technology that is 

available in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to hear the government 

talking about ways in which we can save money and looking at 

alternatives.  Because, Mr. Speaker, when we look at some of 

the alternatives that this government has . . . and some of the 

directions that this government has moved into, I think if other 

ministers followed the example of this minister and looked at 

savings they can find in the different sectors of their portfolios . 

. . 

 

And in regards to this minister, I want to thank the minister as 

well for his input and some of the discussions we've had 

regarding the whole environmental issue and underground 

tanks and the concerns that have been raised by people across 

the province, and the fact that the minister has indicated that 

he's asked his department and they're doing a review and will 

be taking the time to meet with people, and I think that's 

commendable. 

 

And I would just suggest that it would be . . . it's unfortunate 

that we do not have other ministers of the Crown taking the 

same initiative and doing some solid and serious review of 

some of the pieces of legislation.  While one minister is 

working to enhance business and business activity in this 

province, other ministers are looking at ways in which they 

seemingly are destroying that business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would like to again, Mr. Speaker, suggest that the Bill 

before this House, even though it isn't large, even though there 

isn't a lot of information . . . or major initiative changes via the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, it does have some important aspects to it, 

and I think there are a number of questions we would like to 

raise in committee. 

 

It's just unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that I don't have the time to 

expand all day on this Bill.  But I want to indicate to the 

minister that I appreciate his comments and I appreciate the 

work that he is doing, and the efforts that are being made by the 

people across the province of Saskatchewan.  Certainly people 

in the forestry commend them and wish them well in their 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

further endeavours. 

 

And certainly at a future date, Mr. Speaker, we'll have more 

that we would like to add to this Bill.  Therefore at this time, I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Churchill Downs, that with leave: 

 

 That notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly shall, following 

the adoption of this motion, meet Monday, Tuesday, 

Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, from 8 a.m. until 10:30 

p.m. with a recess of one and a half hours at 12 noon, and a 

recess of two hours at 5 p.m.; and that routine proceedings 

shall commence at 1:30 p.m. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, 

Thursday and at 10 a.m. on Friday. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to 

acknowledge a number of things before we begin.  I think that 

there are some things that need to be said regarding process and 

I think that I will say them here as we begin. 

 

One of the things that has concerned me as we've gone through 

this discussion, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman, is that we on 

this side of the House have given a considerable amount of 

latitude in determining how things are to be done, and the 

government has worked along with that.  And as we've 

approached the end of the session and there is basically three 

substantive Bills left on the order paper that the government 

wants to move through, we have come to the place where, as 

we just witnessed a little earlier, that the government is asking 

for leave to move to extended hours -- and extended hours from 

8 o'clock in the morning till a significant time in the evening. 

 

And I'd say to you, Mr. Chairman, that as we went through 

some of this discussion on last Thursday and last Friday, when 

we moved a considerable amount of business through this 

House in agreement with the members from the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) and the government, we did that with the 

knowledge and understanding that there was going to be a 

considerable reasonableness from the government side. 

And what we've witnessed today, Mr. Chairman, is that the 

government has just decided its heavy hand is going to ram this 

through the House, just like it did to the business community.  

The business community has asked for the minister's 

resignation.  The business community has asked the minister 

for time to come and visit with him.  The business community 

has asked -- from across Saskatchewan -- has asked for him to 

come and speak to them, to adjust his schedule.  They're 

prepared to meet any time with him.  And yet here we see that 

their heavy hand is just as dominant in this process as it is in 

the relationship that the minister has to the business community 

as regards these two Bills. 

 

And I say to this House that that is really a concern to the 

people.  And it concerns them in a number of areas, Mr. 

Chairman, and those areas are, number one, the volumes of 

businesses that are really seriously going to be negatively 

impacted.  Business communities from all over Saskatchewan, 

including the chamber of commerce, the various boards of 

trade, various individuals, who are independent businesses, 

have written us letter after letter after letter saying this is not 

good for Saskatchewan, it's not good for the economy in 

Saskatchewan, and it is seriously and negatively going to 

impact in the province. 

 

The minister has made a significant note of saying a couple of 

other things, Mr. Chairman, and that is the Workers' 

Compensation Board had nothing to do with the kind of 

conditions that exist today; the conditions that have the highest 

welfare volume in the history of Saskatchewan, the highest 

welfare volume people in the history of Saskatchewan -- 

40,900 cases which extends itself into over 82,000 people on 

welfare. 

 

Mr. Minister, that is deplorable.  That is nothing to go around 

bragging about.  And I say to you that that is a part of your 

labour program, your labour . . . your decision in the part of 

yourself and your executive branch and cabinet is to put labour 

at the leading edge in this country as to the rights and the things 

that they should get.  Not a balance like we've been talking 

about; not with a balance like the business community has been 

talking about.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where the problem is. 

 

You have decided that there is absolutely nothing going to 

stand in your way.  Nothing.  And whether people are going to 

be leaving this province as we saw in the ad on Saturday, a 

full-page ad in the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix saying, 

when you're finally done, you finish paying the taxes, because 

there's nobody else going to help you.  Nobody. 

 

And if we think about this a little further, Mr. Chairman, and 

Mr. Minister, those nine municipalities around the city of 

Prince Albert sent you a signal, Mr. Minister, that municipal 

governments aren't tuned in to new taxes and new pressures.  

They aren't tuned in to those kind of things at all.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is a part of the problem.  You're not listening.  

You're not listening. 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

You said you went around the country and travelled the 

province.  But, Mr. Minister, what have you really done?  What 

you've really done is decided that there is going to be an 

example made in Saskatchewan on how labour is going to get 

substantial benefits over everywhere else in Canada. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what does that do?  Mr. Chairman, that says to 

me and to people across Canada, when The Financial Post 

comes out and said this minister calls the businesses in 

Saskatchewan ruthless and greedy, those are the things that 

really, really make business flourish in this province, aren't 

they, Mr. Minister?  The boom in this province is just making . 

. . there's hardly anybody left to find that is going to work for 

you. 

 

Mr. Minister, in my community there is a little town called 

McMahon.  And in that town they have one business, it's a fuel 

business.  And they have a fuel business as a small co-op and 

they run that business six days of the week.  And that little 

co-op decided they wanted to get a new employee to run that 

co-op.  That little co-op is going to pay $1,300 a month, Mr. 

Minister, $1,300 a month. 

 

And do you know how many applications they had for that job? 

-- 19, 19 people were prepared to quit what they were doing 

and go and work for $1,300 a month.  That's hardly any more, 

Mr. Minister, than minimum wage.  That is the way things are 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you ever decided to go out into Saskatchewan, outside 

of the . . . past the Lewvan and past the Victoria Square Mall, 

you'd find out that there is significant hurt in this province, and 

this substantially increases that.  It substantially increases that. 

 

Eighty-two thousand and growing on welfare.  And I haven't 

even talked about those that are unemployed.  I think it's 

41,000 people unemployed in this province.  Those are 

significant numbers in relation to the volume of people that 

work in this province, and you want to establish these criteria 

in these two Bills that you've brought forward -- Labour 

Standards and The Trade Union Act -- you want to set down 

the criteria that will only make them suffer more. 

 

And that's the difficulty that all the people across this province 

have.  They've asked us to defend their position.  They've asked 

us over and over again -- they had a meeting in P.A. (Prince 

Albert); they had a meeting . . . two meetings already in 

Davidson, Mr. Minister -- and they have said over and over 

again, this is the kind of thing that has to stop.  We can't afford 

it.  We can't afford the kinds of things that happen. 

 

(1430) 

 

I'm going to make this observation about a gentleman who runs 

the McDonald's in Swift Current.  He told me a week ago 

Saturday, he said to me, he said, I'll tell you what you do when 

you get in there and talk about these two Bills.  He said, you 

tell the Minister of Labour and the minister responsible for CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) to come 

out to Swift Current and I'll give them a list of the names of my 

McDonald's employees.  And then I'll ask you which ones you 

want to fire.  That's what he said to me. 

 

Now these are high school kids who are working for the first 

time in their lives. They're earning that additional income in 

order to provide for themselves maybe a grad dress, maybe a 

chance to do things a little different on graduation, or maybe to 

buy themselves an old vehicle to drive around with -- to do 

those kinds of things that a teenager would normally want to 

do.  Those are the people that he said to me, you tell me -- 

meaning the minister -- you tell me which ones of those 50 

employees, the 25 that he has to get rid of.  Twenty-five he said 

he had to get rid of. 

 

And now, Mr. Minister, he's asking you to come out and lay 

them off -- lay them off.  And that, Mr. Minister, is how the 

people in this province feel about your kind of legislation.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is not helping the economy grow.  It's not 

helping it grow one little bit.  In fact it's going the other way. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said the other day when we were talking 

about this, your workmen's compensation hadn't impacted at 

all.  Well your job creation is down, your volume of people 

working is down, the people unemployed is up, and the people 

on welfare is up.  How much impact does that have on those 

numbers? I would say, Mr. Minister, a very significant impact 

on the kinds of economic conditions that exist in this province. 

 

The business community is saying to you, Mr. Minister, as we 

deliberate, they're saying to you, why don't you come out and 

visit, and postpone this legislation so that we can visit with you 

to put it together in a proper way. 

 

My question to you today is that.  Why don't you go out and 

visit with the business community so they can clearly 

understand, so that they can clearly understand what your goal 

is, and that you would be able to understand what their goal is.  

Because the two are not running parallel to each other at this 

point.  They are in alternate directions, heading for a severe 

accident and a wreck.  And these people are saying to you, Mr. 

Minister, why don't you come out and visit and talk about the 

things that can really, truly make this province grow. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the labour community and the community 

that generates wealth in this province has to be concerned as 

well, for the kinds of conditions that you lay down on them.  

And they want to know from you, why don't you go and see 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've answered this question 

extensively and I'll summarize my comments for the member. 

 

We had extensive consultations with business people in every 

community.  I think certainly on the part of the Department of 

Labour and myself there was a degree 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

of understanding as to the needs of the business community.  

There was also, I think, a degree of understanding of the needs 

of the workers who work for them.  We think those needs can 

be balanced.  We think at the end of the day that they have a 

common objective and that is to have the enterprise flourish.  

When it does they both succeed.  Our legislation is tailored to 

achieving that objective. 

 

I would add, before taking my chair, that I do not accept the 

proposition of the member opposite that we are acting contrary 

to the interest of part-time workers by providing them with 

benefits.  It may not be a major item to a high school student 

who wants to save up money to buy a grad dress, but for people 

who have to try to make a living off one or two part-time jobs, 

it does make a difference.  And I think almost universally they 

applaud this legislation, as do I think fair-minded people 

everywhere applaud the initiative which this government has 

taken to provide some measure of protection for part-time 

workers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On behalf of my 

seat mate, the member for Thunder Creek, who is at a funeral 

this afternoon, it's a pleasure for me to welcome the school 

students from Pense here today.  They are grade 8 students and 

they're here together with their teacher, Mr. Mathieson.  I'll be 

visiting with them later on this afternoon.  If the member from 

Thunder Creek comes here then we'll exchange places.  

However at this point he's still in Moose Jaw at a funeral.  So if 

you'll acknowledge that, I'd like to have this Assembly 

welcome these students to the Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

to the Assembly here today that there are a number of reasons 

why I believe that you should go and visit with the business 

community in this province.  The business community have 

asked you, the business community have said to you, it's time 

to adjust your schedule so that that can happen. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, in 1991 a decision was made by the 

government to hold meetings in conjunction with the changes 

to a farming program. And it became my responsibility at that 

time, Mr. Minister, to go around this province meeting the 

farming community; taking the time out of a hectic schedule 

that I know that ministers have; taking the time to go and visit 

with 

those people who are directly associated with the kinds of 

changes that will have a huge impact on them and their 

communities. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, we had upwards of over a hundred 

meetings.  And we averaged, Mr. Minister, we averaged 400 

people at every meeting.  I sat in those meetings for hours 

telling those people exactly what was involved in the new 

program that they were supposed to have.  And, Mr. Minister, 

as I went through those meetings I began to discover that the 

people were, number one, concerned. They had a certain degree 

of empathy for the responsibility. They had a lot of very 

important and positive suggestions to make. 

 

Mr. Minister, that's the kind of opportunity you should present 

yourself with as you go around now to say, I am going to go to 

that community and say to them, what do you really want to 

have; what we can all live with; what consensus can we build 

as we go through this process?  And, Mr. Minister, that is 

exactly what you're not doing. 

 

You said you've met with these people.  Well I have heard 

reports of how you've met with these people, and they are not 

glowing -- they are not.  And I know that I went to those 

meetings where I had over 800 people at them, and they said, 

this is a good meeting; you listened, and you not only listened, 

you responded in not an adversarial way but we built consensus 

about what those people wanted. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the business community is asking you, 

asking you to do the same thing.  They're serious about this 

because they're the ones that put the dollars out to build the 

economy.  You aren't.  You aren't. In fact you are curtailing the 

amount of opportunity that they can have; that's what you're 

doing. You're setting roadblocks in many different ways 

through policies that you have that seriously impede people in 

their opportunities for economic development in this province. 

 

These two Bills clearly point that out to us along with some of 

the other things that you have done.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

why the business community is asking you to go out to see 

them.  They're the mom and pop shops across this province 

who have had years and years of experience; years and years of 

investing their time and their money in this province, Mr. 

Minister, in putting a dollar out to get a dollar and a quarter 

return so that they pay the interest, they can pay their food, they 

can pay their labour, and do all of those kinds of things. 

 

That's what they've . . . they've done that for years, Mr. 

Minister, in this province, and you're going to say to them your 

opinion isn't worthy anything.  You're opinion has no value.  

You're opinion will be pushed to the side in lieu of a specific 

group of people getting a greater advantage. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, those people have said to us:  why doesn't 

the minister give us an opportunity 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

to speak to him?  Why doesn't the minister give us an 

opportunity so that he can understand what we really have as a 

problem?  And that, Mr. Minister, is what they're asking; 

they're asking us to ask you. 

 

If you think that I would prefer to be here rather than being on 

my ranch, you got that sadly mistaken.  But those people are 

going out of their way in a similar fashion.  They're going out 

of their way in a similar fashion to point out to you, sir, that 

they want to have a chance to make the economy of this 

province grow, and you're not letting them. 

 

Right now the people in this province have to go till just about 

the middle of July to pay all the government bills that they have 

to pay.  Other provinces end up somewhere in the first and 

second week in June, but this province goes right till the middle 

of July; and that, Mr. Minister, is why they're saying we can't 

afford to do this any more. 

 

When I went into my community, which is Swift Current, those 

people there said this is not the right thing to do.  They've said 

it in spades.  In fact they get so angry they can hardly talk about 

it.  That's the feeling, Mr. Minister. 

 

You think that there's consensus out there because nobody says 

anything.  Well you're sadly mistaken, Mr. Minister.  They 

know what they have to pay.  They know what they have to do 

to deal with the two Acts that you've brought forward and they 

are very, very concerned about it, very concerned about it. 

 

And those people say to you, why don't you come out and visit 

about it and let's talk about it and see whether we can't get 

some consensus on it?  And that, Mr. Minister, is again the 

question that keeps coming up.  Why don't you come and visit 

with us?  Why don't you do that?  Why don't you make an 

opportunity available so that you can come out and see us?  

Why don't you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In the year and a half that I have been 

Minister of Labour, I have met every single request for a 

speaking engagement made to me.  In the last six months that's 

been over 200 of them, and I have met almost every request for 

a private meeting in my office.  I have not refused any 

meetings. 

 

Whether or not those meetings allow us to reach a consensus is 

a different question of course, but I have met every single 

request made by any group to meet with them. 

 

The Chair: -- Before the members continue in the line of 

questioning and answering, can I establish that clearly we are 

on Bill 54, The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

we haven't had an opportunity to get into The Trade Union Act 

very far so far, because we've spent an awful lot of days on The 

Labour Standards Act.  But for the Chairman just to know, 

most of the general public feel that these two Bills are 

intertwined and are actually affecting the same people, and that 

the arguments used for one definitely apply to the 

other. 

 

So the general public will know that if we are speaking about 

one, we are generally speaking about the same affected groups 

in our society.  And they are overlapping in so many ways that 

occasionally we may stray from one to the other, but the 

meaning will be the same. 

 

So we just wanted to make that clear so that we have 

everybody aware of the fact that we know what Bill we are on, 

but the same people are being affected by these two labour 

Bills and we need to take that into consideration as a double 

whammy on society. 

 

We see in recent days, Minister -- and I guess we may as well 

deal with recent days as well as to go back into the Bill itself as 

we have to as time goes by, and to try to clarify some of this 

awful mess that we seem to have gotten ourselves into in this 

province -- but we now see, as you note in the Leader-Post and 

as we had a question related to in question period, we have the 

business community, a large segment of our business 

community, spending, I should imagine, a fair sizeable chunk 

of cash to buy a whole page news ad; I can't even unfold it all 

on my desk here.  But interestingly enough, the words are big 

so that there's not that many of them, and I think it is proper 

that we should run over what the business community has said 

on this page, so that you can respond to it.  And it said: 

 

 Would the last person to leave please pay their utilities and 

the remaining taxes. 

 

(1445) 

 

It then says: 

 

 Saskatchewan closed for business. 

 

 Saskatchewan has a shrinking population and a smaller tax 

base. 

 

 There are 12,000 less jobs in Saskatchewan than in 1991.  In 

the last three years a net total of 24,000 people have left the 

province. 

 

If there's anything wrong with those figures I'm sure that 

everyone in the general public would appreciate your 

correcting those numbers. 

 

And I notice that the member from Swift Current wants to get 

into this debate in the worst possible way, so perhaps he will 

lend some information to you about how these business people 

have erred in their one-page full ad that they took out in one of 

the biggest newspapers in this province.  And certainly they 

must have spent an awful lot of money to distribute this 

information.  So if there's something wrong with it, we'd 

appreciate hearing what it is that you think is wrong.  I'm sure 

the business community would appreciate hearing as well what 

you think is wrong with these figures and with this approach 

that they are taking. 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

Obviously we've struck a note of discontent in your 

government already today without hardly even getting started, 

with the member from Humboldt also is trying to let us know 

his displeasure.  Or was it the member from Rosemont?  I've 

confused your voices over there.  Well there's a lot of noise 

coming from over there; I knew it was one of you two.  

Anyway I'm sure you'll have your opportunity; so not to panic, 

fellows, you'll get your chance. 

 

I want to finish though, the ad for the general public, and to let 

the minister on the record here in this Assembly comment on 

what he thinks of the business community and the words that 

they've put on and into this advertisement. 

 

It goes on to say where I left off: 

 

 New labour laws are about to be passed by the Saskatchewan 

Government that will scare off investment and result in even 

fewer jobs. 

 

If there's something wrong with that, and if they're wrong, you 

say so when I get finished quoting it to you.  It's going to be 

your opportunity to tell the business people where they're 

wrong. 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will powerful labour unions be 

guaranteed freedom from future wage concessions or other 

necessary constraints -- i.e. existing, non-competitive union 

contracts will never expire and can never be terminated 

unless the union bosses say so. 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will there be new laws that will 

effectively prohibit crown corporations, provincial agencies, 

municipalities, hospitals, universities and school boards from 

ever lowering costs by contracting out many services to 

non-union local firms (look out for more taxes and higher 

utility rates!) 

 

It goes on: 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will new concepts of workers seniority 

rights be imposed on thousands of firms -- whether unionized 

or not, and despite current bargaining agreements. 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will employers be forced to pay costly 

and impractical new benefits to many student, casual and 

seasonal part-time workers who just want a job, and who 

would rather maximize take-home earnings. 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will there be new laws that give a 

politically appointed Labour Relations Board more powers 

than the Courts (with no right of appeal on matters of fact). 

 

Minister, this is a devastating attack on your administration.  

And it goes on to say, "You should be concerned!" in big, bold 

letters across the entire page. 

Is this any way to establish a positive climate for economic 

renewal??? Is this any way to encourage new business 

investment or create new jobs??? Is this any way to build 

partnerships??? 

 

Those are good questions, Minister.  I hope that you have some 

just as good answers. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 Ask your MLA, or the Premier at Room 226, Legislative 

Building  Fax (306) 787-0885 Regina, Saskatchewan  Phone: 

(306) 787-0958 

 

 Saskatchewan Business Coalition 

 

 Saskatchewan business working for job creation and 

economic renewal 

 

Minister, what do you say to that ad? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Many of the factual assertions in 

there are inaccurate.  I'm sure they were honestly intended.  

Many of the assertions though are simply inaccurate. 

 

With respect to the general tenor of the ad, let me say that the 

deep air of pessimism and gloom simply is not shared across 

this province.  It was apparent across this province during these 

labour tours that there was a mood of optimism.  The recession 

is receding; things are slowing but surely improving.  In some 

sectors the recession is receding at a very slow pace; in some 

cases it's receding very quickly.  But receding, the recession is. 

 

So the general tenor of the ad is simply out of sync with the 

Saskatchewan mood.  It's also out of . . . very little of this ad 

has to do with The Trade Union Act, I might add.  Most of it 

has to do with Labour Standards. 

 

We're not on that Bill, but let me very quickly say that the vast 

majority of people we met were fair-minded.  The vast majority 

of employers we met were fair-minded employers. They took a 

pride in their relationship with their employees, and were 

genuinely anxious to provide the best possible job and working 

conditions for their employees.  Those people I frankly don't 

think share some of the more . . . some of the gloomier 

statements in that ad.  I do not believe that ad reflects the 

current Saskatchewan mood in the business community or 

anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

you've posed an interesting question.  You say that parts of this 

ad are inaccurate.  I would like you to explain to us which parts 

you think are inaccurate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just finished.  The member might 

want to check Hansard tomorrow morning. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I never heard you point out one inaccuracy in 

this ad, not one.  You've made a vague generalization that 

applied to society as a whole but you never specifically said 

any one thing that is in this 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

ad that is wrong.  And I challenge you to say one thing that's 

wrong in here -- one thing that's not right.  Because these are 

accurate figures and accurate statements. 

 

For example, I'll show you how you're leading people down the 

garden path.  You said this doesn't relate to The Trade Union 

Act in the most part, okay. 

 

 Only in Saskatchewan will there be new laws that give a 

politically appointed Labour Relations Board more powers 

than the Courts . . . 

 

Is that The Trade Union Act or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- For the first time ever the members of 

the Labour Relations Board have a fixed term which should 

take the politics out of the Labour Relations Board, not put it 

in. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who appoints them? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But it is The Trade Union Act not The Labour 

Standards as you said. 

 

You claimed perhaps that some of the figures are wrong.  

Perhaps the 12,000 less jobs in Saskatchewan was inaccurate?  

Would you say that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The whole business of job figures is 

much manipulated by a wide variety of people.  The last set of 

job figures I had showed a marked reduction in the number of 

jobs on farms.  I talked to nobody who was able to explain that.  

That accounts for much of the loss of jobs, is the loss of jobs on 

farms.  That clearly is not an accurate fact.  Clearly the same 

number of hours is being put into farming as always was and it 

is somehow or other a statistical elaboration. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you saying, Minister, that jobs on farms 

don't count? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's what I heard you say.  You tried to 

justify the fact that there's 12,000 less jobs because you said 

there's some manipulation of the figures and that most of them 

were farm jobs and somehow they didn't seem to matter 

because . . .  I don't know what the heck you're trying to say; 

it's impossible to figure this one out. 

 

You say there's something wrong with this ad.  Perhaps it's the 

24,000 people that have left the province?  Do you find an error 

in that statement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The problem with the ad, I'll say 

again for the benefit of the member who may not have been 

listening when I said this earlier, the problem with the ad is the 

general tenor.  There is a mood of optimism which is beginning 

to pervade the business community, the recession is leaving us, 

and a recovery is underway.  The whole mood of the ad that 

this province is going to come to a dead halt if these 

Acts are passed, I think that sentiment is shared by very, very 

few people.  It's the mood of the ad that I object to most. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well at least that's better, Minister, because 

now you're saying that it's the mood of the ad that's wrong and 

not the actual facts of the ad, that in fact the information in the 

ad would be accurate if the mood were more positive.  That's 

what you're saying -- if they'd only say that the mood is more 

positive, then the facts would be right. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ask him if that's the way he would agree. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I suppose I'd better let you agree or disagree 

because everybody's pressuring me to do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the mood were accurate, the article 

would be a non sequitur -- it wouldn't make any sense. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- If the reality of life were that in fact the mood 

was optimistic in Saskatchewan, then you wouldn't have to 

bring in these kind of legislative moves, the general public 

wouldn't have to take out full-page ads, and we'd have enough 

jobs for our kids that are coming out of universities right now, 

instead of having 12,000 less jobs and 24,000 people having 

left and another whole line-up of young people waiting for an 

opportunity to finish their classes and to move on to other 

provinces and the rest of the world because there's nothing here 

for them. 

 

If you found any optimism in this province in business, I'd truly 

like to see you show it to us.  Because I haven't found it, with 

one exception -- there's a handful of canola growers that are 

smiling.  Other than that, there's nobody.  But you just said that 

farm workers don't count anyway, so I don't suppose that that 

matters what the canola price did. 

 

As for farm workers who are so much forgotten by you and 

your administration, which is an amazement to me -- but 

because we're passing through this area -- it is an amazement to 

me that your government who seems so bent on bringing 

justice to the labour movement and to labour issues, it is an 

absolute amazement to me that you've totally and absolutely 

ignored some of the basic, fundamental needs of farm workers; 

not one mention of them except to criticize them and claim that 

they don't in fact count or matter.  I'm quite sure that an awful 

lot of those folks are going to be amazed and bewildered to find 

out that they are seen as being so little thought of by your 

administration. 

 

So, Minister, I wonder why it is that suddenly you've taken 

such a dramatic stand for the trade union leaders, where you 

have taken the opportunity to jeopardize perhaps the entire 

province's well-being, and yet you leave out some of the basic, 

fundamental working-class people that actually could use and 

need some help in society, for as simple a thing as to have the 

right to collect their wages.  And yet you 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

ignore them and say they don't matter. 

 

Have you any place in this legislation that would alleviate the 

problems of the working people that I've just . . . along those 

lines that I've just mentioned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would be actually more than 

interested in entering into discussion of protection of farm 

workers under The Labour Standards Act.  This is The Trade 

Union Act; it has nothing to do with that issue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well of course, you wanted to give the trade 

union leaders the right to organize unions, and are you saying 

that farm workers aren't good enough to have a union leader or 

to have a union representative?  That they don't count under 

The Trade Union Act?  That they'd never be included there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I did not say farm workers didn't 

count nor will my words at all bear that interpretation.  You are 

simply wasting the time of the . . . I say to the member from 

Maple Creek, you're wasting the time of the Assembly putting 

such bizarre interpretations on my comments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, I can assure you, you haven't seen 

the start of bizarre yet.  Wait till next Tuesday.  That's when it's 

going to start to look really bizarre.  Because you and I are 

going to be here for a long time, not for a good time.  We've 

got all kinds of problems, minister, so we're going to take a 

long time to take care of it. 

 

I've just picked up an interesting article here this morning.  It 

says "When is law law?"  It actually pays some compliments to 

your government.  But I think it's got a message in it here that 

we should discuss to see if it has any merit or not.  I shall have 

to quote a little bit of it to you, so you'll know what it's about 

because you may not have read this.  It came out of the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix:  It says: 

 

 So Premier (and it uses the Premier's name there) . . . thinks 

politicians should substitute their decisions for a tribunal's 

even though they may disagree with the body's ruling.  The 

Premier was responding to a suggestion that his government 

could have pressured the Labour Relations Board to allow a 

decertification vote of 140 workers at the Woolco store in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

 The fact that the store was unionized was seen as the reason it 

was not included in the Wal-Mart's take-over of the Woolco 

chain.  Consequently the Moose Jaw workers will lose their 

jobs. 

 

And of course that's already a fact.  They've had their lay-off 

notices and they are already going to lose their jobs. 

 

It goes on, Minister, to say that: 

 

 The Premier's stand should be applauded. 

That's what most residents want to hear, a government which 

upholds its law. 

 

You have to listen to this, because it takes a different kind of a 

twist.  At first I wondered, where is this guy coming from, 

applauding somebody who just cost 140 folks their jobs?  But it 

does make sense when you get to the bottom of it, so just bear 

with us and listen. It's quite intelligently written. 

 

 However, what happened when another tribunal -- this one 

setting pay for Provincial Court judges -- made an equally 

unpopular ruling?  This government had no trouble 

abandoning the Premier's principle in favour of overruling the 

decision.  There are other examples of legal arrangements 

which this government found not to its liking and altered. 

 

 The dispute with the Federated Co-operative over the 

upgrader and the renegotiation of the Weyerhaeuser loan 

guarantee are two examples. 

 

(1500) 

 

And just in passing I think we could probably throw in the 

farmers' problem with crop insurance and their contracts with 

the Crop Insurance board and those kinds of things that went on 

even earlier, before this.  But those are examples that are used 

here, and it goes on to say that: 

 

 Although these actions make Romanow's words ring hollow, 

they were not the wrong moves.  Most Saskatchewan 

residents support the government's attempt to correct bad 

deals.  The problem is, the refusal of the Labour Relations 

Board to accept the reality of the Moose Jaw situation fits 

that description.  The government should treat it as it has the 

others.  If it fails to do this it appears to set a double standard, 

changing the law only when it suits it. 

 

In other words they're saying that the government here is 

flip-flopping.  They take one stand one day, they take another 

stand another day, and you've got the whole province in a very 

worried mood.  And that's the problem.  Nobody trusts what's 

going on here.  I guess reality is they don't trust the 

government. 

 

And when you bring forward laws like The Trade Union Act . . 

. And I know the member for Rosemont would like to get in 

here, and I quite invite him to come on over and join us later 

and we'll discuss this, and certainly he can have his say.  I'm 

sure that the chairman will allow him to do that as time goes 

by. 

 

Now what we need to do, Minister, is to go through this Trade 

Union Act and find out exactly how it's going to affect the 

people.  Now earlier today, you will recognize, sir, that we had 

a preliminary House agenda that had The Labour Standards Act 

on first, so naturally I had prepared my notes for that Act, and 

at the last minute someone in your organization, just for the 

record, decided to change horses in midstream  



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

and said we will talk about The Trade Union Act, and that was 

announced to us after we got into the House.  So I don't exactly 

have all my notes in perfect order so we may have to go 

helter-skelter through this thing back and forth, but you can 

blame those people that decided to change things at the last 

minute. 

 

But I do have here the summary of the proposed amendments, 

and I think we better go into that so that we get a bit of a basis 

and a groundwork of what the Act is all about and what we 

want to discuss with you. 

 

Now The Trade Union Act . . . amendments Act rather, and this 

is a summary of the proposed amendments.  And what I want to 

do is go into the summary, part by part, and have you explain to 

us and the general public how this is going to apply.  And I 

suspect that I'll have to quote a little bit of this in order to get us 

off the ground with it: 

 

 The Trade Union Act sets the ground rules for 

union-management relations.  The Act deals with the 

collective bargaining, organizing, and disputes, and 

contributes to stability in labour relations.  The current Trade 

Union Act was introduced in 1972 and last amended in 1983.  

The proposed amendments bring the Act up to date, taking 

into account the many changes in the workplace and the 

economy over the last decade. 

 

 The amendments are intended to promote collective labour 

relations and reduce points of conflicts between employers 

and unions. 

 

 Now these proposed amendments are the final step in a 

comprehensive overhaul of the province's labour legislation 

to ensure that it is fair, balanced, up to date, and in line with 

our Partnership for Renewal . . . (yes) economic 

development plan.  Amendments would promote productive 

collective bargaining and cooperative dispute resolutions by, 

first of all, requiring parties to bargain collectively and apply 

agreements in good faith. 

 

Now what part of that is being changed that that particular 

statement, Minister, would fall under the summary of proposed 

amendments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There was a requirement in the 

original amendments which would have required the parties to 

bargain collectively and apply agreements in good faith.  In fact 

we received representations from both sides to the effect that 

actually, while that is obviously a desirable goal, actually 

writing it into the Act can do more good than harm.  So we are 

removing that section. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think I'm going to have to get you to explain 

that a little further.  You say that now we're going to remove 

this part about bargaining in good faith and you say that is good 

to have that out of there? 

 

You'll have to educate me a bit more on why that would be 

good.  I would have thought that the union 

people would want that in there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think the . . . what the parties would 

have told you, what I tell you, is that there is already that 

requirement in common law -- parties prefer to rely on the 

common law rather than any statutory statement of that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Ah, so now common law is not a part of this 

Trade Union Act.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, of course it is. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would you care to explain that for myself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I'm not sure this is the place for 

jurisprudence 101, but let me try it.  Common law refers to the 

system which exists in England, in Great Britain, the 

Commonwealth, and the United States, whereby the decisions 

of the judges in and by themselves form a body of law.  That's 

what common law is.  Common law is simply the decisions of 

the judges.  It is not a statute nor is it an obscure theory; it is a 

process.  The process is the judges' decisions themselves form 

part of the law.  And thus the judges' decisions on this Bill will 

form part of the law. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now, Minister, you say this common law that 

the judges come up with through their decisions, a minute ago 

you said that that constitutes a part of The Trade Union Act.  

Now if it's not a written law, how can it form a part of the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, now common law is a process by 

which the judges' decisions become part of the law and they are 

binding on other judges.  That is not the case in France or 

Germany or Spain or Mexico or South America, which don't 

have the common law.  Common law is a process and it is a 

complex . . . it is simple to describe but complex to understood. 

 

I am not sure the estimates on The Trade Union Act is an 

appropriate place to arrive at a thorough grounding in how the 

common law operates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, actually I'd beg to differ with that.  I 

think this is exactly the right place for us to find out how The 

Trade Union Act is going to be interpreted and how it's going 

to be ruled on and how it's going to affect people's lives. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw must certainly be concerned 

about the fact that he's got 140 workers in his city unemployed 

as a result of trade union problems.  Surely he would be in his 

place beside the Minister of Labour, trying to convince him that 

something should be done to get those folks back to their jobs, 

rather than to lend to the argument that we should cut this 

debate short and not have people understand how the law 

actually is going to work and how it will apply. 

 

You see that's the problem with our laws.  We've written such a 

complicated legal system in our society that nobody except 

foreigners who take law degrees 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

in other countries can figure out what they think we are trying 

to say in our legal system.  Instead of using the very simple 

language of the day that common folks use every day to day in 

their lives, they've got it complicated with all these whereas's 

and what for's, and nobody knows exactly where we're going to 

go or how when we're going to get there when we've got a law 

finished. 

 

Now I do understand though that in some of the Slavic 

countries they have a book of law that is so simple that 

everything is written down specifically.  And maybe you 

should try this with The Trade Union Act. 

 

The member from Rosemont wouldn't like anything quite that 

simple because it would separate all of the debate for which he 

has gotten himself elected.  Because he's gotten elected on the 

basis of Trade Union Act interpretations and his support of 

those phoney boloney kind of debates that he says exist in our 

city between our rural people and our city folks.  Things that 

never, ever existed to begin with.  He's been getting elected for 

years on that phoney boloney stuff about how he's the only guy 

that can defend the rights of the workers because he's the only 

guy that understands what the law really means or how people 

are being misused or mistreated, when in fact they're not being 

misused or mistreated at all. 

 

And in fact if you wrote this law in simple English so that 

everybody could understand it, we'd most likely have most 

employers sitting down with the employees and solving their 

own problems.  You wouldn't need any unions.  Wouldn't have 

to have one at all.  They'd sit down and interpret the law. 

 

And as I was saying, in this book of simplicity that they have in 

one of the Slavic countries, they have all the laws of the 

country are written down in everyday language of the people 

that they use on a day-to-day basis and it's simple and 

straightforward.  Even the penalties if you break the law are 

written right down there.  You hardly even need to have a judge 

except to say guilty or not guilty.  That's all you need because 

everybody knows and understands exactly what's right and 

what's wrong. 

 

The lowest crime rates of the world exist in those countries 

where they have the simplest laws.  Because people know 

what's expected of them.  Most of society wants to live by the 

rules, just given an opportunity to know what the dickens the 

rules are.  And half the time we don't. 

 

Especially in a Trade Union Act that is this thick.  And I tell 

you, now this is just amazing.  Now this year is The Trade 

Union Act amendment.  I don't think . . . oh, it's got pages and 

pages.  There must be 50 pages of this thing.  Absolutely 

ridiculous to think that you need 50 pages of complicated 

jibberish out of a legal text to tell people how to get along in 

good faith on the job site.  That's absolutely silly. 

 

But anyway this is your silliness and we have to go through it 

and suffer through the pain of it.  And you try to tell me now 

that common law is going to be the 

basis of which we're going to do a lot of this stuff but it doesn't 

matter because, for some reason, we wouldn't understand it and 

it's better for us if we don't question what we don't understand.  

But we're going to do that anyway. 

 

The second thing it says here is providing assistance in 

reaching first agreements.  Now I have a fair understanding of 

first agreements because that was the problem down at Woolco, 

I understand, or one of the big problems.  But I think you need 

to put on the record what you're changing in the Act and how 

this applies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the latter is a fair question.  It 

comes at the tail-end of, let me just say, one of the more 

unusual commentaries that I've heard made in estimates.  There 

has got to be some relationship between the language used by 

lawyers in The Trade Union Act but it's pretty distant. 

 

With respect to the first contract legislation, I've answered this 

before but I will do so briefly again.  The Act initially stated 

that if the parties could not reach a first contract, the Labour 

Relations Board was empowered to, on the application of either 

party, to set in motion a process which would arrive at the first 

contract, the process being pretty much in the discretion of the 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

This changes that, spells out some of the details, provides that 

the contract shall . . . the first contract shall have a two-year 

term; further provides that either party may give notice to 

terminate the contract on establishing to the satisfaction of the 

Labour Relations Board, either party may terminate the 

contract after the expiration of the two years on establishing to 

the satisfaction of the Labour Relations Board that the parties 

bargained in good faith and that an impasse has been reached in 

the bargaining.  On establishing that, they may unilaterally 

change the terms of the contract.  Those are the changes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you give us an example, Minister, of 

the kind of things that would be in this first contract, other than 

the limit of two years.  What would this two-year contract be 

covering?  Who would be compelled to do what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It will cover everything a collective 

agreement normally covers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you must understand that 80 

per cent of the people in this province don't belong to unions 

and might not particularly understand what a first contract is, or 

what it might have in it.  So even though you would imply by 

the tone of your voice that everybody must know and 

understand what these legal documents have in them, the 

reality is that 90 per cent of the folks, I think, would be right 

along with me in admitting that we don't know what the 

dickens is in here and what's involved.  So I think you should 

indulge us and tell us what kind of things are in these 

agreements. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Very little that is in The Trade 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

Union Act is unique to Saskatchewan.  That's not true of The 

Labour Standards Act, but it is true of The Trade Union Act.  

There's very little in this Act that doesn't exist in other 

Canadian provinces. 

 

This provision exists in other Canadian provinces.  The 

jurisprudence which has grown up around it is that the Labour 

Relations Board arranges for kind of a minimal contract.  And 

thus they cover wages, working conditions, and not an 

enormous amount more.  So reduced to its simplest, one might 

say that the first contract will cover wages and working 

conditions and probably not a lot more. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well now, Minister, I always thought that The 

Labour Standards Act was supposed to cover working 

conditions.  Now you're saying that the collective bargaining 

agreement in the first contract would also have the working 

conditions.  Aren't we duplicating to some extent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, of course not.  A collective 

agreement may provide for other and better working conditions 

than are stipulated as the minimum in labour standards. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- In other words you're saying that The Labour 

Standards Act do not give the people the same protections that 

you can get from a contract. 

 

So you're saying that, even at this point then, what you're in 

essence saying is that The Labour Standards Act is not doing 

enough so The Trade Union Act has to be made more powerful.  

Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The Trade Union Act provides the 

parties with the opportunity to bargain collectively. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, but for more than what The Labour 

Standards Act already has in it.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That opportunity exists, yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well it seems to me that you have a 

duplication of the two Bills doing the same thing, and you 

know I seriously wonder why these contracts should have been 

held in such high regard in the situation like the Woolco in 

Moose Jaw.  You already had The Labour Standards Act that 

covered people and yet you said that these people could not go 

on and continue to work unless they had a unionized shop, and 

as a result, they've all lost their jobs. 

 

You know, I think this was pretty thin stuff here in what I see 

as nothing but a power grab by a few union leaders.  I think 

that's really what it's all about, isn't it?  It's political power that 

the unions are after here.  They're not really after anything that 

the workers need or want. 

 

You've only got what?  About 20 per cent of the people that are 

getting these super-contracts or the 

super-benefits that The Trade Union Act would afford to 

people under this collective bargaining process.  In these first 

contracts less than 20 per cent of the people would get that 

super-advantage and yet you're saying that The Labour 

Standards Act, which protects the other 80 per cent, should be 

allowed to have a lot less conditions in it.  And that's good 

enough for 80 per cent of the people, but the 20 per cent that 

the union bosses are controlling and the 20 per cent that the 

union bosses get paid from, they should have some kind of 

super-control, super-power, and super-benefits.  Is that a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This conversation is completely 

unrelated to The Trade Union Act.  A moment ago the member 

was putting in time by reading my second reading speech.  I 

think that's as good a use of the time as these questions.  So 

why doesn't the member go back to rereading my second 

reading speech? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, this might be a joke to you, 

but the fact of the matter is, it's no joke out in the countryside 

and no joke in the city any more either.  Because there's a lot of 

people want to know why you're giving these super-powers to 

the trade union people through The Trade Union Act when in 

fact you're not giving the same benefits to 80 per cent of the 

people in the province through The Labour Standards Act who 

are not protected by The Trade Union Act. 

 

And this is a valid question, and 80 per cent of the people of 

this province want to know the answer.  But if you'd rather that 

I spend my time reading your speeches, I'll be quite happy to 

do that.  I don't think I'll have enough time today, but I'll get 

through most of it. 

 

Under request, Mr. Chairman, of the Minister of Labour, I 

would like to now take the time to read his last numerous 

speeches and put them on the record.  And I just don't know 

which one he wants me to start with, but I'll just get right at it 

here, and we'll start. 

 

But in the meantime we should consider, Minister, that you've 

got an awful lot of the people in this province upset with you.  

The people from the business community have stated quite 

emphatically that they don't agree with your position; they've 

stated quite emphatically that they see you for what you are, a 

man who is trying to provide political power to the trade union 

movement for the purposes of gaining political favours, which 

means support in the next election.  It has nothing to do with 

fairness; it has nothing to do with helping workers. 

 

Even if The Trade Union Act were to help workers, it could 

only in effect help about 10 per cent of the population, less than 

that perhaps, so that 80 or 90 per cent of the population is 

actually not getting any benefit at all from this great power 

grab.  You yourself have just admitted that this is a fact, 

because you're unwilling to answer the questions.  You say 

they're frivolous or nonsensical because you don't really want 

to give the answers, because the answers are too 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

embarrassing for you, because in fact what you're doing is 

destroying this province and the people in it. 

 

And the workers themselves that need the most help, the very 

lowest on the scale, which you say don't matter, those folks are 

getting nothing out of this legislation, absolutely no protection 

whatsoever at all. 

 

So in fact you're not only hurting the business community here, 

you're actually hurting most of the workers in this province.  

But we've got to go through these amendments that you've put 

up; and it's my job to do it, and I'm going to do it, no matter 

how tough it gets for you. 

 

And the third thing you've got listed here is providing more 

labour relations services, including the appointment of special 

mediators to assist in resolving disputes.  Now, Minister, 

people want us to have further explanation of what you mean in 

this area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, I've answered these questions 

before.  I will briefly do so again. 

 

We are doing three things in this area.  We are providing 

expedited arbitration, which is a quicker and hopefully a 

cheaper form of arbitration.  There are strict time limits within 

which it must begin and strict time limits within which the 

arbitration must end. 

 

We are recognizing something that has been done to date; that 

is, the use of special mediators, and we will be encouraging 

additional special mediators, with the additional use of that. 

 

We're also providing for grievance mediation, voluntary 

grievance mediation, through the Department of Labour.  It will 

allow mediated settlement of grievances without having to 

proceed to costly and time-consuming arbitration. That's what's 

in there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, I guess we've got down to the short strokes here on 

this piece of legislation, as we see it.  We're into the period of 

time now where the government sees it necessary to impose 

extra hours on the legislature to try and wear the opposition 

down so that you can hopefully get this piece of legislation 

through prior to a business rally that's going to be held next 

week in Saskatoon.  And I think the people of Saskatchewan 

will be aware of that soon; the news media have picked up on 

it. And your motives are becoming increasingly clear to the 

people of Saskatchewan with respect to that goal, Mr. Minister. 

 

Fortunately it doesn't appear that by the workings of this 

legislature that you'll be able to meet that goal.  The extended 

hours and all of those kinds of things won't preserve the time 

that you need to deal with that problem that you have.  I think 

we're into a period of time where the minister is under a great 

deal of pressure to make changes.  The minister and his 

government are under a great deal of pressure.  I think the 

minister's under a great deal of personal pressure as well. 

And I guess when you brought this kind of legislation in you 

should have expected it, and probably did. And I guess that's 

why when we see the minister making flippant comments about 

his honour being preserved and those kinds of things, with the 

trade union people, that it might be great talk, it might be great 

talk for slapping back a few beers in union halls, Mr. Minister, 

but I can assure you that the business community isn't amused 

with your attitude or your flippant way of dealing with them 

and their concerns, Mr. Minister. 

 

I spoke to a number of business people in my constituency over 

the weekend and I think they echoed the same kinds of 

concerns that the editorials all over this province have been 

coming out against you, sir -- business reporters, business 

editorialists all over this province saying things like, this is the 

wrong kind of message for the people of Saskatchewan, the 

business community within Saskatchewan; that you're a misfit 

minister as far as labour legislation is concerned and should be 

stepping down, and the Premier should be asking for your 

resignation. 

 

That must be a great deal of concern to you and your 

government, I'm sure, Mr. Minister.  While you make light of it 

in the media, I suspect on reflection, sitting back in an easy 

chair at 1 o'clock in the morning in the dark by yourself, it 

probably causes great concern to yourself personally.  And I 

guess I can appreciate that kind of a problem that you're faced 

with. 

 

Unfortunately I don't really sympathize with you, sir, because I 

think you've brought it all on yourself by those kinds of 

remarks that you make.  And we've seen that kind of stuff 

coming from you and your government before.  And 

unfortunately, a lot of your problems are your own doing, sir. 

 

Business leaders all over this province are angry with you.  

They're very upset with you.  They cannot hardly believe that a 

Minister of Labour would be making some of the comments 

that you make against them and accusations you make against 

them, sir, that they are ruthless.  And it goes back to that the 

labour relations in the '70s were better and there was a more 

paternalistic, I think it was, was the word you used, view of 

management-labour relations back then, compared to now. 

 

And I'll have you know, sir, that the business community takes 

a great deal of pride and concern with the welfare of the 

employees that work for them, sir.  I know in the businesses 

that I'm involved in, we've never had any labour problems.  

We've taken great pride in being able to overcome those kinds 

of concerns and sit down with the people who have worked 

with me and worked for the companies that I'm involved in and 

my family's involved in.  And there's never been any big 

concern. 

 

And I think that's exactly what the problem is here, sir.  We've 

been able to sit down, and I think business has in general been 

able to sit down with their employees and work out their 

differences.  And now what happens is, is you no longer want 

to embark upon that 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

type of labour-management relations. You want to bring in 

legislation that swings the pendulum, as you call, back to the 

centre, when you know very well, sir, that the pendulum has 

not swung to the centre, but it has swung dramatically, 

dramatically towards the labour union side of the pendulum. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think it's unfortunately that you would do 

that.  It's too bad that you would do that.  I think it puts the 

wrong message out to the business community in this province.  

And I think it highlights the concern that business leaders have 

in this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

It's no wonder that we see full-page ads being taken out in the 

daily newspapers over the past weekend, essentially saying that 

Saskatchewan is closed for business.  And I don't know 

whether that's of any concern to you and your government, sir, 

but I believe that it should be of great concern to you and your 

folks. 

 

One only has to wonder about what kind of thoughts would be 

going through someone in we'll say Ontario or United States, 

that might be considering moving to Saskatchewan and setting 

up shop here, when they see that kind of full-page ads taken out 

by the business community, the ones that are most familiar with 

you and your government's policies. 

 

You would think, you would think that would give you pause 

for reflection for a moment; that maybe you've just gone and 

swung the pendulum a little too far.  You'd think that that 

would be what would come out of those kinds of discussions 

and that kind of thought process, where you'd look at it and say 

to yourselves, maybe, just maybe we went a little bit too far 

with this and we should back off a little bit, get business on our 

side, get some economic development going on in this 

province, get some people to work in this province, get the 

people off welfare in this province, deal with the problems that 

we have in this province, rather than creating more. 

 

But oh no, that isn't what's going to happen, is it, sir?  We're 

going to go to extended hours; we're going to go into long, 

protracted debate about this piece of legislation; you're going to 

ram it through, no matter what it takes.  Because I think you've 

made some commitments to labour that you don't think you can 

back off on.  And unfortunately, I think we find ourselves in 

exactly that situation -- you've forced our hand, we force your 

hand; business forces your hand, and now you're going to force 

business. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, at the end of the day it's the general 

public that loses in this debate; and at the end of the day it's the 

general public and the business community and the employees 

that you claim to be representing that are going to lose at the 

end of the day.  Because we see people all over this province 

saying, and full-page ads being taken out, saying that business 

is going to back off in this province; business is not going to 

expand in this province; business doesn't want anything to do 

with you and your government, sir, any longer. 

You had a pretty nice relationship going for a little while, not 

that bad.  And I have to give you credit. The Premier was able 

to keep them on side for quite some time, a couple of years. It's 

been pretty good, pretty good relations between the government 

and business in this province.  The chamber of commerce and 

other groups like that were relatively supportive of your 

government and the direction that it was taking, particularly 

with deficit reduction and a few things like that.  They were 

relatively supportive of it. 

 

But unfortunately it looks like, sir, you've brought that to a 

screeching halt, that kind of good relationship that existed for a 

period of a couple of years.  And I don't think any amount of 

side deal cutting with the Premier running around this province 

trying to cut some deals with major business leaders in this 

province for their specific industries -- and you know very well 

what I talk of when I say that -- is going to make a difference 

on this one, sir.  Because I think the small-business person out 

there, the little guy out there with three or four employees, or 

ten or twenty, or whatever, they're not buying into that. 

 

(1530) 

 

You can buy off, you may be able to buy off a few big business 

leaders in this province by giving them exemptions and a few 

things like that, but you cannot buy off the employer in 

Kindersley with two or three employees, or half a dozen, or ten 

or twenty, or that sort of thing, because this has major impact 

on them, sir. 

 

This legislation is dreadful as far as they're concerned.  They 

see it as nothing but as affront to them; they see it as nothing 

but an intrusion by a government that doesn't seem to care 

about the interests of their small business in Saskatchewan; and 

they see it as something that is totally unnecessary and a 

government that's simply bent on pushing forward labour 

agenda type legislation because their piper has been called. 

 

The labour unions in this province have called you up on the 

carpet I believe, sir, and said we need something now for our 

support.  It would be an interesting time I suspect to be in your 

office with a few of the labour leaders in this province and hear 

exactly what goes on.  I'll bet it's earth-shattering, the kinds of 

stuff that would come out of a meeting like that between you 

and a few like Barb Byers, George Rosenau and folks like that, 

the kinds of demands that they make of you and how you try 

and finesse your way and stick handle your way through all of 

that sort of stuff, Mr. Minister. 

 

It would be an interesting time I bet, eh, to be a fly on the wall 

and listen to those kinds of comments and how you're going to 

stick handle your way through this. 

 

But at the end of the day, at the end of the day it's always the 

people of Saskatchewan, isn't it, Mr. Minister, that seem to lose 

in these things, the people 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

that you claim to protect -- the home-maker out in 

Saskatchewan, anywhere in Saskatchewan, that wants a 

part-time job to provide a little bit more, a little bit more for 

their family.  Always seems to be them kind of people that lose 

in the deal, isn't it.  Because you know what happens, sir?  You 

think that this is going to be helpful, you think that this is going 

to protect the opportunities for those part-time workers, but I 

assure you, sir, it isn't. 

 

We've had representations and we've had letters and telephone 

calls and faxes from all over the province where employers are 

saying to me and you . . . and you've got them all too, you must 

have hundreds by now.  You must have literally hundreds by 

now I would think -- of business owners that are saying, we're 

not going to hire; we're not going to hire that part-time 

employee because it isn't worth the hassle any longer. 

 

And I know that's exactly the way my partner looked at it as far 

as his business was concerned.  He said, no darn way; its not 

worth the hassle any longer.  It's not worth the problems 

associated with going through all of this.  We'll just go out and 

we'll just have to work a little bit harder ourselves in our 

business, and have to deal with the problems associated with 

the peak labour times in the summer period of Saskatchewan, 

when of course that is the maximum . . . or the period of when 

you most likely will need short-term help. 

 

We're moving into that period; farming operations have moved 

into high gear over the past couple of weeks in this province, 

Mr. Minister, and I know exactly that's what happened.  

Business owners and farmers all over the province are telling 

us they're going to get by; they're going to run that tractor 

themselves an extra hour or two a day, or whatever it takes to 

get their seeding operation in. Or they're going to work that 

extra hour or two at night in their fast food establishment or 

their restaurant or their small business or their welding shop or 

their print shop, or whatever it is. They're going to do a little bit 

more themselves so they don't have to go through all of the 

hassle of putting up with you and your labour agenda 

legislation.  That's what they're going to do, Mr. Minister. 

 

You may think that that's all hogwash and is all out to lunch 

and all of that kind of stuff, but I know that that's what they're 

telling me that they're going to do, and I have no reason to 

doubt them.  And I don't think you should either, sir.  And I 

don't think you should be going around this province calling 

people, particularly as the Minister of Labour, going around 

this province calling people ruthless or greedy.  Because I don't 

think that that sends the right the message to anybody in the 

business community either.  No one likes to be called ruthless 

or greedy, and you know that, sir. 

 

Again I say to you, that may make great talk when you're 

standing in the union halls and having a few beers with your 

friends there.  That may make great rhetoric and it might be 

that kind of stuff that makes you a pretty popular guy hanging 

around those places. 

But I'll tell you, the interests of business do not think it's all that 

great of you to say those kinds of things about them, sir.  They 

don't believe we're into a ruthless era of greed where the 

business community takes no prisoners, type of attitude.  

Because I don't think they do. 

 

I think everybody in this province has long got over that kind 

of thing, Mr. Minister.  I think they believe now that the only 

way that you're going to be able to put up with this 

government, the only way you're going to be able to deal with 

the high cost of doing business in this province with respect to 

things like taxes and utilities and all of the things that you 

people have jacked up on them in the last couple of years, I 

think they realize that the only way that they're going to be able 

to survive in this province is to just hunker down and do the 

absolute best job they can with the employees that they've got 

and have very harmonious relationships with those employees. 

 

Because I think they see at the end of the day that there's no 

other way to stay in business in this province because of the 

high cost of doing business in this province relative to other 

places. 

 

And even with that attitude, Mr. Minister, we still see an 

exodus of business into places like Medicine Hat.  Some time 

you ought to get the member from Swift Current, the economic 

development minister for the city of Medicine Hat, to take you 

down there and show you around.  He knows darn well what's 

going on there.  His city's draining out slowly but surely, and so 

is the whole south-west corner of Saskatchewan, is draining out 

slowly but surely into Alberta, Mr. Minister. 

 

You ought to take the time to go down there sometime and see 

it for yourself.  Housing starts, incredible housing starts, 

incredible business start-ups in places like Medicine Hat.  And 

what advantage does Medicine Hat have over Swift Current, or 

any other place in Saskatchewan for that matter, Mr. Minister?  

None, except that they have a government regime, a 

government that seems to feel that business can work in 

Alberta.  And in Saskatchewan we have a minister that thinks 

they're ruthless and greedy. 

 

That's the difference, Mr. Minister.  A lot of times in business 

the difference between being successful and being a failure is 

that little bit of confidence in there -- that little bit of 

confidence.  And I think you know that, sir. 

 

From what I understand, you're involved in small business 

yourself.  And you know very well the difference between 

staying in business and going out of business and being there 

for the long haul and through the tough times is that little bit of 

difference called confidence, sometimes, and management skill 

and having a government that believes in business and having a 

government that works with them rather than against them.  

That's the difference, sir. 

 

And you know very well that that's the case.  You know very 

well that the government of other 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

provinces in this country and other states bordering 

Saskatchewan, of the United States, have a different 

relationship with business than you do and your government.  

You know very well that that's the case. 

 

Your government seems to have this labour agenda stuff on 

your mind and you just can't seem to get over it.  You seem to 

be back in that 1940s, '50s type of attitude that people . . . that 

anyone that has any capital invested, anyone that has any 

person working for them somehow or another is ruthless and 

greedy. 

 

And it kind of slipped out.  I suspect, Mr. Minister, you wished 

you'd never said that kind of thing.  It's kind of like one of 

those Freudian slips.  It kind of comes out and you wished you 

never done it. 

 

And I understand that.  From time to time we all get caught up 

in those kinds of things, Mr. Minister, but unfortunately you 

got caught up and some major newspapers and some . . . The 

Financial Post, I think it was, and the Leader-Post, and others 

like that picked you up on it, took you to task for it. 

 

And it's no wonder, Mr. Minister, that we see editorials all over 

this province starting to come out against you and your 

government and saying that you've got to step down, sir, or the 

Premier's got to relieve you of your responsibilities. 

 

And my guess is, is yes, we're going to see this stuff pass and, 

Mr. Chairman, you know very well that that's going to happen.  

At the end of the day, I suspect this government will press 

ahead and they'll pass this legislation. 

 

But I also expect come about August, when the people are 

away on holidays and hopefully nobody knows what's going on 

in the province of Saskatchewan, that that minister will be 

relieved of his responsibilities by the minister.  He'll be shifted 

aside, he'll be shuffled sideways, probably.  He'll still have his 

cabinet minister's salary maybe, and he'll still have his car and 

all those kinds of things that go along with it.  And he'll still 

have his pension at the end of the day, and he'll still have all of 

those kinds of things.  But he'll be shuffled aside, because this 

has been nothing but bad news for you and your government.  

It's been nothing but a tragedy right from start to where we're at 

today, Mr. Minister.  And I think you know that. 

 

Mr. Minister, we see editorials, the headlines saying things . . . 

Unions are the big winners this time.  And they are.  Is that 

good for the province of Saskatchewan?  I don't know.  

Business interests don't think it's good for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I guess that's why they're taking out full-page 

ads.  We're going to see this piece of legislation . . . Bruce 

Johnstone and others are predicting that it is not centring the 

pendulum . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member 

from Swift Current speaks up from his seat and says, it's called 

the experts. 

 

I guess . . . I don't know, if you can't . . . When you look at 

business, when you look at the chamber of commerce and the 

Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business and the north Saskatoon business 

institute or business group, I mean, and others like that.  Are 

those the experts, Mr. Member? 

 

The member from Swift Current, the one the bankrupted the 

credit union out there, are you the expert on labour relations in 

this province?  I guess you are.  I guess you are.  I guess you 

are the expert on all of that sort of stuff.  I guess you are the 

expert on that, aren't you, sir?  I guess you are.  Interesting . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . we'll maybe see about that some 

day, sir.  Yes, we'll see about that.  Yes.  He doesn't like it 

when he's exposed for what it is, Mr. Chairman. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . go outside and say that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes.  Well what would happen if I did?  You'd 

take me to court.  We'd have this little dust-up in court, and 

you'd say that you'd never bankrupted it, and I'd have to present 

some information showing that you did.  At the end of the day, 

what would happen?  At the end of the day, what would 

happen? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . not bankrupt, and that's the whole 

point. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The point is it's not bankrupt; they saved it before 

you could do it.  And you know very well that that's the case.  

I'm surprised at your . . . after the comments you made with 

respect to Medicine Hat, you'd be wanting to even talk about 

your relationship with the city of Swift Current. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Pretty good relationship. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, I'm sure it is pretty good.  Have you been 

home lately?  Have you been home lately?  Have you been out 

there in six months?  Have you been out there in six months to 

talk to the business people out there, the ones with the plywood 

on the door downtown Swift Current?  Been out there to talk to 

them lately?  I'll bet you have.  I'll bet you have.  I've been 

downtown Swift Current.  On my way home I go through Swift 

Current, and I talk to a few of the business people on a regular 

basis.  And they say, this is the kind of stuff that you and your 

government are bringing forward, this labour union stuff, and 

they don't like it, sir.  They don't like it, sir . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . We'll see.  Put my name on the ballot?  My 

name's already on a ballot.  I represent a constituency called 

Kindersley -- maybe you've heard of it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You won't make it there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well maybe I will, maybe I won't make it there.  

We'll see, I guess, come next election, won't we?  But I assure 

you that there will be lots of New Democrats go down when 

the people of Saskatchewan have to put up with any more of 

this kind of stuff -- this labour union crap that keeps coming 

forward more and more and more from this government, this 

kind of stuff . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

members that we're on clause 1, Bill 54.  And I would just like 

to caution the members who are getting involved in the debate 

from their seat to just wait till their turn comes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we just 

got some information here from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, one of those extremist groups that you 

speak of, one of those groups that are made up of nothing but 

ruthless and greedy folks.  And they have some specific 

concerns that I'd like to address with you this afternoon for a 

while. 

 

The employer's right to make unilateral change.  And they have 

some specific concerns and some information that they've sent 

us here recently, that I think is important that we deal with this 

afternoon. 

 

Employer's right to make unilateral change.  This is found in all 

jurisdictions in North America, including Ontario and British 

Columbia, which allows an employer to make unilateral 

changes to an expired union agreement.  Although there are 

hoops that an employer must go through, at some point after 

the contract expire, the rights exists. 

 

The concept has been discussed by labour writers in the 

Supreme Court of Canada.  In the Pacaar -- I think it's 

pronounced -- case, the Supreme Court of Canada accepts the 

model of unilateral change as reasonable. 

 

Paul Weiler, an accepted expert in labour relations policy, 

writes as follows, and I quote: 

 

 The basic assumption of our industrial relations system is the 

notion of freedom of contract between the union and the 

employer.  There are powerful arguments in favour of the 

policy of freedom of contract.  We are dealing with terms and 

conditions under which labour will be purchased by 

employers and will be provided by employees.  The 

immediate parties know best what are the economic 

circumstances of the relationship; what are their 

non-economic priorities and concerns; what trade-offs are 

likely to be most satisfying to their respective constituencies. 

 

(1545) 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 The freedom to agree logically entails the right to disagree, to 

fail to reach an acceptable compromise.  Most of the time 

good faith negotiations does not produce a settlement at the 

bargaining table often without a great deal of trouble. 

 

And I guess that's what we're dealing with now. 

 

 But often it does not, and at that point the collective 

bargaining system diverges sharply from other components in 

the market economy.  The tactical premiss underlying the 

 system is that both employment status and collective 

bargaining relationship will persist indefinitely through one 

series of negotiations after another.  And it is precisely for 

that reason that the means of resolving deadlock in 

negotiations between union and management becomes a 

serious social issue. 

 

 At the same time we must appreciate the very different 

perspectives of that employer and the union on that subject.  

The employer typically has no direct and immediate interest 

in successfully getting a new contract settlement.  That 

settlement almost invariably will provide for compensation 

increases, often in sizeable amounts.  All other things being 

equal, the employer would just as soon stick to the status quo. 

 

 It is the union which ordinarily must take an initiative to 

move negotiations off dead centre.  True, this is not always 

the case; sometimes the status quo may be distasteful to the 

employer.  Suppose the employer cannot get an agreement 

from the union to change these requirements in a new 

contract.  In that event, management is entitled to act 

unilaterally.  It can simply post an announcement to its 

employees that this is reducing the price they will pay for 

labour and the amount of labour that it is going to use. 

 

 That is what it means for management to exercise the rights 

of property and of capital -- to be able to propose the terms 

upon which it will purchase labour for its operations. 

 

 What rights and resources do the employees and their unions 

have in response?  In essence they only have the collective 

right to refuse to work on those terms; to withdraw their 

labour rather than to accept their employer's offer.  That is 

what a strike consists of. 

 

 The legal right to strike is not justified, not on account of 

intrinsic value, but simply by its instrumental role in our 

larger industrial relation systems. 

 

 A lockout is not the employer equivalent of a strike.  As I 

have shown, the reciprocal employer lever is really the 

management prerogative to maintain and change the terms 

and conditions which the employer will pay its employees 

who want to work in its operations.  A lockout is usually the 

instrument of an employer association, employer union which 

wants to defend itself against selective trade unions of its 

members.  The principles of our system are that the 

employers' equivalent of a strike is unilateral change.  By 

removing the employer's right to unilateral change, the two 

sides will no longer have equal rights. 

 

 Consider the problem of the employer who needs concessions 

in the contract.  Under the new system, the union never has to 

agree.  The 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

employer, no matter how unreasonable the union is, will 

never get the change. 

 

 What if they want to lock out?  This would stop production.  

The capital investment is at risk; the employer cannot stop 

production without losing all income, and therefore the 

ability to pay the bills.  The options are therefore to continue 

to pay higher amounts or take away the means of paying the 

costs of doing business.  It should be remembered, in 

Saskatchewan it appears that the employer cannot tell the 

union if it did not agree to the concession, the business will 

close -- section 11(1)(i) of The Trade Union Act. 

 

 The only option therefore is to make an irreversible decision 

to close.  In concession bargaining this is what the result 

would be. 

 

 Business concern therefore is that, with the legislation which 

is unprecedented in North America, who will lose existing 

businesses and fail to attract new business?  If you compare 

this legislation, which ties the employers' hands, with other 

provinces where there are some employer rights to change, 

who would not be on equal footing when we try to attract 

these businesses to Saskatchewan? 

 

 The legislation is unfair as it fails to recognize that an 

employer will not be able to deal with an unreasonable union 

with rights that are equivalent to the right of strike.  Just what 

is the employer's right? 

 

And I guess that's a rather lengthy look at the employer's right 

to make unilateral change.  But, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if 

you would care to comment on the employer's right to make 

unilateral changes and your feelings as to the need for it or its 

impact upon losing business or attracting new business into 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The provisions which will be in effect 

once this Bill passes which prohibits unilateral change were in 

effect in this province from 1972 to 1983, the period of the 

greatest prosperity in the province's history. 

 

So if you want to relate . . . if you want to use anecdotal 

evidence, I'd use that.  It was in effect and worked fine. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Labour Board 

appointment and the powers under section 4 and 5. 

 

 The proposed changes would add extensive powers to the 

Labour Relations Board with no right of appeal. They would 

in fact have more powers than a court without the rights of 

appeal that exist in the court. 

 

 There are two areas of concern.  The first concern, the limits 

and controls of the board's powers; the second, the matter of 

appointment of those who get those powers. 

And I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would care to comment on 

that, the rights of appeal as well as the powers, and who gets to 

appoint the board and the difficulties that business seems to 

feel is inherent in those two areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The right of appeal and who appoints 

them is standard throughout the civilized world. 

 

Governments in office appoint them.  I think that is the case 

from one end of the globe to the other. 

 

The appeal is standard in Canadian provinces.  It is the same 

right of appeal here as it is everywhere else.  The appeal is 

limited to questions of jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  The other area that you didn't touch 

on was the board and the appointees to the board and those who 

. . . and the concern with the power that the board has. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The civil courts, someone needs to 

interpret the contract and the rights arising out of the contract.  

All Canadian provinces and most U.S. (United States) 

jurisdictions leave that . . . but not all U.S. jurisdictions -- but 

all Canadian provinces have a labour relations board which 

interprets the rights arising out of the contract. 

 

The civil courts have proven themselves to be an awkward 

venue in which to interpret those rights.  It is slow and 

expensive.  This is an area in which you need a decision right 

away.  And so all Canadian provinces have set up the Labour 

Relations Board.  Ours is in the mainstream of Canadian . . . the 

powers given to our board is now in the mainstream among 

Canadian provinces. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- To understand the concerns, you have to 

understand that a labour relations board is supposed to be a 

board consisting of labour and management experts chaired by 

an impartial chairperson.  However, without changes, all 

appointments are made by the government without any criteria 

to determine the level of expertise necessary to get that 

appointment. 

 

And I think that's an area of concern, Mr. Minister -- that you 

don't have a situation where both groups are represented on this 

because they are appointed by government and there's no 

criteria.  I wonder if you would care to take the time to explain 

the criteria that you use for the appointments as well as why 

business isn't able to put forward their own folks onto that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In fact the precise opposite is true of 

what the member says. 

 

For a lengthy period of time, stretching back through several 

administrations, equal numbers of appointees are taken from 

management and from labour. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- With the government appointing them -- is that 

the case? 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And with the parties recommending 

them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- At least with the courts, sir, external bodies like 

the Canadian Bar Association that qualified people for the court 

. . . applications are made by people and a committee 

determines if they qualify. Even then, the decisions of the 

judges are subject to appeal. 

 

 With the new Trade Union Act there is no direction on what 

is required to become a representative of management or a 

chairman of the board.  Surely a way to set the appropriate 

board members should be a priority before powers are 

expanded.  Only after a method to determine the new labour 

board is set, should added powers be given. 

 

And I wondered what your comments are on that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The qualities needed by a good judge 

are not capable of precise decision, precise description.  This is 

a judicial role as surely as a Queen's Bench judge.  The 

qualities needed of a good judge are very difficult to define. 

 

I don't know anyone, anywhere, in any legal jurisdiction, who's 

ever tried to do that.  It is a certain quality of mind, a certain 

sense of fairness, a certain ability to understand, a certain 

dignity which you bring to office.  I don't know anyone, 

anywhere, who's tried to define the qualities which make a 

good judge. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In addition: 

 

 To give powers without any idea of limits or how the powers 

should be exercised is unfair.  Even with clearly defined 

powers in the courts, checks and balances on the forms of 

appeals are allowed.  There has to be discussion on checks 

and balances in every system.  These checks and balances 

should be discussed before unlimited powers over the 

economic lives of citizens are given to the present tribunal.  

At the very least, these new concepts and powers should be 

delayed until a method of appointment and some checks and 

balances are discussed. 

 

And that's the view of the chamber of commerce.  And I think 

that you should take the time to consider those concerns.  And I 

wonder what your comments are on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We certainly did take time to 

consider them.  I've already commented on them.  The method 

we have for appointment of members to the Labour Relations 

Board is the same as it is in every other province.  It's basically 

worked pretty well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The next area of concern that they have is with 

the first contract arbitration. 

 

 Once a business is certified to a union, there is a 

 requirement to bargain.  The first contract negotiated is 

generally the best for the employer.  Usually the employer 

wishes to bargain as close as possible to the way it operated 

before the union arrived.  Such items as promotions or 

selection of the best people to jobs are examples of ways you 

operate a productive business that you wish to retain. 

 

And I'm wondering if that's you and your department's view as 

well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I would have to have the 

documents you're reading from.  I wasn't entirely sure what it is 

you want me to respond to. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well what I'd like you to respond to is, is indeed 

that the case that the employer generally, in the first contract, 

receives the best of the deal, essentially I guess is what they're 

saying here; that usually the employer wishes to bargain as 

close as possible to the way it operated before the union 

arrived.  The first contract negotiated is generally the best for 

the employer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't think we would share that 

view.  I think it would vary from case to case. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, to look at the above example.  A 

union will likely argue for seniority-based system in which a 

senior person gets any job without . . . any job opening they 

wish, and is that . . . I think that's an area of concern that 

business has, is that if they are forced to have a union shop that 

they cannot deal with things like promotions and selection of 

the best people to do certain jobs within their shop, that 

seniority will be the area that the system will be based on.  And 

I think that's an area of concern. 

 

Do you share that view that in a newly-formed unionized shop 

that an employer will have difficulty putting people into a 

position that they wish the person should be in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I certainly don't.  The vast 

majority of the very successful businesses in the world are 

unionized; the vast majority of the most successful businesses 

are all unionized.  It depends upon the relationship between 

management and labour.  The relationship can be good and 

productive; it may be bad and very destructive.  That will vary 

according to the personalities on location. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well you make a fairly general and 

wide-sweeping comment there, that the businesses in the world 

that are most successful are unionized.  What kind of criteria 

did you have to back up that assertion?  Does that extend to 

very small businesses as well, or are you only thinking that in 

order to be successful you have to be employing a certain 

number of people?  Or what kind of information can you 

provide us with that supports that claim? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The comment which I made to the 

member is that at a certain size the majority of businesses 

become unionized. 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the size? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Oh, well it would vary from one 

industry to another.  Normally unionization occurs when there 

is . . . oh, it would be hard to generalize -- let us say 50, 60, 

100, 150, somewhere there around, most businesses become 

unionized at somewhere in that range.  Why?  I think it has not 

much generally to . . . it probably has something to do with the 

management. 

 

Also it is simply a more difficult and complex relationship as it 

gets larger.  As the business gets larger, the relationship gets 

more complex.  In many cases it's easier to handle if the 

workers are organized and you speak to the representative of 

the workers, rather than trying to deal with each one of them. 

 

I made the comment that that unionization which occurs to 

most businesses in that range does nothing to inhibit their 

success.  Many of them go on to become very large, very 

successful.  I made the comment to point out unionization does 

not prevent a business from being run and managed 

successfully; the evidence is the opposite.  Most of the very 

large, very successful businesses are all unionized. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So your advice to the people of Saskatchewan is, 

is unionize your shop and you'll become successful.  I wonder 

how many businesses in Saskatchewan employ more than 50 

people, which was your break-out figure of where, generally 

speaking, in your view at least, that they become unionized 

after that point. 

 

Businesses in Saskatchewan that are based in Saskatchewan, I 

don't think there'd be all that terribly many, sir, that are actually 

. . . only operate in Saskatchewan.  You have a number of 

major chains, and things like that, that operate in 

Saskatchewan.  But I have some difficulty with that, that I think 

that you can be . . . your company can be successful in a 

number of ways without having 50 employees or more. 

 

I think there's a great deal of small-business owners in 

Saskatchewan that take a great deal of pleasure in operating a 

small business.  And what I call a small business, I think of 

something 20 employees or less.  I think there's lots of people 

in Saskatchewan that make a very, very good standard of living 

for themselves and their employees by employing that kind of 

numbers of people. 

 

And I think that that's why people in Saskatchewan, 

small-business people in Saskatchewan have difficulty with 

you, sir.  Because you throw out these kinds of things like, 

well, you know, to be successful you need to have a unionized 

shop.  That's the kind of thing they have difficulty with. 

 

Because I don't think in a lot of cases they want to necessarily 

have a union shop.  If they do, that's fine 

with me; I don't care.  But on the other hand, you seem to 

suggest to the business community in Saskatchewan that in 

order to be successful, in most successful businesses you throw 

that out and say they're unionized.  Do you think that's a 

responsible way of discussing issues with the business 

community in Saskatchewan, to say that . . . to make those 

general, sweeping types of observations that a lot of people 

would disagree with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I did not say that nor will my words 

bear that interpretation.  If the member wants to misinterpret it, 

nothing will stop you, and the time is yours.  I did not say that, 

nor will my words bear that interpretation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well I'm glad you cleared that up, sir, because 

that is exactly the way I interpreted it, that in order to be 

successful, your view was that you had to have a unionized 

shop.  Because you said, and I think Hansard will back me up 

on this, that most successful businesses are unionized.  I recall, 

and I'm quite sure that that was what the comment was, that 

most successful businesses are unionized.  And therefore I 

guess from there it would seem only logical that the next 

conclusion would be that in order to be successful you have to 

be unionized, would be your way of providing some advice to 

the business community in Saskatchewan. 

 

And we'll go back to this first contract arbitration concerns that 

the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) has.  

On what basis are the terms to be set?  Will the labour board or 

arbitrator require you to change your methods of operation?  

Will promotion in the above example be based on seniority or 

competition?  And the example was the newly formed 

unionized shop that we discussed earlier, where there's some 

concern whether or not they'll have the ability to select certain 

folks without basing it on seniority. 

 

Allowing a government-appointed board to impose the rates of 

pay or working conditions creates problems that the business 

will have to operate under without the accountability for those 

who impose the terms.  Now do you see that as a difficulty, sir, 

as the CFIB obviously does? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, of course I don't.  There are many 

. . . one of the myths that the opposition are desperately trying 

to peddle is that the result of this Trade Union Act is, 

everybody's going to be unionized.  In fact it would surprise me 

somewhat if the percentage of the workforce which was 

unionized rose rapidly after this was passed.  That would truly 

surprise me.  It's not the aim of the Act nor I think will it be its 

effect. 

 

There are many businesses where there are unions where there 

is an extremely productive relationship between management 

and labour.  It can also be equally destructive.  It depends upon 

the parties involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, we've dealt 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

with just a few of the concerns that the CFIB has brought to our 

attention, and now I am in turn bringing them to your attention. 

 

And every single one of them -- it seems like there's a pattern 

here, Mr. Chairman -- every single one of them seems to be of 

concern to them.  And we bring them forward and you say no, 

there's no reason to be concerned about that. 

 

Well how do you deal with groups like the CFIB when they 

bring forward their concerns to you, sir?  What do you say to 

them?  Do you just dismiss their arguments as irrelevant all of 

the time?  How do you, in a formal or informal setting, deal 

with the concerns that these folks have?  Do you just brush 

them off with those kinds of comments that you make here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- None of the people that I've met with 

would stoop to engage in the kind of discussion which is going 

on this afternoon in the legislature.  None of them try so 

desperately to spread misinformation, false facts, and confuse 

others.  No legitimate business group would stoop to the level 

that the opposition here is stooping to. 

 

So the discussion starts out at a very different plane.  The 

discussion begins with them telling us what their concerns are.  

We deal with the CFIB as we deal with everybody else.  We 

hear their concerns, we consider them; on occasion we will find 

that we don't share their concerns, on occasion we will find that 

they do; and we modify our approach accordingly.  But the 

discussions are usually productive. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Well that's interesting, Mr. Minister.  

This is their material; this isn't mine.  I didn't write this.  This 

was sent to me by the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business as concerns that they wanted to be addressed to you, 

sir.  I didn't have any input into writing this information. 

 

These were the concerns as they set them out; not me.  It's not 

me that's taking out full-page ads in the Leader-Post and the 

Star-Phoenix around the province of Saskatchewan.  It's not 

me that's sending out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it's not 

the CFIB that did that; it was the Saskatchewan business 

coalition, I think is what's it's called, a number of business 

interests all over Saskatchewan -- chambers of commerce, 

CFIB, North Saskatoon Business Association, Regina Chamber 

-- a few outfits you should be aware of. 

 

And I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm sure there are 

some from my constituency, yes.  Most definitely, there's lots 

of members of the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business in my constituency, Mr. Member.  There's lots of 

them out there. 

 

They were sent from a number of groups around the province.  

The Leader of the Opposition, in question period last week, 

read out the full list.  I forget it now.  Ten or twelve different 

business groups all across Saskatchewan.  So this isn't my 

work, Mr. Minister, this 

is their work.  And it's them that's taking out the 

advertisements, and it's them that's calling for your resignation. 

It's not . . . well we most definitely are calling for your 

resignation, there's no question about that, but it certainly is 

with the agreement of business groups all across Saskatchewan. 

 

The chamber of commerce, for the first time I think probably in 

the history of Saskatchewan, were calling for a minister's 

resignation.  And they're not . . . I don't think the people of 

Saskatchewan would think they're unreasonable people.  I think 

they're very, very . . . considered by most people to be very 

reasonable and relatively straightforward with you, sir. 

 

And you say that it starts out at a higher plane.  Well I think it 

did start out at a higher plane, but it certainly has degenerated 

from there with the business community, hasn't it, sir?  It's 

degenerated to the point where they're taking out full-page ads 

in major newspapers at their own cost, asking for changes to 

this legislation. 

 

And it's also degenerated to the point where they're asking for 

people to bring forward the concerns with the minister in places 

like the legislature and in places like open meetings in 

Saskatoon and Davidson, and places like that.  Next week they 

meet in Saskatoon.  I'm hoping that you will attend, sir. 

 

In question period today you were asked, your government was 

asked whether you'll be meeting with this group.  And the 

minister for Economic Development cleverly side-stepped the 

question and went into some rant about other stuff.  I don't even 

recall what it was any more, but he didn't even get within 50 

miles of the question about whether your government . . . 

excluding you, incidentally; they don't want to meet with you 

any more, I understand. They want to meet with the Premier, 

the Finance minister, and I believe the Economic Development 

minister because they believe that they are the heavy hitters in 

this government and the ones that have the ability and the 

authority to make some changes, and hopefully realize that 

what your government is doing is wrong. 

 

Just to go on with the first contract arbitration.  Business is 

concerned about the imposition of these contracts.  However if 

this method is to be used, a method to select people who decide 

is very important to business, at the very least the actual people 

who decide, or the criteria for appointment should be 

established before this section becomes law.  And I wonder if 

you and your department have given consideration to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the Labour Relations Board, the 

members of the Labour Relations Board are charged with 

responsibility for the administration of this.  I understand the 

practice in other provinces has been that non-monetary items 

are determined by Labour Relations Board; monetary items are 

determined at arbitration. 

 

I've already answered the comments with respect to 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

the appointment of the Labour Relations Board.  We use the 

same criteria everybody else uses. 

 

With respect to the arbitrators, we have discussed but not 

brought to any fruition a system for appointment of arbitrators, 

in which we might have a list of arbitrators and use them on a 

rotational basis, again to try to bring some of the politics out of 

the system of appointing arbitrators. 

 

A thrust of this department has been to take politics out of the 

appointment system, and to some extent I think we've 

succeeded. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The difference is, sir, is the criteria may be the 

same for appointing people to the boards -- and I'm not sure 

whether it is or not, but we'll accept your word for that -- but 

the difference is, is that you're giving the board, the Labour 

Relations Board, so much more power than other places, and 

that's why the concern is.  And that's the reason why I think 

they're calling for some criteria for board appointments, as well 

as clearly defining the powers of that board before they want to 

go any further.  And I wonder if you'd comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are differences from one 

province to another.  In the main, however, the Labour 

Relations Board in each province enjoy the same powers.  They 

enjoy broad jurisdiction to interpret the rights under the 

contracts. 

 

There aren't . . . there isn't any enormous difference between 

what's found here and what's found in other provinces.  I was 

going to say there aren't any differences.  That's probably not 

true; there are certainly some.  Each legislation is a little 

different.  But there aren't any major differences between the 

powers our board enjoys and the powers enjoyed in other areas. 

 

That's true of so much of this legislation.  So much of what is 

being vigorously resisted by members opposite is already 

working well elsewhere.  And it's also true of the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

It's true of first contract legislation.  It is true of so many things.  

What is working well . . . many of the things which you people 

are so vigorously opposing is working well in Manitoba, B.C. 

(British Columbia), and Ontario and Quebec, which have these 

powers in them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well then why, Mr. Minister, do you think the 

CFIB brings these objections and these concerns forward?  If 

it's all as cut and dried as you say it is, why does the CFIB have 

difficulty with what you're saying with respect to this first 

contract arbitration?  Why do they have these concerns if you 

indeed say that the rest of the industrialized world doesn't have 

a problem with this?  Why does the CFIB in Saskatchewan 

have difficulties with this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That would be an excellent question 

for you to put to them. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think they have tried that 

with you, sir.  I think they have tried that with you and 

somehow or another . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm 

not the Minister of Labour in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Minister -- you are.  I think it should be you that takes the 

initiative to ask the CFIB about their concerns, not me.  I'm an 

opposition member.  You are the one that's the Minister of 

Labour in this province.  Maybe you should take some 

initiative, sir, and step forward and ask the CFIB about their 

concerns and sit down with the CFIB and address some of their 

concerns. 

 

All that we can do as opposition members is bring forward their 

concerns to you, and then you in turn throw it back at me and 

say, well why don't you go and talk to them and see what the 

problem is?  I'm not in a position to be able to make the 

changes that you are in a position to make the changes for.  So 

don't you think it's your responsibility to deal with that, not the 

opposition's? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The point I was trying to make -- and 

I would have thought it would have been obvious to the 

member from Kindersley when I said you should ask them -- it 

seems to me that when these provisions are working well in 

other jurisdictions, whose demography, economy, and other 

things, are basically similar to Saskatchewan, that raises a 

question about whether or not in fact these are legitimate 

concerns.  That's the point I was making. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So it's your view that the CFIB's information that 

was faxed to me not more than an hour ago, an hour and a half 

maybe, is irrelevant.  None of their concerns have any merit 

whatsoever.  This information . . . I'll supply a copy of this to 

you, sir, so that you can look at it and see and verify for your 

own benefit that this was indeed sent to our office. 

 

And it isn't our concerns -- it's the concerns of the CFIB.  And I 

think that you should take the time, sir, to take these up with 

them.  And I wonder if you would commit to that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we are not prepared to delay the 

passage of the legislation for further consultations.  We're 

prepared to meet . . . as I said, I have not turned down a request 

to meet, and I don't foresee myself doing that.  Although 

obviously for the next few days it's not going to be possible to 

be out of the legislature.  But within any reasonable time frame 

I've not turned down any meetings and I don't anticipate doing 

that within a reasonable time frame. 

 

I would say, however, to the member that we have had 

extensive consultations.  Time has now come to pass this 

legislation, put it in effect, and I think once it is in effect, that 

will allay many of their concerns. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So it doesn't meet your agenda.  The CFIB's 

concerns don't meet your agenda.  You've listened to them as 

much as you intend to listen to them.  You're through listening.  

You're leaving the 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

province. 

 

I don't know what's up in the next few days that's of such great 

concern, but it seems to me that the concerns of one of the 

major business groups in Saskatchewan should be your concern 

as the Minister of Labour in this province.  But I guess it's 

painfully obvious that you're through listening, and it's your 

view that this legislation has to move forward and you intend to 

ram it through at all costs.  And the objections of anybody -- 

too bad.  Is that the conclusion to the whole thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We intend to see the legislation 

passed at this session. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, sir, during this session maybe it would be a 

good idea to address some of these concerns with them prior to 

the conclusion of the session and the conclusion of this 

legislation.  Maybe, just maybe, they have some legitimate 

concerns.  Did you ever consider that?  Did you ever consider 

for one moment that they may have some legitimate concerns 

that you and them, if you sat down, could work them out?  

Does that concern you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have had extensive consultations 

with them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And the results of those consultations still are that 

they have the same concerns and you still have the same 

ideological bent that you're going to push this stuff forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We expect the legislation to pass at 

the current session. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well the next area of concern that they have is 

with successorship and contracting-in.  This is a method to 

require business to be union even though their employees have 

not selected a union.  It will usually apply when a government 

or agency contracts their work and when a business that 

contracts to government loses the bid to a competitor in food -- 

or, pardon me, in cafeteria or food, janitorial, or cleaning or 

security services. 

 

And I think that this is something that's important to deal with, 

Mr. Minister, and I wonder what your thoughts are on this.  Is 

that indeed the case, that we'll see those kinds of things 

happening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The difficulty with these kind of 

services is they are frequently tendered.  And the difficulties 

these people have is that they go to the effort -- and 

considerable is involved -- to set up a union.  Then the contract 

is retendered and they may lose all of their rights to bargain 

collectively.  They may well have to start all over again. 

 

This is an attempt to recognize that these people, who, I may 

say, are at the bottom of the ladder in an economic sense, these 

people . . . This is an attempt to provide some protection to 

these people at the very bottom.  And I sense if there's any area 

upon which there's broad general agreement -- and I think 

there's 

many, but this is one -- and that is that those at the bottom 

should get some protection and that that's overdue. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The CFIB says that with the House amendments 

some parts of the original Bill have been improved.  in 

particular, this section cannot apply to private sector businesses 

except in an indirect way.  The section will now only apply to 

provincial or municipal government and government-funded 

agencies, such as health boards and universities.  This section 

will make any contracting out of cafeteria, cleaning, or security 

services automatically covered by the union agreement.  This 

would mean that a private business that successfully bids on the 

type of work for a government agency will be unionized to the 

same union as the government workers that previously did that 

work. 

 

Is that the correct interpretation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it really is not.  The clear 

suggestion there is that once they're unionized they're unionized 

forever.  The basic tenet which underlies this legislation and 

has been the foundation of every single Act of this sort since 

the Wagner Act was passed by the Roosevelt government in the 

'30s is that workers have a right to organize.  That is a basic 

human right.  This Act recognizes that. 

 

It is also their right to decertify.  It is their right to have their 

union decertified if they so wish. 

 

This Act simply recognizes peculiar problems which these 

people have because the service which they provide is 

retendered on a regular and frequent basis. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well the CFIB's view is, from a practical point of 

view, that this means that the work cannot be contracted out as 

business will usually not be able to carry out the terms of an 

agreement.  It is hard to understand why those funded with tax 

dollars now have their hands tied in attempting to reduce costs 

of providing services to taxpayers. 

 

That's the view of the CFIB, Mr. Minister.  And I wonder if 

your discussions that you've had with them up till now, whether 

that was brought to your attention or this is new information 

that is available now, and what your view on that is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I've heard these comments 

before. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- You don't subscribe to that view? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The next area is successorship-related businesses.  

Under this amendment the labour board can declare businesses 

owned or controlled by the same or similar shareholders or 

people to be one employer for the purpose of dealing with a 

union.  Because the principle is that employees are supposed to 

decide if they want a union to represent them, there is a concern 

that employees of a second business 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

could be unionized without a change to decide if they want the 

union to represent them. 

 

This is another example of the expanded powers to a labour 

board to unionize businesses without employee support.  I 

wonder if you would share with us your thoughts on that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- These provisions are found in other 

legislation in Canada and they work reasonably well.  I suspect 

they'll work equally well here.  There's nothing particularly 

leading edge about these provisions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- It seems like with amazing regularity we see the 

minister saying that CFIB's concerns have no merit. 

 

The next area is a return to work following a dispute.  This 

section requires an employer to take striking workers back or 

pay them in lieu of notice as provided in a back-to-work 

agreement under The Labour Standards Act. 

 

We are told the intent is to allow the parties to negotiate any 

back-to-work agreement they wish without regard to the 

minimum standards of The Labour Standards Act.  In this 

section, it is . . . pardon me, if this is how it is to be applied, it 

will solve one of the concerns of business to this section. 

 

However, because this section can be used to put economic 

pressures on businesses during a dispute, an employer is going 

to have to serve a lockout notice in every dispute and negotiate 

a back-to-work agreement on terms suitable to it before 

employees return to work at the end of the dispute. 

 

If not handled properly, this section has the potential of adding 

large costs to employer both during and at the end of the 

dispute.  What are your thoughts and your department's 

thoughts on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That is simply at odds with current 

experience.  Current experience is the vast majority of strikes 

have, at their conclusion, a protocol agreement.  It is not 

necessary to lock everybody out to get a protocol agreement.  

And I think the rather dire consequence which the CFIB 

anticipates simply won't occur.  Protocol agreements are 

common in most cases now where a strike comes to an end. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The next area of their 

concern is certification is an unfair labour practice . . . if an 

unfair labour practice.  The House amendments take away the 

right of a labour board as found in the original Bill to certify a 

union if there is no majority support. 

 

Now the labour board has to order a vote.  This will eliminate 

business concerns of these amendments.  And it appears that 

this might be one area that you've done something in.  Is that 

the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, you have the amendments 

before you. 

Mr. Boyd: -- They also have the concern with benefits during a 

dispute. 

 

 House amendments to the original Bill have clarified that 

there is no obligation on the employer to pay any benefits 

during a dispute or guarantee that those who provide the 

benefits will actually provide the benefits during dispute.  

With the House amendments, business concerns have been 

removed. 

 

Is that your understanding as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well again, I invite the member to 

read the House amendments which have been filed.  It is our 

view that the House amendment simply clarified what everyone 

had always understood to be the case, and that was the benefits 

might be tendered by a union or the employee, and if so, they 

had to be remitted.  But there was to be no cost to the business.  

That was what was always intended. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The next area is technological change. 

 

 House amendments to the original Bill provide that in 

circumstances where you have to implement a change or to 

prevent serious damage to your business, you can proceed 

with technological change.  However, this section is still 

poorly worded on how long the change can be stopped in 

normal circumstances. 

 

 While there are some arguments that can be used to deal with 

the concern that a change could be delayed longer than 90 

days after you first give notice to the union, it would be far 

better if clearer intention were expressed in this section. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Now this section initially came out of 

a nationwide strike by the railways in 1958.  The wording 

hasn't changed significantly since then and not a great deal of 

problems have occurred with respect to it. 

 

So I suspect that we may simply call upon our history with this 

section which is very considerable.  I suspect we won't have a 

lot of problems with it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There are still a 

number of groups that have been writing to us over the past few 

days; and again, we've been receiving then in the last little 

while.  I want to present another one to you this afternoon. 

 

This one was I guess May 10, '94, recently.  It was major 

concerns with The Trade Union Act amendments for public 

sector employees, and this one comes courtesy of the SUMA, 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), and 

SARM, Mr. Minister.  And they say: 

 

 Significant concerns over Bill 54, An Act to amend The 

Trade Union Act, remain for our 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

coalition of public sector employers.  The coalition, which 

includes the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, was 

responding to the House amendments to Bill 54 tabled by the 

Labour minister. 

 

 The association wishes to commend the Labour minister for 

addressing several of their concerns in the House 

amendments, but point out that major issues which represent 

significant cost for the public sector were not considered. 

 

And here are their concerns.  They include: 

 

 Amending the definition of technological change.  Bill 54 

proposes to define technological change as: 

 

 (c) the removal or relocation outside the appropriate unit by 

an employer of any part of the employer's work, undertaking 

or business. 

 

This will restrict public sector employees . . . or pardon me: 

 

 This will restrict public sector employers from reorganizing 

internal work assignments to achieve the most cost-effective 

service delivery for our taxpayers.  The associations maintain 

the definition must be amended or withdrawn to permit 

employers with multiple bargaining units to shift workload 

between bargaining units. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I think we'll go through these.  I think 

there's a few concerns that they have.  I wonder what your 

comments are on that, Mr. Minister, that they have. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me read for you the comments 

contained in an article entitled "Mr. Cholod, you have been a 

naughty boy".  This was contained in the Leader-Post 

supplement distributed to every house in Regina on Sunday.  

It's called the Sunday Sun. 

 

In there, the writer, Neil Scott, says as follows: 

 

 One of the specific points mentioned by Cholod were 

proposals in the Trade Union Act that could limit the ability 

of cities, school boards and hospitals to contract out certain 

jobs (security guards, janitors, cafeteria workers and perhaps 

others). 

 

 Cities and other public sector employers need flexibility to 

contract out certain jobs in order to keep costs and taxes 

down, Cholod argues. 

 But -- while money can sometimes be saved by contracting 

out -- it is questionable if the practice can be justified if the 

only real savings comes by replacing unionized workers with 

lower-paid, non-unionized workers employed by private 

contractors. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The second area of concern that they have is 

reinstating the termination of contracts during open periods. 

 

 Bill 54 entrenches existing collective agreements as a base 

that can be enhanced through negotiations, but which cannot 

be reduced.  For the public sector this means that local 

taxpayers are obliged to finance existing collective 

agreements indefinitely and regardless of the negative effect 

that obligation may have on the local tax base or local service 

delivery. 

 

 This is an unwarranted intrusion into collective bargaining 

that will result in adversarial labour-management relations.  

The employer's option to terminate contracts during open 

periods must be reinstated. 

 

How do you deal with their concern on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The notion -- which is not peculiar to 

the cities, the municipalities, universities, schools, and 

hospitals -- the notion that these contracts can never be changed 

is just not accurate.  Of course they can be changed.  They can 

be lowered, but that must be done by negotiating with the 

employees.  It can't be done unilaterally.  And that we think is 

fair and makes sense. 

 

And I might add, I could name any one of a number of different 

companies which had achieved remarkable turnarounds after 

negotiating lower wages.  I might mention Chrysler.  The 

Chrysler minivan plant at Windsor is a model of what a car 

plant should be.  One of the things they did, 10, 12 years ago 

was negotiate lower wage packages.  But it was negotiated, and 

that is how employers should proceed.  They should proceed by 

negotiating with employees.  And if the business . . . if the 

continuation of the business depends upon it, in most cases, 

you'll get that consent.  And that's also true of the 

municipalities. 

 

So it is simply not true that these contracts can never be 

lowered.  The benefits can be lowered, but they must be 

negotiated. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- The third area of concern that they have is with 

withdrawing contracting-out, amendments. 

 

 Public sector employers contract out service delivery as a 

cost control measure, caused in part by harsh reductions in 

provincial transfer programs.  The association maintains that 

public sector employers must retain the option to use 

contracting out as a means of reducing service costs and of 

managing service delivery within budgets. 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

How do you deal with that concern that they have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I already have dealt with that 

concern, and I did so by reading the article from the Sunday 

Sun. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- As far as these groups are concerned: 

 

 Wages and salaries represent the single greatest expense in 

the public sector. Left unchanged, the government's proposals 

prevent public sector employers from responsibly managing 

that expense in the best interests of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 The provincial associations are united in calling on (and I'm 

quoting from this, Mr. Chairman) Mr. Shillington to 

introduce additional House amendments to address their 

concerns and provide public sector employers with the 

flexibility needed to responsibly manage the cost of service 

delivery. 

 

Now I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you . . . this came in May 

10, I understand.  I'm wondering if you've taken the time to 

write to these people and have addressed point by point the 

concerns that they have.   And if you have, if you would 

provide a copy of those, of that information to us please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is unlikely, if that is dated May 10, 

it's unlikely that I would have responded at this time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The next one we have 

comes from, I believe it's Merit Contractors -- and I think 

you're probably familiar with them -- Association.  Yes, 

respectfully submitted by Merit Contractors Association, May 

29, 1992, Mr. Minister.  This is some information that came to 

us recently. 

 

 On April 8, 1994, Bill 54, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 

was introduced into the legislature.  Due to the speed with 

which these amendments will be passed, the scope of this 

commentary is primarily limited to representation issues and 

related powers of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board.  

There will none the less be some wandering commentary on 

issues which may be addressed in the unionized employer 

contract. 

 

Their general assessment of this piece of legislation is as 

follows: 

 

 The proposed amendments are intended to promote greater 

industrial peace between Saskatchewan's unionized 

employers and employees.  Much mention is made of the 

proposed amendments which will not ban replacement 

workers.  Media isolation on what is effectively a historic 

non-issue in Saskatchewan has effectively diverted attention 

from the subversive amendments which will undermine 

employee rights 

 respecting workplace representation and the ability of 

employers to bargain effectively with the trade unions. 

 

That's their general assessment of it, and I wonder what your 

thoughts are on it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I obviously don't agree, and I 

think I've already commented in these estimates on those 

general sort of comments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Point (a) in their submission is: 

 

  . . . acceding exclusively to labour's demands.  As with Bill 

32, amendments to The Labour Standards Act, Bill 54 

amendments give operational, legal effect to most changes 

called for under the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour's, 

SFL's discussion paper, "An Economic Agenda for 

Saskatchewan Labour in 1990." 

 

Is this where this information, this legislation has come from, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Of course not. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well these people seem to think so, Mr. Minister.  

Do you have a copy of the economic agenda for Saskatchewan 

labour in the 1990s which is written by the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour?  Are you familiar with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I must say I'm not intimately 

familiar with it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well we'll have to ask our research department to 

get a copy of that.  Because if that's the case, Mr. Minister, I 

think it lends some support to the view that businesses and the 

opposition has been saying that this information has come 

forward directly from labour to you and your government.  And 

I wonder if you have any comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Legislation was the product of 

extensive consultation, sir. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- 

 

 The paper called for repealing Bill 104 granting automatic 

certification, i.e., without employers' votes due to employer 

unfair labour practices; continuing labour agreement 

provisions after agreements expire; strengthening union 

successor rights in cases of contracting out; imposing first 

collective agreements, etc.  All of the measures and more are 

contained in Bill 54 and appear despite the protests of the 

business community which has advanced well-reasoned 

positions on possible amendments since the Trade Union Act 

Review Committee was initiated in 1992. 

 

I guess that's just one piece of evidence to suggest that it indeed 

does come from the SFL's "Economic Agenda for 

Saskatchewan Labour in 1990." 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know what response I'm 

supposed to make to these allegations.  They are the same.  

You've been making the same allegations all afternoon.  I've 

been saying no, it's not true, all afternoon. 

 

If the member wants some assistance in carrying on a filibuster, 

I can lend you some ideas which will work a lot better than 

this. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would suggest that if 

you want to do something helpful, you could make some 

changes to this legislation.  That would be the most helpful 

thing you could do. 

 

I'm just simply bringing forward the concerns of the groups 

across Saskatchewan.  I mean you can belittle them all you 

want and belittle us in opposition all you want, but it's really of 

no concern to me, sir.  It should be of concern to you though, 

that business groups across the province are concerned about 

this legislation.  And you should be dealing with it, rather than 

offhand flippant comments that you tend to make whenever 

you seem to get frustrated with the process. 

 

No matter how much you look at that clock, it isn't going to 

speed up, sir.  This afternoon and tonight and day after day 

after day I think we're probably going to be going through this 

kind of stuff, Mr. Minister, because I think this is important.  I 

think that it's important that the business groups have 

opportunity to hold a rally in Saskatchewan . . . or in Saskatoon 

next week to bring forward the concerns of business groups all 

across this province and develop a focal point of opposition to 

this and to your government's agenda with respect to this. 

 

So we're going to continue, sir, and I don't know whether it's 

going to be successful or not.  We hope that the business 

groups will continue to put pressure on you to deal with this 

piece of legislation.  I'm sure you're still continuing to move 

forward with this, but I'm hopeful that business will be able to 

shake some sense into this legislation before it does pass. 

 

Once again organized labour has succeeded in obtaining, 

through law, in Bill 54, what it would have been unable to 

obtain through grass roots organizing efforts and democratic 

procedures.  First contract arbitration, otherwise enhanced 

arbitration procedures, in extending terms of expired 

agreements, also ensures that what cannot be achieved through 

free collective bargaining process will be imposed by law or 

third parties. 

 

Clearly these new rules are solely intended to give organized 

labour . . . and put these amendments that are desperate 

attempts to expand union influence on the workplace despite 

the fact that less than 10 per cent of Saskatchewan private 

sector employees are unionized.  The government may point to 

various surveys, studies, meetings, commissions, etc., as an 

indicator of how broadly it consulted in an attempt to develop 

legislation.  However, the general, unanimous opposition of 

business determined not to replicate the unbalanced and 

uncompetitive laws 

recently introduced in Ontario and B.C., meant the government 

could not create the illusion of consensus or broad support for 

the measures contained in Bill 54. 

 

 At the end of the day it is clear that the proposed amendments 

in essence reflect an imposition of new rules by governments 

and unions at the expense of employees and employers. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've said that you've consulted broadly on this 

issue, and I expect you probably have talked to a great deal of 

people, a great number of people.  Are there any business 

groups in Saskatchewan that you can point to as examples -- 

any at all -- major business groups, that support this 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I'm going to decline to get 

involved in the discussion.  Yes, there are.  Your next question 

is going to be who, and I'm going to refuse to answer it, just to 

anticipate your next question. 

 

I've had a large number of conversations with business groups 

and most of them have been confidential.  And so while there 

are people who have said this is the right thing to do, this is an 

idea whose time has come -- anticipating your next question -- I 

do not intend to reveal individual conversations. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that's quite a statement, Mr. Minister.  

There's people out there that support me but I'm not going to 

tell you who they are.  That's incredible, Mr. Minister, how you 

can stand with a straight face, say that to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that there are business groups out there but it's a 

confidential nature.  We have talked to them and they don't 

want their names associated with any of this stuff and they 

don't want to give us their full fledged support.  They don't 

want to come forward and let you use their name publicly.  Is 

that what you're saying, sir, that they're supportive but you 

don't have their permission to trumpet that support?  Is that 

what the problem is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm saying private conversations are 

just that. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Private conversations.  So we have to assume that 

somehow or someone out there has had a private conversation 

with you and that you have elicited their support but you don't 

want to reveal the people who they are, Mr. Minister.  That 

seems a little bit hard to understand or believe, quite frankly, 

sir, that if they support you, I'm quite sure most business 

leaders in Saskatchewan would stand up and say, because 

they're forthright people -- they're not ruthless and greedy; 

they're forthright people, I think -- they'd stand up and say, yes, 

we're supportive of this legislation.  The minister has our 

support and we freely admit it.  Or what seems to be the 

problem with this, Mr. Minister?  Why, if a group is supportive 

of it, why do you think that they wouldn't be prepared to 

publicly say that? 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've already stated that I'm not going 

to get into the issue of naming individuals. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Are we talking about, Mr. Minister, are we 

talking about these little side deals that are going on that we're 

aware of?  That the Premier and I think probably the Economic 

Development minister are engaging in these days, hustling 

around from one corporate boardroom to another trying to elicit 

the support of major business leaders? 

 

I see one member shaking her head in agreement that that's 

probably the case, Mr. Minister.  Is that what we're talking 

about -- the Premier going around to the various corporate 

boardrooms?  There was one person shaking their head -- you 

look at me that I'm not telling you the truth.  But is that what 

we're talking about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What are we talking about then, Mr. Minister?  

You're saying that you've got support but you won't reveal it. 

We're aware that side deals are being looked at right now. Your 

government's trying to appease a few heavy hitters in this 

province these days to get their support for it.  It seems to me, 

Mr. Minister, it's pretty conditional support, isn't it, when you 

can't even get them to come forward and say that they're 

supportive of this legislation. 

 

Should it be a concern, Mr. Minister of Labour, in this 

province, to small-business people when a government goes out 

and tries to cut side deals in order to get support and be 

exempted from this legislation?  Should that be of concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Minister, let me say that we put 

forth this legislation because we believe it is in the best 

interests of the public of Saskatchewan.  We do not do so after 

tallying who supports it in the trade union community, who 

supports it in the business community; you add them up -- if it's 

a plus figure you go, if it's a minus figure, you don't.  That 

actually is the kind of government in which the former 

administration participated and it really is disastrous. 

 

What we have sought to do is determine what is in the best 

interests of the province of Saskatchewan and proceed with it.  

We believe at the end of the day, governments which do that 

are successful; those which attempt to run a government by 

polls are not.  It's the difference between driving a car by 

looking out the front window -- which is what we're doing -- or 

looking out the rear view mirror, which is what running a 

government by polls is. 

 

So we make no apologies for the process.  The questions which 

you asked do not determine whether or not this legislation goes 

forward. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, no one is suggesting that you line 

up one side and you line up the other side, and then you count 

the number of people on each side and make a determination as 

to which direction your 

government is going to go. 

 

I think what business is only suggesting, I think what business 

is suggesting is that you deal with this by consensus and you 

deal with it in a way that addresses the concerns of all, not just 

labour.  That's the concern, Mr. Minister.  And I don't think 

you've addressed the concerns that business groups in this 

province have.  And that's why you can't get support for them 

unless you cut them a deal, unless you cut them some kind of a 

side deal. 

 

Is that the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, this group goes on to say that: 

 

 Undemocratic measures in enhancing third-party powers.  At 

the behest of organized labour, NDP governments across 

Canada continue to erode procedures and rules that would 

protect the fundamental principle of trade union legislation to 

protect the right of employees to organize in unions of their 

own choosing to bargain collectively. 

 

 These changes have included greater restrictions on the 

fundamental rights to have a secret ballot vote on certification 

or decertification applications.  There are also growing 

numbers of circumstances where the right to vote is being 

effectively eliminated. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that the agenda of you and your party across 

Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No.  The process with respect to 

certification and decertification has not changed at all. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- 

 

 Regardless of employee wishes, the Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board, whose members now sit for fixed three- to 

five-year terms instead of at the pleasure, retains the 

unfettered discretion to order a secret ballot vote on union 

representation regardless of the level of employee support 

evidenced. 

 

 Amendments would also now permit the LRB to order 

certification without an employee representation vote in 

instances of employer unfair labour practices and through 

common employer declarations.  Although rules regarding 

the employer free speech, as evident in the LRB 169-92 

attached, are already highly restricted and there are multiple 

instances of reverse onus provisions which reverse the burden 

of proof onto employers in dealing with unfair labour practice 

charges, section 11, greater restrictions will be placed in 

employer communications for proposed under section 

11(1)(a) amendments.  As evident in the LRB 



May 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

149-92 attachment, I believe the current LRB invited both 

amendments to be included in this series of amendments. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member had any understanding 

of what he was reading, he'd recognize that comment is out of 

date in light of the recent House amendments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: --  

 

 Section 37 gives the LRB free rein to interpret within the 

broadest meaning of an Act whether a secret ballot vote on 

representation is warranted.  Upon the sale, disposal, or 

leasing of assets or business, the LRB may order the transfer 

of a union and collective bargaining agreement regardless of 

the employee wishes. 

 

 An example provided in LRB 172-9 attached, wherein 

employee wishes were totally disregarded and there was no 

legal requirement for the board to order a vote. 

 

 However proposed section 37.2 amendment is positive in that 

it permits a vote to be taken.  However as the section is 

currently worded, similar to section 5 dealing with the LRB 

powers for regular votes on certifications, there is no express 

duty placed on the LRB to order a vote, i.e., "shall" should 

replace "may". 

 

 The expansion of board powers in the absence of compulsory 

voting requirements is particularly disconcerting, given 

section 37.1 and the amendments to section 43 dealing with 

technological change.  Section 37.1, contracting out of 

services to be a sale for purposes of union successorship.  

Providing this would likely be considered a removal or 

relocation of work covered by the definition of technological 

change covered under section 43(1)(c), workplace adjustment 

plans, i.e. mitigating measures, would also have to be 

negotiated. 

 

 Two side issues may also be relevant: the express inclusion 

of services to mining camps, covered under section 

37.1(1)(a)(iii) seems curious.  It is understood that various 

native organizations are entering into joint ventures and 

establishing their own business enterprises to provide these 

types of services as part of their economic development 

strategies.  Unless these circumstances are covered by a 

Canada labour code, proposed amendments concerning 

contracting out of services may in fact hinder as opposed to 

facilitate greater native control over their economic future. 

 

 Second, it is important to note that the threshold of 

significance applying to section 43, technological changes, is 

between 13.7 and 20 per cent. 

Is that the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Once again, let me say that the 

existing Trade Union Act gives the board really an unfettered 

discretion to order secret votes.  None of this adds to that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- 

 

 Expanded powers to declare a non-union employer to be a 

common employer with a unionized employer, as proposed in 

section 37.3(1) also leaves the LRB with broad discretionary 

powers over employee voting rights.  Perhaps even more 

disturbing is the new power to grant any relief by way of 

declaration or otherwise that the board considers appropriate. 

 

 While it may be said that this language is patterned after 

section 18 of The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act attached, the LRB's authority in the proposed amendment 

does not appear to contain the same language limiting the 

relief to circumstances related . . . the company has 

deliberately done so to avoid a collective agreement or its 

collective bargaining objectives. 

 

And their conclusion, Mr. Minister: 

 

 As with Bill 32 respecting labour standards amendments, Bill 

54 respecting The Trade Union Act amendments reflects 

essentially the realization of legislative goals and policies as 

set out by organized labour. 

 

And that's a fairly serious accusation, Mr. Minister, and I'd 

wonder if you'd comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would simply repeat what I've been 

saying all afternoon; it is not.  It reflects our view of what is in 

the public interest. 

 

Mr. Boyd: --  

 

 The formal consultative process undertaken in spring 1992 

can only be characterized at best as a failure.  History will 

record this process as more likely a sham to begin with.  

Many of the proposed amendments reflect a betrayal to both 

non-union working people, who see more and more of their 

fundamental democratic workplace rights eroded, to 

unionized employers who have had the ability to bargain 

competitive agreements effectively emasculated. 

 

Again that's a fairly serious charge, Mr. Minister, and I'm 

wondering what your thoughts are on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What the member said was, the 

consultation process which took place in the spring 1992 was a 

sham.  We don't have any comment.  Nobody sitting here 

played any role in any 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 1994 

consultation which took place in the spring of 1992.  That was 

before the committee, which eventually led this legislation, was 

set up.  Either the member has read the date wrong or you're 

referring to something different than The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Next, Mr. Minister, I have an article that came 

out of the British Columbia Report, May 3 of 1993, and I 

think it highlights some of the things that were happening in 

British Columbia at the time, and should give warning to the 

people of Saskatchewan as to what's going to be the problems 

here. 

 

 If the LRB rules an employer has interfered with the union 

organizing effort, it can simply declare the workers as 

unionized. 

 

Mr. Minister, they seem to think that that's a problem in B.C.; 

do you share that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What's happening in B.C. is of no 

relevance to this legislation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: --  

 

 The NDP claimed the loaded gun it handed to labour would 

be only used for protection.  But it's becoming obvious that 

labour considers the code a powerful, offensive weapon. 

 

Again, Mr. Minister, a very serious accusation.  What are your 

comments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure what is to be gained by 

these broad, general accusations which have nothing to do with 

The Trade Union Act, but are simply more an expression, I 

think, of frustration than any comment about The Trade Union 

Act.  All I can do really is get up and say to each one of them: I 

disagree. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well you're right, Mr. Minister, it's becoming 

painfully obvious that the concerns of business are of no 

concern to you.  The people in Saskatchewan that represent 

business interests all over the province whether it be the 

chamber of commerce here in Regina or in Saskatoon, or the 

North Saskatoon Business Association, or the CFIB, or group 

after group, the Saskatchewan Construction Association, the 

hoteliers, retailers all over Saskatchewan, fast food outlets, 

small-business people, large-business people -- other than the 

ones you're trying to cut a deal with -- all disagree with you, 

sir. 

 

All seem to feel that these changes do not represent the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And somehow or another, Mr. Minister, you seem to fail to 

recognize that.  You categorically deny any concern that there's 

people out there that support you, but you don't identify them, 

which seems awful curious to us, Mr. Minister.  Business 

interests don't believe that; I don't believe that. I don't think the 

general public of Saskatchewan believes that. 

 

Just who are you trying to protect in all of this, Mr. 

Minister?  Are you trying to protect your job?  Is that the only 

concern you have here?  You've got yourself in so deep now 

that it seems painfully obvious to me, and I think people all 

over Saskatchewan, that you're going to try and ram this stuff 

through come . . . no matter what. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems painfully obvious that . . . and in clear 

evidence, and I think that was this afternoon when the Minister 

for Economic Development tried to slap and impose extended 

hours on the opposition.  That's always been the tactic of this 

government, is the moment that there's any opposition, make it 

tougher and tougher and tougher and tougher for the opposition 

to deal with it. 

 

And the Minister of Economic Development, he knows that.  

He's a master of dealing with these kinds of things.  We've seen 

it from time to time in this legislature.  He's a master of dealing 

with this kind of problem and we know it.  He knows it.  Slap 

some extended hours on it, make it so the opposition wear . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I frankly question 

what the member's comments have to do with the Bill before 

us.  In any event, it's 5 o'clock and this committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


