




















































Hansard: March 24, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1125 

 March 24, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

really is a great honour for me today to introduce to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the Assembly, a very special 

group of people seated in the west gallery.  These are the 

alternate education program students from Campbell 

Collegiate.  They've come here to visit with us for a while this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, accompanied by their teacher, Moira 

Lucas. 

 

We're just delighted to see them here and I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, on behalf of my colleague the member from 

Melfort, 21 grade 6 to 10 students from the North East 

Christian Academy in Melfort.  And they are seated in the 

Speaker's gallery.  They are here with their teachers Mr. Wilf 

Loewen and Loy Dahlsjo; chaperons Rhonda Berstad and 

Marlene Fedosoff. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them after question period to 

answer any questions they have about the procedure of the 

House or what they took in today.  And I'd ask all members to 

welcome them very warmly here today in Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you today a former constituent 

and dear friend sitting in your gallery, Mr. Peter Knelson from 

Saskatoon.  Peter is not only a keen observer of the 

Saskatchewan political stage, but I want to tell members that 

he's also an avid reader, and a regular reader, of Hansard.  So 

it's very good for him today to be here today and to see the 

proceedings live.  He won't have to read part of them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

MLAs vs CBC Hockey Match 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last night was hockey 

night in Saskatchewan.  I'm pleased to report on behalf of the 

winning coach, fans -- including the member for Regina North 

West -- and the government MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) team, the results of last night's hockey game. 

Notwithstanding the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) report, earlier today, that the game was close 

enough to be a tie, give or take a point or two, your MLA team 

thumped the CBC 9 to 8. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- It should be of interest the CBC drew its players 

from all across Canada, and even had ringers from other than 

the CBC.  While we, on the other hand, had . . . all players were 

MLAs, or at least liked MLAs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be an opportunity for revenge, 

Wednesday next at 10:15 in the Regina North West Arena.  We 

MLAs are so confident of our team's ability that we're going to 

take on an all-media team next Wednesday. 

 

Last night's hockey game, Mr. Speaker, was good fun and there 

was great sportsmanship displayed by both teams.  As a result 

of the free-will collection supported by fans and both hockey 

teams, Chili for Children was the clear winner last night -- 

$237 will help feed hungry children.  A big thank you to CBC 

and all who participated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial 2A High School Basketball Champions 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like to 

congratulate the Foam Lake Panthers.  They're now officially 

the provincial 2A high school basketball champions.  And not a 

single player is close to 7 feet tall.  These players rely on skill 

and not atmosphere. 

 

The Foam Lake Panthers, coached by Garth Anderson, won the 

championship game Saturday, March 19 in Regina.  The 

provincial tournament called Hoopla '94 took place within the 

walls of the Agridome this year to large, enthusiastic crowds.  

The final game pitted the Foam Lake Panthers against Clavet, 

with Foam Lake rising to the occasion and coming out 

victorious.  It was a well-fought battle by both teams, with the 

final score being a close 68 to 54.  Both teams should be proud 

of their achievements. 

 

Once again we see a fine mixture of academics and physical 

activities taking place in Saskatchewan.  We should all be 

proud that within this province our children can receive such an 

elite and well-rounded education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to once again congratulate all the 

teams, coaches, and schools involved in Hoopla '94 for their 

fine efforts.  A special honour goes out to the Foam Lake 

Panthers for their provincial 2A high school basketball 

championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Community Forests 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to comment 

on a conference that I attended last weekend, Friday and 

Saturday in Saskatoon, sponsored by the SOS Elms Coalition 

of Saskatoon on: backyard to boreal forest. 

 

This was a conference that looked at holistic and community 

forest practice, that was dedicated to exploring the ecological, 

economic, social, and educational aspects of community 

forests.  And part of the emphasis on community forest was to 

look at the urban forest in terms of dutch elm disease and what 

that means for our province. 

 

I want to say to members of the Assembly and the public, that 

dutch elm disease is a very serious concern in our province and 

that the government is committed to working with the SOS 

Coalition to look at the issue and to facilitate the addressing of 

the problem. 

 

I want to congratulate those who were responsible for it -- the 

president of SOS Coalition, Karen Taylor-Browne; Jack 

Walton; and all others who were involved.  The presence of 

Herb Hammond, forestry expert from B.C. (British Columbia), 

and people from across Canada at this conference, was an 

added bonus that made it a real first-rate, educational 

experience. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Drama and Music Festivals in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In my 

home community of Moose Jaw, one of the things that leaves 

the citizens feeling very proud of our community is the focus 

and attention that's given to our young people with the 

opportunity to develop their talents and their skills in the arts. 

 

In my home constituency, Mr. Speaker, at Peacock Collegiate 

this weekend, the regional drama, high school drama festival is 

being held, from which the winner will go on to North 

Battleford for the provincial final, which I might point out, Mr. 

Speaker, was won last year by Central Collegiate from Moose 

Jaw. 

 

But also last week and this week, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

two-week music festival taking place in Moose Jaw, which has 

given young people of our city the opportunity to -- in 

competition -- to display their talents in choir, band, 

instruments, and the remainder . . . remaining days, in song. 

 

It will be of special interest to members of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that the highest mark so far, a 96, has gone to the 

Moose Jaw Children's Choir, many members of whom were 

here as part of our opening for the reading of the Speech from 

the Throne two years ago at the Assembly. 

 

And I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out it will be 

absolutely no surprise to anyone in this Assembly that people 

from Moose Jaw, including the odd MLA or 

two, are known to have a song in their heart. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Destination Saskatchewan Award 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to recognize a big winner in the 5th annual TISASK 

(Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan) tourist 

awards.  The Saskatchewan Science Centre, which is located in 

the Wascana Centre and in my constituency, was awarded the 

Destination Saskatchewan Award in the attraction category. 

 

How attractive is it?  In 1993 the Science Centre attracted 

240,349 people from Saskatchewan and from all over the 

world.  Science centres are places where learning and fun are 

combined.  People of all ages can touch, participate, and get 

involved in science and achieve a measure of science literacy 

while being entertained. 

 

Some might think we are too small to support a top-notch 

science centre, but in five short years the Saskatchewan 

Science Centre has achieved a reputation as the best centre on 

the prairies and among the best in North America.  The Science 

Centre is a non-profit community organization, operating out of 

earned revenues and community support, with very modest 

provincial and municipal grants. 

 

I congratulate the board and staff for this well-deserved award 

and I encourage Saskatchewan citizens and corporations to 

support the continued development of the Science Centre.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Upkeep and Tourism Development Options for Historic 

Sites 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to report on an area of my 

constituency that few people in this province are aware of, but 

an area I'm sure many would be interested in. 

 

At a recent meeting in Frenchman Butte we met the MLA from 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster, from Parks Canada officials, 

Economic Development, SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 

and Resource Management), officials from the Government of 

Alberta, and most importantly, members of the Frenchman 

Butte museum committee. 

 

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the preservation, 

upkeep and tourism development options for the national and 

provincial historic sites associated with the 1885 Riel Rebellion 

in this area.  The 1885 north-west conflict represents a unique 

and important part of Canada's history. 

 

A large number of historic sites associated with the so-called 

third front of this conflict are located in 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

north-west Saskatchewan and north-eastern Alberta.  These 

sites represent a significant historical legacy of Canada's past. 

 

Artifacts have been found in this area that are believed to be the 

oldest in North America, Mr. Speaker.  There are 159 

registered archaeological sites in Fort Pitt, Frenchman Butte 

area, and 49 are considered to be of a significant nature. 

 

The people in this area have done an amazing job of preserving 

many of the sites already.  One would be remiss if I did not 

acknowledge Mr. Edgar Mapletoff.  Mr. Mapletoff has worked 

tirelessly with the surrounding first nations, Metis people, and 

local communities to preserve these very, very historical 

locations. 

 

I encourage all to visit this area.  You will be very impressed 

with the rich history that it has to offer.  On behalf of area 

residents, I encourage everyone to travel to Frenchman Butte 

just to view these sites.  You will leave amazed with what we 

have right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Jack Messer Lawsuit 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, on the news this morning we all learned that the great 

one has achieved another milestone in his long and illustrious 

career.  Yes, Jack Messer has now taken over his neighbour's 

farm. 

 

To the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, it turns out that 

one of the terms of the sweetheart deal that you made with the 

great one is that he is going to wind up owning the Dierker 

farm -- the farm that he forced his neighbour off of.  And 

something really stinks here, Mr. Minister, and it's not the cow 

barn. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm that Jack Messer will be taking 

over the Dierker farm as part of the settlement of this case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to make 

it clear from the start what the role of government has been in 

this.  We were named in a lawsuit by Mr. Messer with regards 

to a livestock operation of his neighbour.  We paid nothing to 

Jack Messer.  There's a potential settlement of $20,000, 

out-of-court settlement, which we would pay to the Dierkers to 

help with the assistance of moving the operation. 

 

This is not inconsistent.  It was based on the advice from the 

Department of Justice as an out-of-court settlement.  Because 

of the case, I think I could point out that in 1987 the members 

opposite paid 156,000 to somebody to move a poultry barn, 

which is a very similar situation.  And that, Mr. Speaker, are 

the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it 

seems that Jack Messer got so used to using government money 

to buy up farm land back in the '70s that he wants to continue 

that farming practice in his own operation.  What this 

settlement works out to, Mr. Minister, is a $20,000 subsidy to 

help Jack Messer buy more farm land -- Jack Messer's own 

personal land bank program, Mr. Minister. 

 

An RM (rural municipality) map indicates very clearly that 

there was one missing link that he wanted to have, and now 

apparently he has achieved that objective that was standing in 

his way. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think that that's right, particularly 

considering Jack Messer's privileged position in your 

government?  Shouldn't Jack Messer have to reimburse the 

government for the 20,000 subsidy that he received to help him 

take over his neighbour's farm? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact 

that Mr. Messer works for the government and despite the fact 

that the opposition obviously dislikes Mr. Messer, he has a 

right, as any citizen, to court remedies.  When I was at the . . . 

attended the pre-trial hearing, the judge was very concerned 

that Mr. Messer was not getting the same deal that an ordinary 

citizen was because we were scared of the political fallout and 

were not treating him equally as we would treat anybody else. 

 

This is a perfectly legitimate court settlement -- out-of-court 

settlement -- to deal with a lawsuit and it certainly was no 

special treatment whatsoever for Mr. Messer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

recently introduced a discussion paper on legislation to protect 

farmers from nuisance lawsuits.  You did that just a few days 

ago.  One of the stated intentions of that Bill is to prevent 

farmers from being unjustly forced to defend themselves 

against unwarranted lawsuits.  And that's a good idea; we 

support that, Mr. Minister. Since most farmers don't make the 

kind of money that Jack Messer makes and simply can't afford 

to go on with lengthy legal battles, it might be simpler and less 

costly just to simply give up and move away. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you or anyone in your department suggest 

that settlement of the Messer case be put on hold until this new 

process was put in place, so that Jack Messer and his neighbour 

could settle the dispute on an even playing-field?  Mr. Minister, 

is there anyone in your government who's not afraid to stand up 

to Jack Messer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, that suggestion is 

somewhat ridiculous.  It was Mr. Messer who was suing us.  

We were being told by the courts to appear in court.  I was 

summoned myself to the pre-trial hearing.  It wasn't an option 

that we had. 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

I'm glad that the member supports our consultation on a new 

Bill.  We have many problems and we think there's a huge 

potential for increase in livestock in this province.  And one of 

the things we need to increase livestock production is to make 

an environment where farmers and their neighbours can live 

and coexist without ending up in court, and that's what we 

intend to do.  It has nothing to do with this particular case 

which was before the courts, and I think was . . . as a matter of 

fact, this case was well in the works when the opposition was in 

power.  They were dealing with Mr. Messer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

I understand that Jack Messer is currently in Costa Rica.  And I 

guess after taking over the Government of Saskatchewan, it's 

only natural that his next goal would be to take over a small 

Latin country. 

 

Mr. Minister, I realize that you have reached a legal settlement 

with Jack Messer.  That is not in dispute.  But, Mr. Minister, as 

your colleague, the Minister of Justice, will tell you, there is 

law, and then there is justice.  And if justice is not being done, 

then it's okay to break the law. 

 

Mr. Minister, regardless of whether the settlement in the 

Messer case is a legal settlement, do you believe that it is a just 

settlement?  And if not, why don't you make a retroactive 

change in the law and force Jack Messer to reimburse the 

$20,000 settlement?  Why won't you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure I follow 

either the questioning or the logic that's going around here.  I 

don't know whether they would suggest that we should go back 

to 1987 and say that the money that they paid out to move a 

poultry barn was unjust or unfair.  But really, this was clearly 

an out-of-court settlement which was in the best interests of the 

taxpayers of the province.  And I think we settled it . . . the very 

best interest that we could for the Saskatchewan taxpayers, and 

that was our whole objective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Sales Tax Exemption 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Justice.  Mr. Minister, this week you informed us of a new legal 

principle: there is law, and then there is justice.  I guess that 

means when a law is unjust it's okay to break that law.  And 

apparently you have declared yourself the almighty arbiter of 

justice in this province over and above the law. 

 

Mr. Minister, we can think of a number of laws that 

Saskatchewan people are terribly . . . that think they're terribly 

unjust.  So why don't you take this great power that you've 

espoused and give them a break and take those laws and break 

them as well? 

The town of St. Walburg and other communities near the 

Alberta border have asked for an exemption from their 9 per 

cent PST (provincial sales tax) because they are losing too 

much business to Alberta.  Now the law says they must pay the 

PST.  But you don't want the laws to stand in their way, do you, 

Mr. Minister?  Will you declare this law unjust as well and see 

to it that these towns are granted their tax exemptions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite will know that ever since there 

has been an education and health tax in this province there has 

been one exemption only from the paying of that tax and that's 

the community of Lloydminster.  And the reason for that 

exemption is quite clearly that the border goes right down the 

main street. 

 

I, of course, have met with the community of St. Walburg, have 

heard their concerns, understand them, and have some 

sympathy for them.  But unfortunately their situation is quite 

different than Lloydminster and I think when push comes to 

shove they understand that as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Surplus 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) is running a surplus.  We 

would like to see that money paid out to farmers. 

 

Now legally the farmers are not entitled to this money because 

of the coverage levels.  But, Mr. Minister, there is the law and 

then there is justice.  Mr. Minister, will you use your powers of 

justice to override the law and pay the GRIP surplus out to the 

farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there is law and there 

is justice and then there's Tory arithmetic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We should pay out a projected and 

possible surplus right now just in case it accrues because we 

should never, ever have a program that had a surplus in it, and 

we should do this right now, even if that's not what the program 

calls for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that's a rather ridiculous suggestion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Woolco Decertification Vote 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Justice. 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think members on both sides can't 

carry on a conversation when their colleague wants to ask a 

question.  And I'd ask all members to please give him an 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the Minister of 

Justice:  Mr. Minister, some weeks ago the employees at the 

Moose Jaw Woolco asked you to grant them a decertification 

vote.  They said . . . The law said that you couldn't do that and 

you couldn't interfere with the independent panel.  The law said 

that the matter was up to the Labour Board. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, there is law and there is justice.  Mr. 

Minister, will you see that justice is done and grant the 

employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco their decertification vote 

so that they can stand a better chance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With respect to this issue, which is 

now about nine weeks old and has been extensively reported in 

the paper, let me assist the member with it. 

 

As the facts were, there was a hearing before the Labour 

Relations Board.  And everybody agrees upon the law.  The 

law is that if a majority of employees want to decertify, they 

have that right.  The only function of the Labour Relations 

Board was to determine, is there a majority?  Was it voluntarily 

given? 

 

After hearing evidence for eight days and considering the 

matter for a few weeks thereafter, the Labour Relations Board 

determined that those conditions did not exist. 

 

So I say to the hon. member, the Labour Relations Board 

considered it fully, determined that those conditions did not 

exist, and so the matter rests.  I don't think there's any 

disagreement in this case on what the law ought to be.  There 

may be a disagreement with respect to the board's decision on 

the facts, but that's quite a different matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ministerial Assistants' Pay Raises 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government's ministerial 

assistants received a hike in their salary scale of about 12.5 per 

cent on average.  Some MAs (ministerial assistant) have 

received raises in excess of 40 per cent, sir.  They also get an 

additional pay raise every year, Mr. Speaker, because of their 

salary scale. 

 

Now I know they have a salary scale, so legally they're entitled 

to that money, Mr. Premier.  But there is law and then there is 

justice, Mr. Premier.  Mr. Premier, most Saskatchewan people 

think that your MA pay hike is unjust.  Will you use your 

powers of justice to override the law and retroactively rescind 

those salary hikes?  Will you do that, sir? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

respond to the member opposite and I want to remind him 

about what the Minister of Agriculture said about their kind of 

numbers. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that there never was an increase for 

ministerial assistants.  The members opposite know that; the 

Liberal Party knows that.  The only increase of any significance 

that has happened in this legislature in the last two and a half 

years is a 37 per cent increase in the personal salary of the 

Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

Now if we want to talk about law and justice, Mr. Minister, I 

will ask the member from the Liberal Party whether she would 

agree there would only be justice if some steps were taken to 

roll back her personal increase in her salary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Binding Arbitration 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, the Premier is quoted 

as saying that your decision to ignore the law was based on the 

fear that it would set a precedent for other groups the 

government will soon be negotiating with, like 7,000 

government employees.  Has your decision now set a precedent 

that allows you to overrule future binding arbitration decisions 

with government unions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- First, Mr. Speaker, today is the day for 

Tweedledee.  Yesterday was Tweedledum's turn.  Hand the ball 

back and forth over there as to who's going to attack what 

issue. 

 

What you have to do on this matter, Mr. Speaker, as I said 

yesterday, is make up your mind on what side of the issue you 

are.  Are you in favour of giving the judges a 24 per cent 

increase or not?  If you are, you simply pay it.  And I take it 

from past statements and from that question that the member 

would favour the payment of the increase. 

 

If you say that we can't afford that increase, then you have one 

choice and one choice only and that is you have to reach back 

and change the law.  It's as simple as that.  There's no other 

course permitted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you in 

favour of binding arbitration or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I'm going to treat that as a serious 

question.  Although I'm not certain why I should, I'm going to 

do that out of deference to my friend. 

 

It has long been my position, Mr. Speaker, that binding 

arbitration is not a preferred option.  It is the very last resort.  

And that collective bargaining ought 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

to be done at the table and not by the imposition of some third 

party who makes a decision that the parties themselves should 

make.  That is my general position.  So I think I've answered 

the member's question. 

 

But I do want the member, the next time she stands up and 

comes at us with this sort of question, to declare herself on this 

matter of a 24 per cent increase and to do it very clearly.  And 

just to aid her, Mr. Speaker, we'll be having a vote in a few 

minutes in this House and I ask her not to leave but to declare 

herself at that time where she is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gaming Revenues 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions are 

for the minister of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, I want to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Will the government members 

please come to order.  I think that outburst is simply not 

necessary.  Order.  Well maybe the Premier could come to 

order too . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No it certainly won't.  

Well I will tell the Premier that he will get three warnings just 

like anybody else.  And that's all I will give him. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I want to encourage your 

government to rethink its approach to gaming.  I believe that 

you've taken an industry with great potential and that you've 

made some serious mistakes.  But there is also time to correct 

things if you're willing to listen to people. 

 

Mr. Minister, gaming experts say that there is a grave danger 

when governments take too much money from local economies 

through gaming.  And your government plans to drain $100 

million out of local economies through VLTs (video lottery 

terminal). 

 

So precisely what evaluation are you doing to determine 

whether Saskatchewan can afford to have this kind of money 

extracted from our communities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I thank the member for the question, and I want to say 

in the outset that it's easy to understand her reluctance to 

continue her questions to the Minister of Justice because quite 

clearly she's unwilling to put forth her position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member opposite that she knows 

full well the process that happens with respect to budgeting and 

where dollars go that government raises with any source of 

revenue; that they are put into the Consolidated Fund and 

delivered back through programs, with health, with respect to 

education, and other programs in this province to service the 

programs that the people of this province demand, whether that 

be gaming revenue or whether it be tax on fuel or whether it be 

personal income tax.  That is the process, and that is how 

money is returned back to the communities. 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is incredible that this 

member, who would stand up now and suggest that we 

shouldn't be taking revenue from video lottery terminals, was 

the same member who in the last session was encouraging us to 

hurry up because we were losing 50 to $60 million in revenue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, we've communicated with 

many hotel owners across Saskatchewan.  Over 90 per cent of 

Saskatchewan hotel owners who responded to our survey said 

that your government is taking an unfair share of VLT profits.  

Those same hotel owners at the recent hotel association 

convention asked you to consider raising the local operators' 

share of VLT money to 25 per cent of what your government is 

taking.  Mr. Minister, will you agree to do that?  Will you agree 

to divide the pie more fairly and increase their percentage to 25 

per cent of what you're taking from their customers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, firstly I'm going 

to ask the member to table her survey and I'd be interested to 

know how the survey was funded as well. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker: I met with the hoteliers just 

the beginning of this week at their annual convention.  And I 

want to say to you that they did in fact ask for an increase of 

the percentage of the VLT revenue; they asked us to increase it 

from 15 to 20 per cent. 

 

And I want to say as well to the member that no self-respecting 

hotelier wouldn't ask for an increase.  But the fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, we are putting some $15 million into the hands of the 

hospitality industry through the video lottery terminal program.  

It has in fact saved, we believe, a lot of rural hotels from 

bankruptcy.  I want to suggest that we indicated to them that we 

feel it's a fair portion of revenue and that we have no intentions 

at this time of increasing the amount. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, VLTs were introduced in 

rural Manitoba two years ago and the effects of VLTs on rural 

Manitoba charities who used to sell break-open tickets was 

devastating.  In fact the Manitoba government has to set up, 

and has set up, a break-open compensation fund which paid 

over $500,000 to those very charities this past year.  Now that 

there are thousands of VLTs all across Manitoba, the fund has 

been expanded to charities to compensate the cities as well as 

the rural areas. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are tremendous losses being experienced by 

Saskatchewan hospital foundations, by legions, by church 

bingos, and by others whose fund-raising revenues are being 

destroyed by your government's gaming competition. 

 

Will you commit today to establish a fund to compensate 

Saskatchewan charities for the money 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

that they are losing because your government is competing with 

them in gaming? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 

member for that question and let me answer it in this way.  She 

might want to talk to her Liberal cousins in Quebec who are 

taking all of the revenue from gaming. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, she is well aware of the fact 

that the bingo revenue to charities has increased from last year 

to this year from $18.8 million to over $22 million.  She stands 

in this House -- and there's more money for the hoteliers, 

there's more money for charities, there's more money for 

judges. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, where does she think all of this money is 

going to come from?  Can the Finance minister just reach out 

and grab it out of the air?  On one hand she supports our 

balanced budget initiatives, but on the other hand, on a daily 

basis she stands in this House and asks us to spend, spend, 

spend. 

 

I say to the member from Greystone, you can't have it both 

ways.  You can't get control of the fiscal situation in this 

province and spend as you would encourage us to do.  I say this 

is the highest form of duplicity that has ever been displayed in 

this legislature, and you should be ashamed of yourself and be 

honest with the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Salaries Recommendations 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my hon. 

colleagues have brought up numerous examples of laws and 

legislation brought forward by the government opposite, which 

many people believe are unjust.  Their causes and their real life 

concerns are every bit as substantial as the political concerns of 

the government members.  Yet they must and will abide by the 

law as set out by the government.  And that is the point.  There 

can be no one above the law, or there is no law. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, when 

there was a question of impropriety involving the David 

Milgaard case, you saw fit to refer the matter to the Department 

of Justice of another jurisdiction.  Mr. Minister, would it not be 

appropriate to refer this entire matter to another jurisdiction for 

an impartial and reasoned analysis?  Have you considered this, 

or are there any other alternatives other than breaking the law? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- So Tweedledum steps back into the 

breach here. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the minister knows that 

that term certainly doesn't add anything to the question period 

and I wish he would refrain from referring to members in that 

fashion. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member knows that no 

one is above the law.  The member also knows what the issue is 

here.  I've said it often enough but let me say it again; let me 

say it slowly and clearly.  The question is, whether or not you 

think judges should get a 24 per cent increase.  If you do, just 

do nothing but pay it.  If you don't, you have one choice and 

one choice only, and that is to reach back and change the law.  

There is simply no alternative. 

 

Now that's not a question of being above the law.  It's a 

question of us standing in our place in view of the result and 

saying, this Assembly, this government, made a mistake.  We 

are bound to remedy it and there is only one way to remedy it.  

Your question implies you favour the 24 per cent.  We're going 

to find out in a few minutes, we're going to find out in a few 

minutes whether you do or not.  So please don't leave the 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, yesterday you rejected accepting 

your Minister of Justice's resignation.  You said there wasn't a 

warranted . . . the issue didn't warrant that.  Mr. Minister, my 

colleague just pointed out that other jurisdictions have been 

used by your government. 

 

Your minister is under significant public pressure in the area of 

the White Bear casino issue, with what has come out in the 

media there.  Your minister is under significant public 

suspicion because of the judges issue.  Mr. Premier, don't you 

think it would be appropriate, given that this minister is in the 

glue in a number of areas, that you would refer to another 

jurisdiction and take the initiative of taking the suspicion off of 

your Minister of Justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for that question but I want to tell the leader, as I 

want to tell the Assembly, if there is any evidence, proof 

positive, that that question is ill-founded and wrongly directed, 

it is what we have seen in this spectacle which has gone under 

the guise of question period, where both the Conservative and 

Liberal caucuses skated around this issue of whether or not 

they support the 24 per cent increase for judges. 

 

They tried everything including this last question.  I say to the 

Leader of the Opposition that in May of 1991 when he was a 

member of the cabinet and the then attorney general, Gary 

Lane, overturned a commission which you set up, giving 15 per 

cent to the judges, that was okay for you -- 15 per cent at that 

time.  He broke his word and you were part of government that 

broke the word. 

 

That was okay then.  Why did you do it?  You did it because 

presumably you said it was not in the public interest at a time 

when we were in dire straits of getting our finances in order. 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

Here it is, we're doing the same thing at 24 per cent, and now 

you've changed your position.  Where do you stand?  Do you 

stand with the little guy?  Do you stand with the working 

person?  Do you stand with the single mother?  Do you stand 

with the farmer?  Or do you stand with the judges and 24 per 

cent?  You're going to have a chance to vote on that in just a 

few minutes.  We stand with the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 45 -- A Bill to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Child and Family Services Act be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 -- A Bill to amend The Provincial Court Act and 

to enact certain other provisions 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact certain other 

provisions be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:13 p.m. until 2:22 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Lautermilch 

Van Mulligen Calvert 

Thompson Renaud 

Wiens Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Shillington Draper 

Anguish Whitmore 

Koskie Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Kowalsky Cline 

Mitchell Scott 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Cunningham Stanger 

Hagel Kluz 

Bradley Knezacek 

Koenker Jess 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle  

- 39 

Nays 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd McPherson 

Toth Bergman 

Britton  

- 11 

The Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to repeal The Agriculture Development 

Fund Act 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  At this time I would like to ask the 

Minister of Agriculture to please introduce the officials who 

have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me today I have Dr. Hartley Furtan who is the deputy minister, 

and Mr. Martin Wrubleski. 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if I can get the cooperation of the 

members to perhaps move away from the officials and the 

minister and carry on their conversations elsewhere so we can 

conduct the business. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, and welcome to your officials, particularly to Hartley.  

Last time I saw him was, of all places, in the Hague arena 

during the course of the winter. And the only thing actually, 

Mr. Minister -- don't get worried here -- that we have in 

common is that we both particularly appreciate one of the 

individuals that plays for the Hague Royals, and that's what 

brought us together at that time. 

 

And so we are looking forward to having a somewhat 

enlightening dialogue this afternoon regarding the repealing of 

The Agriculture Development Fund Act.  And I must admit, 

Mr. Chairman, I'm having a little bit of difficulty making a 

mental switch as it were, or mental shift from the activities that 

have gone on in this House the last half hour or so and trying to 

concentrate on a relatively less significant topic than we have 

just been dealing with. 

 

And I guess what that does though, Mr. Chairman, is 

underscores, underlines the concern that we have, as far as this 

opposition is concerned, with many of the directions that this 

government is taking.  A concern that we have about this 

government staying the course as it were, when a cognizant 

decision is made by the government, in cabinet, in caucus, that 

this is what we want; this is the direction that we're going; 

we're going to establish an independent commission and we're 

going to make that ruling binding. 

 

(1430) 

 

The problem here, Mr. Chairman, is that the confidence of the 

people I think is sorely eroded, whether it be the issue of 

judges' salaries or whether it be the issue of the Agriculture 

Development Fund that we're debating this afternoon. 

 

And so there's a much more significant issue before us 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

this afternoon than the relatively simple repealing of the 

Agriculture Development Fund.  Because, Mr. Chairman, I 

know what the minister's going to get up and answer to the first 

question that I'm going to ask, and namely the question is, why 

are you repealing the Agriculture Development Fund?  And 

he's going to say, well it belongs back in Agriculture and it's 

not going to affect the programs being offered because it will 

still continue in the general parameters of the general revenue . 

. . Consolidated Fund. 

 

And quite frankly, Mr. Minister, under normal circumstances, 

under normal operational modems, I might buy that.  But given 

the track record, Mr. Minister, that your government literally 

on a daily basis exhibits, is such that it brings into serious 

question your desire and indeed your motivation to live up to 

what you say you're going to do.  We see that on a daily basis, 

on high-ranking members of your government.  That the people 

of this province are just saying, whoa up, I don't know if we 

can believe them, I don't know if we can trust them, I don't 

know if that's really what's going to happen. 

 

And I recall approximately last year at this time when the 

Minister of Health was sitting in your position where there was 

going to be a repeal of SADAC, Saskatchewan Alcohol and 

Drug Abuse Commission, where that was also taken out, as it 

were, a separate entity and rather rolled into the massive 

bureaucratic structure of the Department of Health, where the 

likely case is that it will never see the light of day again, 

certainly not in recognizable form.  Because once it gets rolled 

into the Department of Health, it gets lost in the shuffle. 

 

Now I know that you're going to get up, Mr. Minister, and I'm 

assuming that you're going to commit yourself to continuing on 

with research and development in agriculture.  But it will just 

be where it belongs, which is in the general coffers within the 

Department of Agriculture as opposed to a separate entity 

where it sticks out, where it can be evaluated, where it can be 

seen much more readily than lost in the big shuffle of the 

massive Department of Agriculture. 

 

So I'm just going to say to you, Mr. Minister, that when you do 

get up and give those answers, I want you to expound 

somewhat and give me a level of comfort and give those 

farmers a level of comfort that indeed agriculture is still 

significant in your mind and in that of your fellow colleagues 

over there, that indeed agriculture is the backbone of our 

economy.  And that's an overused expression, Mr. Minister, but 

you and I both recognize that, I know. 

 

And so if we're going to continue to develop agriculture, if 

we're going to meet the objectives as laid out by some of your 

plans, by some of your prognostications, then indeed the 

diversification that can occur can only occur if there's a proper 

support for the research, development, marketing expertise, and 

the projects and the innovativeness that is inherent within the 

people of Saskatchewan, and particularly in the farming sector, 

that that cannot be jeopardized. 

And I won't stand for it and the farmers of this province will 

not stand for any move on your part to roll everything back into 

the Department of Agriculture and get lost in the shuffle and in 

the end find out that there has been a significant decrease. 

 

Now there are other areas that we're going to be touching on.  

What is this going to do . . . We'll get to them later.  What is 

this going to do, for example, to private input into this process?  

Is this going to stimulate private enterprise by continuing to 

facilitate and continue to be involved?  Is this going to make it 

harder for that to happen?  There's a whole host of questions 

that I and my colleagues want to ask you on this feature. 

 

So firstly, Mr. Minister, I would just want you to get up and 

describe for us as best you can the rationale for taking this 

move and feeling that you have to repeal The Agriculture 

Development Fund Act.  Could you do that for us please, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it's 

welcoming that the member opposite understands basically 

what we're doing and even why we're doing it, and I don't know 

what I can add to that.  We are bringing it under the 

department.  There will still be an independent board that 

makes decisions on individual projects. 

 

I think we are committed to research and development.  In fact 

one of the things that we did that I think is different than what's 

ever been done in this province in the past, is we've developed 

a strategic plan for agriculture.  We think that we need to move 

in a direction and not be doing ad hoc programs and ad hoc 

research. 

 

We wanted to have research that has a strategic direction to it, 

and that is what we intend to do.  We have a commitment to 

research.  I think this will still be in the budget book. It's not 

going to be hidden; it will still be there to see.  We're moving 

from roughly 11 million to $12 million in ag research. 

 

This is not something that's new. This has been under the 

department for a year, has been working very well in the past 

year. And all we've done is -- we still need to use the private 

industry and individuals to help us make decisions on projects 

-- but all we're doing by bringing it into the department is be 

sure that we've got our research focused.  We don't have 

unlimited dollars.  And we want to focus it so that we can move 

ahead with the general plan for agriculture.  And that is the 

whole purpose of repealing this Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Maybe that's a 

good place to start, is by asking you to explain some of your 

comments.  You said that you want it focused by the 

Department of Agriculture.  By that I would suppose, and 

correct me if I'm wrong, you're telling us that you want to 

control it.  You want to have control of where those dollars are 

spent rather than the committee that's doing it. 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

There was another comment that you made that caught my 

attention and you said you didn't want this ad hoc approach.  So 

correct me again if I am wrong on the second point now, and 

that is that the logical conclusion for listeners to draw from that 

is that there has been up to now an ad hoc approach to R&D 

(research and development), and therefore you want to focus it 

and control it and be able to say, yea, nay, yourself.  Is this 

what you mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that is not what we mean in 

terms of controlling it.  All we're doing is setting out a mandate 

and focusing which are, after all, taxpayers' dollars, into 

research.  It's going in a general direction that's going to be 

helpful to what everybody else in the province is doing in 

research, and to have it coordinated with the universities and so 

on. 

 

We still have an ADF (Agricultural Development Fund) board 

and on that board, I can list you the people on it; Hartley 

Furtan, the deputy who is here today; Gary Wellbrock, Don 

Russell, Meg Claxton, Alesa Verreault, Eugene Lee, Betty 

Althouse, and some department people who sit on the board. 

 

So that board still makes the decisions on individual projects 

and there is no political interference.  And I don't want to get 

into, not only the ad hoc approach, but the political interference 

that was exhibited with the ADF fund previous to our election. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, what difference does it make in 

terms of being able to control it?  You want to control it, you 

say.  You want to be able to focus it.  You don't want the ad 

hoc approach, and we'll get back into that subsequent to the 

statement that you just made.  But why would this not be 

possible under the existing format of ADF where it is, as 

opposed to rolling it into the Department of Agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, Mr. Chairman, I don't 

think it's any easier to control or manipulate when it's part of 

the department than it is when it sits out separately. 

 

The whole purpose is the strategic plan that we all need to work 

on.  And if the department is doing initiatives and spending 

money in certain areas, then we think the research should also 

be coordinated in those areas.  And I think if the department is 

wanting to do an initiative that promotes ostriches or whatever, 

then I think the research in the province should also be focused 

in those same directions.  And that is all we're trying to do. 

 

You keep using the word control; we use the word focus.  All 

we want to do is have a mandate that everything that we do in 

this province and all the money that the taxpayers spend on 

agriculture has a direction and a plan to it.  And we can't afford 

to be having one hand spending money here and the other hand 

spending money in a different direction.  And all we're doing is 

trying to coordinate and plan some strategic direction for the 

industry in this province. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for acknowledging the fact 

that you, as Minister of Agriculture, want to control the ADF 

fund.  That's what you have just said.  You said the Department 

of Agriculture is going to have some strategic plan in mind -- 

focus, if you prefer your words -- so that you know what 

direction you want to go, what parameters are going to be 

allowable in so far as the funding is going to be concerned. 

 

Now you are saying that the department is going to control that 

direction.  But if the department controls the strategic direction, 

you control the department, so what you want now is an order 

for the ADF fund to be rolled into the department so that 

absolutely the board of directors are going to have to kowtow 

to the direction that you have determined and imposed upon the 

department in so far as your focus is going to be, Mr. Minister. 

 

That is why I submit to you that what you are doing is taking 

them under your umbrella, under your wing, and you are the 

one now that's going to be able to direct the direction in which 

R&D . . . the Agriculture Development Fund is going to be 

following. 

 

Are we not saying the same thing?  By me having my version 

of it and you quoting your version, are we not saying the same 

thing?  One is a little more flowery than the other. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I'm not sure 

which one of us is most flowery, but I think that the direction 

that you . . . the spin that you want to put on it is that we want 

to control and politically influence this, and that certainly is not 

the case. 

 

All the expenditures are still approved by the board, not by the 

department and all we've done is moved it a little closer to the 

department where there will be more coordination and that the 

board knows what the department is doing and the department 

knows what the board is doing. 

 

This strategic plan that we've put forward is not my plan.  It's a 

plan that we, over a whole winter or more of consulting and 

talking to farm groups and farm meetings all over, put together 

-- a strategy that the players in this industry think we can head 

in and that, I think, we need to all work towards the same 

direction. 

 

And I think, other than some members opposite, I think 

generally the agricultural producers and the industry in this 

province is onside to move in that direction, and that's all we're 

attempting to do. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh, I would question that last statement, Mr. 

Minister.  I think where the commonality lies is that all 

producers and the opposition recognizes the significance of 

R&D.  And what I'm trying to determine here this afternoon, 

Mr. Minister, and to ensure ourselves in the comfort level of 

the listeners and the farmers and the people that are involved, 

that you indeed also have that commitment. 

 

And if I was assured of that, then we could be talking 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

about some of the few little details of the implementation of 

this and then we're on our way.  But that's what I want -- to put 

your feet to the fire for this afternoon a little bit to get a very 

succinct, decisive commitment on your part, and this is the 

manner in which we are going to be going around it. 

 

Now let's take a look a little bit at the logistics of how you plan 

to implement this.  So everything is now going to be directed to 

you as Minister of Agriculture.  Does this mean that every 

application will be coming to the Department of Agriculture 

before it arrives on the doorstep of the board of directors to 

make the decision?  Is there going to be a screening process 

whereby the board of directors is going to be able to look at 

those that you want them to see? 

 

What mechanism is in place for applications to arrive directly 

at the board of directors' doorstep as opposed to the Department 

of Agriculture, where indeed there is some jeopardy as far as 

some of these applications may be . . . (inaudible) . . . because 

they will arrive with your officials first and you.  So explain 

that process to me. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that 

now we're getting some place.  As to the first question, is the 

commitment of my commitment and this government's 

commitment to research in agriculture, I can give you every 

assurance that that is very strong. 

 

I think one of the things that we're saying in our ag strategy is 

that while a provincial government cannot necessarily afford to 

bail out producers to the tune of billions of dollars for price 

supports and so on, that we are very strongly committed to 

research.  And I think there are all kinds of examples, for 

instance in the lentil field, where we're being very successful.  

And the reason we're being very successful can be directly 

related to a relatively small amount of dollars put into research 

and the varieties that Dr. Slinkard developed and so on. 

 

So if you're asking for a commitment from myself and from our 

government to research for agriculture, I can certainly give you 

that.  We have a very strong commitment to research and 

development.  And I think you will continue to see us, as funds 

become available and more and more emphasis placed on that . 

. . I think that's a role a provincial government should be very 

involved in. 

 

As to the mechanism, every application goes to the board.  We 

do not remove any.  They don't go to the department first; they 

go to the board.  The board makes a decision on them.  So we 

do not and I do not see applications until after they're approved.  

So there is no political screening or any other screening of 

applications; they all go to the board. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I take some heart in what 

you just said, that you have that personal commitment.  And I 

respect you for that and I'm going 

to take you at your word.  I also hope that your impact around 

the cabinet table is such that you make your feelings not only 

heard but also that people will listen to you that indeed monies 

will become available for this particular fund on an ongoing 

basis. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, would you indicate to the House at this time 

what amount of money is going to be spent in ADF fund this 

coming year -- what has been spent this year, since we're 

almost at the tail-end of the year, and the projected amount. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the amount for last year, the 

estimated amount is 11.909 million.  The amount for '94-95 is 

12.11 million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's an increase, on the surface at least.  I 

don't know what kind of machinations go on in auditors' books 

and so on, but I'll assume then that there is an increase. 

 

Your commitment then, Mr. Minister, is that that 12.11 million 

will be spent '93-94 and it will be spent on ADF projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  The number, you said '93-94, 

that is basically I believe spent or being spent as we're winding 

down the year with only a few days left.  But yes, the 12 

million will be spent on research. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I noticed another comment, Mr. Minister, that 

you made during your previous answer -- not this last one -- 

and you said that this will continue as funds become available.  

And to me, that's the scary statement.  And I want you to 

perhaps give me a comfort level here that that was almost like a 

slip of the tongue, that this is not going to be an out for you to 

spend less in the future than what you are spending now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe that what I said -- at least 

what I meant to say -- is that there will be increases in research.  

We will spend more and more of our budget on research as we 

go into the future.  I think, you know, we are tied to many 

programs and direct producer-support programs, which at this 

time are very, very necessary and it becomes difficult to take 

money out of producers' pockets to put it into research.  But as 

we progress, we certainly would expect to be spending a larger 

portion of our budget and more actual dollars on research as the 

years . . . as we progress. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In your second 

reading speech, on page 454 of Hansard, second paragraph, 

last sentence, you say: 

 

We have made some changes to improve the effectiveness 

of our research funding. 

 

That sounds great.  I was wondering if you could perhaps give 

me an indication of how you have done that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, one of the 

things that we've done is we've greatly 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

streamlined our administration, which is what we've been 

trying to do in all areas. 

 

Just in regards to research, ADF is not the only money that's in 

research.  In this budget there's $1.35 million for a beef 

development fund which will also be research money.  And 

there are, as you know, money going to universities and other 

places. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about private clients' involvement in the 

ADF?  How is this new structure going to affect their 

involvement?  Because going over your second reading speech, 

I noticed you're saying that: 

 

. . . (the ADF) Fund Act brings closure to a decision made 

in the spring of . . . ('93) to simplify and improve the 

delivery of agricultural research and development funding.  

Clients have been dealing with the new administrative 

structure, and . . . I'm pleased to report are finding it to be 

a major improvement. 

 

Can you elaborate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the 

administration has been reduced from 17 people down to 7 and 

that seems to work better, I guess, maybe because they deal 

with fewer people and it moves quicker.  But that's basically 

what happened in administration; we greatly reduced it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Another apparent reason for your rolling this 

together into Ag and Food is that it's going to reduce the 

administrative costs, particularly extra audits and so on, that it 

can be rolled into the one audit.  What was the audit fee for the 

ADF fund the previous year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The audit fund was around $8,000, 

or the audit fee, I should say. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Rolling it together into the Department of 

Agriculture and Food, what do you project the cost to be, the 

auditing of that portion?  What's the cost saving, the ultimate 

cost saving? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't think there will be any 

added cost when it's in.  It would just be one more line for the 

auditors to deal with, and it would be none or very little added 

cost to the audit there.  So basically the savings would be 

$8,000 or very close thereof. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that auditors get 

paid by the hour? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is not a 

huge amount of fund.  If you have to audit separately and set up 

and go through a separate set of records, that certainly takes 

hours.  And whether or not there is some additional hours or 

cost, we would have no way of sorting out.  We get charged for 

auditing the department and they don't give us a separate bill 

for how much they spend on each particular budget line. 

But there would be really very little added cost, in our opinion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the reason I'm pursuing 

this is that obviously when an auditor looks at the size of the 

operation, the estimate or the contract that you can sign is 

based upon the size of that operation.  And if the ADF is going 

to be rolled into it, it's going to increase the size and, I would 

suggest to you, it's going to increase the amount of cost to the 

department.  Now I will acknowledge that that may be less than 

if this was a separate entity. 

 

And the only reason I'm bringing this forward and challenging 

some of your statements is because you were the one that 

initiated the issue as a positive, that it's going to be saving 

money.  And I'm just saying to you, well how much?  If you 

thought it was significant enough to raise as one of the 

motivations for this development, then I suggest to you that 

you must have had a fairly specific figure in mind, a fairly 

major figure in mind to make it worth your while to mention it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well it's interesting that earlier this 

afternoon $20,000 was a very major figure and now 8,000 is 

insignificant.  But the audit may well cost us a few more dollars 

as we contract in the future.  But I think, again on 

administration, auditing was certainly only one portion of it.  

Reducing the number of employees from 17 to 7 is certainly a 

major cost saving. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know why you 

would want to get involved with the lord of the flies once more, 

after we were doing so well in this discussion.  But $20,000 I 

submit to you, given to Jack Messer, is not in the same 

category, is not nearly in the same category as $6,000 given for 

a legitimate reason for the auditor.  And that's what we're 

objecting to, Mr. Minister.  It's not necessarily the 6,000 or 

$8,000 for the audit.  It's not even the $20,000 for Jack Messer.  

It's the matter of law and justice. 

 

And most people in the world can't have it both ways.  It is 

only your Minister of Justice in your cabinet that is able to 

accomplish that, and that's by the might of your majority.  So if 

we want to divert and start talking in those terms, we're going 

to be here a long time and I'm quite prepared, because that's a 

topic I love to talk about.  So don't bring it up again unless you 

want to discuss it.  It wasn't me that raised that issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, the assets and the liability of the funds are 

transferred to the General Revenue Fund, you stated in your 

adjourned debate, second reading speech.  Could you indicate 

to us what the general health of the fund is, where we're at, how 

many outstanding bills are there, how much money is left?  Is it 

all going to be used up by the end of the year?  And later on we 

can get into some of the . . . 

 

And I'm going to give you a chance to beat your own breast 

here for a little while, because I'm going to ask you, what are 

you the most proud of, what the ADF has done over the past 

year.  You've spent $11 million. 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

Let's give the audience and the viewers and the listeners a 

chance to hear what kind of bang they are getting for the bucks 

that you've spent.  So why don't you highlight some of the 

major events of the past year in ADF after you've answered the 

budgetary question that I've asked you. 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, as to the amount of 

money that was spent, we came into the year with the 

carry-over of $1.7 million in the fund; we will be leaving the 

year with approximately $100,000 in the fund.  So the fund is 

not bankrupt but we are spending the full amount, basically the 

full amount of the money. 

 

As to some of the work that the fund has been doing, we've 

done a lot of work through strategic research program at the 

university.  We have money that's gone to Ag-West 

Biotechnology, which is one of the very much up and coming 

industries and is fast becoming a centre of excellence in 

Saskatoon. 

 

We've spent some money . . . ADF money has gone into 

ICAST, which is an International Centre of Agriculture Science 

and Technology and has . . . its main function is to take 

research and turn it into applied businesses.  And that has been 

very successful in many cases.  We spent money on soils 

accord through ADF, projects that are helping to produce soil 

conservation and improve our soils in the province.  Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the . . . or Mr. Chairman.  My question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  And I wonder if you would provide for me a list 

of those companies from the private sector that have been 

involved in ADF, either through grants that they've given, 

donations they have made.  Would you have a list of that for 

me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have that here but we 

certainly can provide that for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have a dollar value that you would be 

able to provide so we can talk about it a little bit?  Because I 

have a few more questions I want to ask regarding that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- You're asking for a dollar value of 

donations . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order, order.  Could I ask the two 

members that are carrying on the conversation to take it behind 

the bar, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- You were asking for the list of 

companies that have made donations, or contributions, to ADF 

and the amounts?  Yes, we can get . . . we can do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What I'd like to have, Mr. Minister, is a 

volume of dollars.  Is it $500,000, is it $800,000, is it 

3 million?  What kind of a contribution have the private sector 

made to the ADF fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We're not aware of . . . the officials 

are not aware of any money that's been directly contributed to 

ADF.  There are projects that are done with matching funding 

and that's a different story.  But there are no . . . From our 

knowledge, and we stand to be corrected, but there would be a 

very small amount of money that would be contributions made 

from private sector to the ADF fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And what's the value of the dollars that are 

joint ventured by individuals within the framework of the 

Agriculture Development Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we didn't hear that 

question.  I'm sorry. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The question I have is how many dollars and 

matching dollars did individuals or corporations provide 

through ADF to ADF for research or for demonstration 

projects?  Can you give me that dollar value? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It would be very difficult for us to 

put that together.  Almost every project that ADF puts funding 

into is cost shared in one way or another.  Some are shown; 

some we're not even sure of how much the individual private 

company puts into the project.  We really wouldn't even have 

that number.  Some we would know; some we wouldn't. 

 

Almost of them are not funded 100 per cent by ADF.  They're 

funded by other groups or by companies, so it would be very 

difficult for us to put together a number of . . . really the 

amount of private money that goes into research.  It certainly is 

a large amount and probably exceeds the amount that ADF puts 

in in many, many cases. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, do you think there's any risk 

that you will not have this money be put down . . . made 

available through individuals to provide these demonstration 

projects or research projects?  Is there any reason to believe 

that you will not be getting them as voluntarily as you were 

before because you are taking it out of the Crown corporation 

and putting it into the Department of Agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we haven't found any 

difference and don't expect to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In one of the Bills that we just went through 

here, the universities of Saskatchewan are just putting together 

Crown corporations dealing with research projects.  And my 

understanding of that is there is some significant hurry to this 

because one individual is prepared to put $500,000 to research 

providing it can have some independence from the government.  

So the government is putting a Crown corporation together 

dealing with the universities. 

 

Now on one hand, you're saying that if individuals are prepared 

to make a donation, depending on the size, we will provide a 

Crown corporation to deal with that. 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

On the other hand, here we have a Crown corporation that is 

researching and doing all of those same things -- people are 

putting in thousands and hundreds of thousands . . . And 

perhaps, as you said earlier, if you're putting $11 million in, the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan are perhaps matching 

that.  And yet you disregard their involvement in that way and 

then say, on the other hand, in the universities, we're going to 

give you a Crown corporation to handle all this for a 

contribution by an individual of $500,000. 

 

Now will you tell us how you weigh one against the other?  On 

the one hand, you say it's a good deal, and you set up a Crown 

corporation to do it, with all of the administration.  And on the 

other hand, you take and turn it around and say, no, we can't do 

it any more because it costs too much. 

 

How do you justify that when you come to cabinet, when you 

come to cabinet and talk to the Minister of Education as she 

brings forward that program, or the Minister of Finance as she 

brings forward that program, how can you justify . . . or how 

come you didn't justify the existence of the Crown corporation 

in relation to that?  They say it's a good idea and you say it's 

not a good idea.  Why do you say both of those things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we both have 

good ideas and that's not unusual for us to have many good 

ideas.  And I don't think one good idea counteracts another one. 

 

I think what the member is referring to is a Crown foundation 

which is basically to allow for donations to be tax deductible.  I 

don't know what that has to do with research and development 

and streamlining and reducing the number of employees from 

17 to 7 and saving money on administration, which I think is 

one of the reasons we're doing this, and I think it's working 

very well.  And I don't know what that has to do with some 

other Crown foundation that's been formed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then I guess what you're recommending to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, if you want a tax 

deduction for your research in agriculture, why don't you just 

give it right to the universities.  Is that what you're saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- People who put money into 

research do not put it into our fund.  They put it into their 

projects and that's always been the way it is.  And certainly 

we're not getting into a complicated argument on tax law. 

 

I think this works perfectly well for people who want to do 

research.  They apply to ADF and we provide some of the 

funding and they provide some of the funding and do research 

projects.  And the fact that we administer it more simply and 

cheaply is not something that most taxpayers complain about. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm not complaining about the fact that you're 

doing it.  I'm complaining about the fact that you haven't got 

any consistency.  Agriculture 

research can now go to the University of Saskatchewan, 

agriculture research can go the University of Saskatchewan in 

Saskatoon and say to them, I'm prepared to finance a research 

project or a demonstration project 50/50 with you providing 

you give me a tax break as well as the deduction. 

 

Is that what you're saying is good on the one hand, and on the 

other hand in agriculture, you don't give equal opportunity?  

My question to you then is also, do you want all the research to 

go to the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon for 

agriculture development?  Is that what the goal is in this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chair, I'm afraid the member 

opposite doesn't understand Crown foundations or tax law that 

well, and certainly I'm not in a position to argue the details of 

tax law.  This has nothing to do with research, and I see 

absolutely no inconsistency in setting up a Crown foundation 

which lets universities or hospitals receive funds that people 

want to donate to them.  And I don't know what that has to do 

with agriculture research and ADF becoming part of the 

department. 

 

Changing it from a Crown to putting it as part of the 

department has in my knowledge absolutely no effect on the 

tax breaks or the tax laws of anybody that's doing agricultural 

research in this province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you argued that way in 

cabinet, you wouldn't have got very far; that's why you got this.  

They said to you, cut your costs in administration; and so you 

said, okay, we'll get rid of the Crown corporation and the 

Agriculture Development Fund. 

 

And yet on the same tone, somebody else in cabinet argues on 

behalf of getting a fund established.  And that's what I'm 

talking about.  Why can't agriculture have the same benefit that 

others are going to have?  That's what I'm arguing for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is chasing something, and I'm not sure what it is.  We have 

nothing to do with the university setting up a Crown foundation 

in order to accept donations.  And that is something that they 

have asked us for, not something that the government has 

promoted. 

 

We are trying to do the best job we can in the Department of 

Agriculture.  And we have not reduced our ADF funding; in 

fact, it's up.  And we have reduced our administration and we 

are functioning better than we were before.  And I don't know 

what the relationship is to donations that go to a hospital 

somewhere to agriculture development in this province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the thing is that it's not 

only going to go to build a hospital, perhaps, or put some 

equipment in a hospital; that isn't the only place that this money 

is going to go into the Crown foundations of universities.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking about. 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

Why not give an opportunity for agriculture to the same extent 

that you're giving to an academic component in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which they have asked for for years?  Why don't 

you give that same benefit to agriculture in allowing them to 

donate or contribute to research in agriculture and 

demonstration projects? 

 

We have governments all over this country cutting back on 

research -- probably the best investment that people will ever 

make.  And we need to have more of that, Mr. Minister, not 

less.  And why not give people a break for putting that money 

into research and development in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know if it's 

even possible to set up a Crown foundation that would be a part 

of government.  I think those are a very specific function of 

universities and hospitals that are set up in order to receive 

large donations from individuals.  And I don't know what the 

relationship to that is to doing agriculture research. 

 

We still have the same tax laws that applied before we did this, 

apply now.  There are still some tax breaks around for research 

and development.  We still do matching projects with private 

companies and groups and organizations, and that hasn't 

changed.  All that we've done is streamlined and made this 

thing administratively run better. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much money have you moved out of this 

fund into the Consolidated Fund that was in reserve since you 

took office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- As I gave the numbers earlier on 

last year, there was the 1.7 million that was carried over and 

that only 100,000 carried over this year.  Going back years 

before that, we don't have that data here.  I can certainly get 

that.  But we don't have with us today going back in history 

beyond last year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You said that you had a hundred thousand this 

year and you had 1.6 million last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What I'm saying is there was $1.7 

million that wasn't spent at the end of last year; that was spent 

during this year and only a hundred thousand is now being 

carried forward for next year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So you carried forward $1.7 million last year 

into the program for this year.  In Public Accounts, it states 

there that in 1992 you put back 10.6 or 10.7 million and then 

you put back into the Consolidated Fund another 1.4 million.  

Can you verify that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have the 1992 numbers 

here, but we can certainly get them for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's what the Public 

Accounts state and you've been the minister here for, what, two 

years now?  You should be able to 

remember that you put that money back into the Consolidated 

Fund.  That amounts to about 11 or $12 million that you put 

back into that fund that was used by the people in that fund.  It 

was used by the people in that fund to do demonstration 

projects, to have a revolving fund for them.  And my question 

to you then is, why did you put that back?  Was that even in 

your mind then to rob this fund of the money and put it back in 

the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well if the member wants to go 

back in history, I certainly can't quote him numbers.  There was 

a freeze on spending in ADF as we reviewed the mandate of it 

and wound down projects that were in place.  And some of that 

money was paid back to the Consolidated Fund.  And as the 

member well knows, we had a couple of very tough budgets 

and we struggled in all areas. 

 

But I wouldn't want to from memory quote numbers back from 

1991 or 1992.  But there indeed was a freeze put on spending in 

ADF while we reviewed the mandate at one time.  And there 

was money that was returned to Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Shouldn't that, Mr. Minister, have gone in to 

pay for projects in research and demonstration?  Don't you 

think that there's value in research and demonstration?  Why 

didn't you put it into projects that would increase or enhance 

the agriculture component in research? 

 

And I could go through a whole list of things that have 

benefited from research in this province, to the people of this 

province.  And you took and put that money back into the 

Consolidated Fund.  Why did you do that?  That's the question.  

And why do you do this? 

 

That's a question that you should really answer to this 

Assembly because you were not only a minister at the time, 

you were Minister of Agriculture probably during the period of 

time when you did that.  You should have had a reason why 

you let it go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The reasons were quite simple, and 

I generated them earlier, that we had a freeze on as we 

reviewed the mandate.  We wanted to, as we did when we took 

over government, have a look at all expenditures.  We made 

some . . . as the member knows, money was in very short 

supply and we made some very tough decisions in a lot of 

areas. 

 

What I've outlined earlier is that we are increasing spending on 

research and development and we strongly believe that that is 

the route.  I don't recall whether I was minister of Agriculture 

at the time that those transactions took place, but be that aside, 

as a government we took a very prudent approach as we did 

with all spending, reviewed it carefully and we were sure that it 

was being spent on the right things and that we developed the 

ag strategy so that we know where we're going and what 

research we want to be doing in fact. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, just 

another short series of questions.  I have 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

in front of me here a letter from Herman M. Austenson who is 

the executive director for the Western Grains Research 

Foundation.  And this letter addressed to me is in response to I 

guess my initiative in sending him a copy of your proposed 

amendment in this Act of agriculture development, and his 

response to my asking him -- have you got any concerns; is 

there anything that we should bring up to make sure that all 

bases have been covered? 

 

And it's a relatively mild letter, Mr. Minister.  As you know, 

the Western Grains Research Foundation is there to encourage 

research into grain production, encourage research into grain 

utilization, and the marketing of it as well, the market 

development. 

 

Now they tell me that WGRF (Western Grains Research 

Foundation) provides research grants of about $1 million 

annually to do research work within the parameters of the 

prairie provinces.  And they are of course, very concerned what 

impact might result from your rolling of all of this back into the 

general revenues.  And I quote from the second-last paragraph 

of his letter.  He says: 

 

As for Bill 9, the main concern of the WGRF is that 

Saskatchewan Governments support of grains-related 

research be continued at current levels and not be reduced 

as a result of past and future voluntary contributions by 

producers. 

 

Could you give him that comfort level that that is actually what 

will or will not occur? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite before was asking me to give assurance that I wouldn't 

tinker with the fund and that we would let the board decide. So 

I don't know if I can do both of those commitments, but I 

certainly understand the concern that producers have.  And 

when they do check-offs they don't want us to withdraw our 

funding because they do do check-offs and give that funding 

then . . . direct that funding to another group that doesn't have a 

check-off, which they view as unfair.  And that's obviously . . . 

I think they have a very good argument. 

 

And certainly we're prepared to take that into account, and I'm 

sure that the board of ADF looks at that when they make their 

decisions about projects.  And I think they basically base their 

decisions on whether or not it's good research and whether or 

not it has a return for the province and not on the relative 

wealth of the group that's proposing to do the project. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I suppose the biggest concern there, Mr. 

Minister, would be that their research would still fall within the 

parameters of your focused research that you were talking 

about before.  And the reason I'm asking these questions at this 

point is not to reassure me but to reassure the Western Grains 

Research Foundation that that indeed is going to be the case.  

And we'll take you at your word then, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, and I again don't make any 

specific commitments that the board will 

allocate money to certain people, but certainly in our thinking 

we certainly take into account the fact and we certainly do 

really appreciate when producers do check-offs and contribute 

to research which not only benefits producers but benefits all of 

the province.  So we will certainly take that into account. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey 

Sales Act 

 

The Chair: -- I ask the minister to introduce any new officials 

that may have joined us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the only new 

official is Mr. John Buchan, who is seated behind me. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, and welcome to John here as well to assist you. 

 

The Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act is 

significant, maybe not in the wide scheme of the province for 

most people, but it certainly is for the individuals that are 

involved in the production of those commodities, and of course 

particularly the fruit aspect and the fruit production which has 

-- I think we're all very pleased -- expanded very, very rapidly 

in this province. 

 

In fact, back in 1947 when this Act was . . . the last time this 

Act has been touched, there was no such thing or no concern 

about fruit and fruit development in the diversification aspect.  

And now it certainly is, and it's a growing, booming industry. 

 

You don't have to go very far anywhere in Saskatchewan to 

recognize this fact.  I know in my area around Saskatoon we've 

got a whole host of businesses that have been developed, 

whether it's blueberries or whether it's strawberries or the berry 

farm that's been in the news quite a bit last year and so on, and 

RM of Corman Park also has had to wrestle with this new 

development and so on.  So I guess what we are on is a 

continuum where we've been somewhere one time but we're 

always going to be continuing on and so on, and this is part of 

that progression. 

 

I have been in contact with some of the people that are 

involved and they did express some concerns about this Act.  

And primarily it revolved around the larger issue of, all right, 

so you're going to amend this Act.  You're going to be putting 

in rules to include fruit, and as fruit develops still further so that 

there's an organized manner of marketing the fruit. 

 

Now when I say marketing the fruit in a organized 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

fashion, that can only be accomplished if there's some standard 

and if there's some recognized level to compare with, so that 

material coming out of Saskatchewan is going to have some 

kind of confidence level on the consumer that when they buy 

something of this kind of standard that indeed it's going to meet 

some kind of specific standard. 

 

(1530) 

 

And that's the concern that has been expressed to me by 

gardeners and people with green thumbs.  And they say, we 

want it; we want some kind of standardization not only in the 

vegetable aspect but also in the fruit aspect, so that there's a 

standardized set of regulations that can be gone to and that will 

help to regulate the industry. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, could you explain to me the process whereby 

this is going to be accomplished with this change in the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that's a very 

good question.  The member very correctly lays out the 

situation.  We have a new and growing industry that we think is 

going to need regulation and grading and so on if it's going to 

survive. 

 

What this Bill basically does is enabling and it will allow us to 

set up regulations.  And we will be consulting with the 

producer groups and others as we develop those regulations, so 

that they meet the requirements of this new industry.  This Bill 

basically will be enabling so that we can work with producers 

to develop the regulations that will be needed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you give me an idea of 

whom are we talking about.  Who are the fruit growers' 

association; who are the associations that will be working with 

your department officials to determine what the regulations are 

going to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is a fruit 

growers' association that has 40 or 50 members.  Most of the 

fruit in Saskatchewan is now U-pick and direct sales.  And as 

with the vegetable and honey, those are not likely to be 

impacted by this Act.  So it will become . . . the regulations 

become required when commercial production becomes reality 

and we start to get . . . the industry grows to the point where 

we're doing commercial production.  That's the point where you 

need to have some standards and so on, so that you can 

properly market the product. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A couple of questions resulting from that 

answer, Mr. Minister.  These 40, 50 members of the fruit 

growers' association, they are the ones that will determine that.  

What impact will their recommendations have?  Who will have 

the ultimate say as to what the regulations are actually going to 

be? 

 

And furthermore while you're on your feet on that one, you 

mentioned that this would not affect off-farm sales; farm gate 

sales are not going to be affected by any kind of 

standardization, by any kind of regulation saying that they must 

be so and so.  So whatever 

consumer . . . buyer beware, consumer beware; you go on, you 

pick; and this will not be affected in any way by what we're 

doing with this Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that would be on farm gate; 

direct sales will not be impacted.  We do not have regulations 

now for vegetables if it's a direct farm sale.  It's for commercial 

production. 

 

And I guess ultimately government has the power to pass the 

regulations, but we would be doing . . . our people and John 

Buchan here and others will be talking with the association and 

particularly the commercial growers who are the ones who will 

be needing the regulations and developing them and 

implementing them as they're required. 

 

Really this is a bit of, I think, foresight on our part and on their 

part because, you know, we've got this enabling legislation now 

so that we're able to go ahead as we need it.  And we think this 

industry is going to grow very rapidly and be commercialized, 

and we will need those regulations fairly quickly. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What about the implementation?  What about 

the inspectors?  Who's going to enforce the regulations?  Do 

you have a set of inspectors out there that have been trained, 

that know what's going on?  And how many have you got; 

where are they; how is this whole Act going to be enforced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- At the present time, the inspectors 

who operate under this Act are the federal inspectors, the 

inspectors of Ag Canada.  And we simply name them as our 

inspectors when they do the inspection on vegetables.  So we 

assume that that would be the same situation for fruit. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is that, Mr. Minister, a fee for service, or who 

would be paying for these federal inspectors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The federal government pays for 

that.  They just carry us along, because they're inspecting under 

their regulations and they just add ours into it.  So there isn't 

any cost to us. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Really?  Well why don't they do that for my 

hogs, I think would be a legitimate question for me to ask, 

because I think that we pay for that ourselves.  That's a 

question I'll be asking you later on in further estimates then. 

 

The inference was made by you that the fruit industry is a 

growing industry and that it's basically, I suppose, at its infancy 

and we can only expect greater things; and that there will be 

standardization of product to assist in the marketing of the 

products, perhaps interprovincially and, who knows, 

internationally. 

 

What support do you have for this growing industry in terms of 

expertise and in terms of advice, marketing strategies, and so 

on?  Do you have any input?  Are you working with this 

industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have a horticulturist on staff 

who works very strongly with his people.  There's 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

a strategic research component with native fruits at the 

university, which we support.  And also our marketing branch 

has been working quite extensively with these people. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, one of the other comments that 

was directed to me was that this is a growing industry, this is an 

industry with potential.  But it is also an industry that has 

relatively few support services for it.  The comment was made 

to me that we are really almost by hand to mouth, almost 

seat-of-the-pants kind of an approach -- lack of manuals, lack 

of directions, these kinds of things. 

 

And there was a request made that I pass this on to you to see 

what your reaction would be in terms of can we improve the 

support services, either through our rural service centres, 

agrologists, whoever's out there who can add extra support to 

this industry.  Could you comment on that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  We certainly 

see this as a growth area and are trying to make it one of our 

priorities.  It's one of the challenges.  It's also one of the 

exciting parts of agriculture, but it's one of the challenges for 

our people in extension is that we have so many new industries 

developing -- game farming and ostriches and things like fruit 

and vegetables, which are very new to us. 

 

And we certainly appreciate the comment that there's more that 

could be done, and we certainly want to make this one of our 

priorities because we believe it is a growth area. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Good, great, that's wonderful because now 

comes the clincher question, and that's this: these individuals 

have identified a problem as they see it in their industry and 

that's lack of support services, information, these kinds of 

things that would assist potential producers.  Now we have just 

also gotten a commitment from you in the previous Act that 

ADF will be there, R&D will be there.  Can you see this as 

being a very likely candidate for help out of the ADF in terms 

of developing marketing strategy, production strategy manuals 

that would help these people in their new industry and help 

them to realize the full potential of the industry that they're in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly that's a good question.  

We have, the ADF has, funded a saskatoon manual and I think 

we've just approved ADF funding to produce a raspberry 

manual.  So certainly we are moving in that direction. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for that assurance, Mr. 

Minister, and I would just encourage you to continue on on that 

path and I thank your officials for helping us this afternoon.  

That's the basic questions that I would have. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to repeal The Agriculture Development 

Fund Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey 

Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read for a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1545) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 34 -- An Act 

to amend The Animal Protection Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 35 -- An Act 

respecting Agrologists be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

agenda shows that it's Bill 34, An Act to amend The Animal 

Protection Act. 

 

My comment on this one, Mr. Speaker, is going to be the same 

as it would have for the other one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. That's what they call a cover-up.  I guess the significance of 

these are not necessarily as high a priority on my mind as some 

of the others; not to denigrate the significance of these to the 

individuals involved. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, we have consulted with those third-party 

groups that are going to be affected by these Acts.  In fact, as 

far as the agrologists are concerned, we have met with 1,100 

agrologists in this province, through their representative, I 

might add, Brenda, whom we had in our caucus and did a very 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

wonderful job of explaining the situation as far as the 

agrologists see it. 

 

And quite literally, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we do have 

specific questions directed to both of these Acts, but instead of 

me spending time talking about them here and then redoing it 

again in the Committee of the Whole, I think the time of the 

legislature would be better served at this time to let these pass 

second reading, and we will deal with the specific matters in 

the Committee of the Whole at some future time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

haven't got the times quite in my mind, but I do know that 

approximately a month or so ago I asked, in the form of 

motions for returns, a question which simply was this: what 

were the expenses for a few of your back-benchers, specifically 

the member from Biggar, the member from Humboldt, and the 

member from Pelly, yourself, and the former minister of 

Agriculture?  And I see you're busy getting the answer ready, 

so maybe we're going to . . . this could be my lucky day, it 

looks like. 

 

I asked for motions for return, and your House Leader decided 

he was not going to answer that question and he put it into the 

never-never land where questions go to die, which is the 

motions for returns (debatable). 

 

Subsequent to that I asked that same minister in question 

period, where did these people go, what did those folks get that 

money for?  And he said he didn't have the answer; the proper 

thing was to ask for it in estimates. 

 

Now we are in estimates, and I believe it was a week ago or 10 

days ago, I asked you that very same question and you said you 

didn't have the answer to that question; that you would provide 

it for me as soon as you could.  And 10 days later I stand in my 

place, you sit in your place, I ask you that same question once 

more: what did these folks get paid for; what were their 

services; under whose recommendation were they paid; where 

did they go; and what kind of service did they render to the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

So it's somewhat like pulling hens' teeth here and I cannot 

understand why I cannot get a simple answer to a simple 

question.  So I'll give you that opportunity now; it looks to me 

as if you've got it today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, it is the 

member's lucky day.  I will send across the answer.  This was, I 

think, quite properly a question for 

estimates and we now have the answer here. 

 

I'll try to find the particular breakdown of the ones that were 

asked for.  One was the member for Biggar and he had attended 

Grain World '93 in Winnipeg; total cost of the trip was 

$782.78.  The breakdown was $530.72 to commercial air fare; 

lodging, $90.06; taxi, $12; and registration, $150. 

 

The member from Pelly went to Ottawa to attend the Canadian 

Federation of Agriculture conference on my behalf. The total 

cost is $1,274; commercial airline, $589; car rental, 135.19; 

meals, 136.96; lodging, 373.92; parking, 22.40; gratuities, 

16.53 -- for the total of $1,274. 

 

And the other one that I believe you asked for was the member 

for Humboldt. Attended the opening of Western Canada 

Testing Incorporated, which is the offshoot from PAMI (Prairie 

Agricultural Machinery Institute).  Travel of a personal vehicle 

. . . the total cost, $258.95; personal vehicle, 129.84; meals, 

56.71; lodging, 68.40; gratuity, $4 -- for a total of $258.95. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- He went to Portage la Prairie. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the amount for the member from 

Pelly was a car rental of $124.  Could you indicate to us where 

this particular conference was in relation to the airport; $124 

seems fairly high for a one-day conference. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have the 

hotel.  I think the agenda's attached to the answer that I sent 

across.  This was a three-day conference and presumably it's 

somewhere away from the airport, but I don't have the location 

of it here on the agenda so I can't answer it. 

 

The Chairperson: -- I'd like to ask for the cooperation of the 

members to free up room for the officials in the back and to not 

get into discussions around the officials.  The officials are here 

to participate in the business of the committee which is the 

consideration of the estimates.  If members have other business, 

please take it away somewhere else outside the Chamber, or 

away from the officials.  Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have one very simple reaction to what we have just witnessed 

over the last four or five weeks, and it's simply one of 

aggravation.  I'm extremely upset and annoyed at the games 

that you're playing.  I asked you a very simple question, 

beginning with your House Leader, for this type of information 

and it's been five weeks coming. 

 

Now for a government that says we're open and we're honest 

and we're forthright, what in the world could have prevented 

you from answering the question? 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

First of all it was asked in motions for returns as a legitimate 

question.  It was put in writing.  It was brought into the House.  

You knew about it.  It was there.  You had the information; 

you've had this information. This is not collected just now, 

recently.  You had this information the last time I asked it, and 

yet you will not be forthcoming with it. 

 

So I want you to explain to me what is the rationale of your 

House Leader, and I know that's difficult to figure out 

sometimes.  But why would he not have simply written out the 

answer, as is normal, as is the procedure in this House?  We ask 

a written question because we don't want to tie up the time of 

the House, so it's written and he responds. 

 

And out of the 200-and-some questions we asked last session, I 

think we got a response from about 40 of them.  The rest hit the 

dustbin.  I can't figure that.  You've got nothing to hide.  Why 

wouldn't you give me this information? 

 

And if you're not willing to give us information when you have 

nothing to hide and we have to pull it and drag it out -- good 

grief, what about the other information that you don't want us 

to know?  That's why the public is sceptical, Mr. Minister.  And 

I don't think it was your doing that you didn't give me the 

information, quite frankly.  You're not that type of individual. 

 

No, I don't think he is.  I don't think he is.  I have a great deal of 

respect for him.  We've had some good discussions, we've had 

some good disagreements, and we've worked well on certain 

issues -- when it comes to wildlife and so on.  And I respect 

you for that.  But I'm upset, annoyed at the procedure that 

we've had to follow through to get this information. And for the 

life of me I don't know why you're doing it to yourself, quite 

frankly, Mr. Minister.  So I'll give you an opportunity to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I appreciate the opportunity 

to respond.  I'm not sure why it wasn't answered immediately as 

a question, although I think the judgement was . . . and as you 

know, we have very limited time to get that together.  The 

judgement was that it was properly a question for estimates.  

And you were right, I had this information in my possession 

shortly after it was asked. And it is my fault for not having it 

here, and I apologize for that, not having it.  When I looked in 

the information last time, I expected to have it, and we didn't 

find it, so it didn't get here until today. So I certainly take 

responsibility. 

 

I agree that this is information that certainly is your right to 

have and should have been here when it was first asked in 

estimates.  It's a proper question for estimates, was what the 

House Leader told you; and you asked it here and didn't get it.  

I apologize for that.  We have it here today.  We don't have any 

information we don't want you to have, so it's all the same. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I welcome 

your officials here today. 

Mr. Minister, can you give a bit of an overview as to what role 

ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) is 

playing today and what the short-term goals are?  And surely 

with a corporation of this size you'd have a two-year, a 

five-year plan, a ten-year plan.  Can you give us a complete 

overview of those plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well ACS certainly is playing a 

role that it's played for many years as a farm lender.  We 

continue to lend to farmers to help support the industry in the 

province.  We continue to have a rather huge portfolio of loans 

that we inherited, that we are struggling with. But we continue 

to loan, as we always have, to help the agriculture industry in 

the province.  We target our lending to machinery and livestock 

and so on, and very little into land.  And that is what we intend 

to continue in this province. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, but what you're 

telling me is what ACS is presently involved in.  Could you 

give me some idea as to what you have plans for the future, a 

five- or ten-year plan.  Surely you have a plan as to where the 

corporation is going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we certainly 

intend for ACS to continue to be a lending institution and be 

part of our agriculture strategy. 

 

I think as we plan for the future, we need to take into account 

other lending institutions and what they're doing.  I think the 

fact that FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) is expanding their 

mandate may have some impact on ACS in the future as we 

struggle with the federal government to prevent too much 

overlap and duplication of services. And as well, what the 

intentions of banks and chartered banks and credit unions are in 

lending to farmers will have some effect on our plans for the 

future. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Chair: -- The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests.  Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, a group of 55 students from Sutherland School in 

Saskatoon from grades 2 and 5.  They're here to visit the 

legislature today and learn about the democratic process. 

 

And they are accompanied by their teachers, Yves Bousquet, 

Mrs. Miller, Mrs. Puroy, Mrs. Paul, Mrs. Martin, and Mr. 

Turcotte.  And they'll be watching the proceedings here and 

then I will be meeting with them for drinks and for a photo.  So 

I ask all members to welcome these guests to our House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, what you have just told me 

then is that any plans for ACS in the future are on hold.  You 

have no plans for the future of ACS until you get some idea of 

what Farm Credit Corporation and the other lenders are going 

to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't think that's a fair way to 

characterize what I said.  We certainly . . . we have a plan to 

play a role and to try to do strategic lending to help keep young 

farmers on the land and to implement our ag strategy policy.  

All I'm saying is that we need to be flexible in view of what 

other people are doing and what the need by producers is.  And 

so we must maintain a good deal of flexibility as we move into 

the future. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, have you given some 

consideration to perhaps winding down ACS?  Has there been 

any consideration of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly 

there has been some consideration of that, I think, as this 

government went through budgeting.  We have looked at every 

arm and every appendage of government to determine what its 

role is and whether or not it's absolutely necessary, and whether 

or not we can afford it.  We've certainly done a significant 

amount of downsizing in ACS and we certainly would see 

some downsizing into the future as some of the huge portfolio 

we have now out there is not likely to be replaced in full. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that 

you do have some plans for the future if you are winding it 

down?  Is that what I'm hearing?  You do or you don't have a 

plan for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've said, we have 

a plan and we continue to see it as a vehicle to lend to farmers, 

as a lending agency that is needed.  We're also saying that as 

we move into the future we will be assessing the role that it 

needs to play and whether that's a changing role or whether it's 

the same role as played in the past. 

 

And that will depend on other players in the field and we 

certainly . . . our goal is to be certain that there are funds 

available and capital available for the agricultural industry, and 

we provide that where it's needed.  And we don't want to 

duplicate and provide services that are not needed. But we 

certainly know that there is a need for capital in the agricultural 

industry, and ACS is prepared to play its part in that in the 

future. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, have you or your department 

had any negotiations, say, with other agriculture lenders as far 

as taking over certain portions or portfolios of ACS? 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have had 

preliminary discussions with a number of organizations about 

parts of ACS and whether or not there was merit in divesting 

ourselves of parts of it.  Those negotiations were very 

preliminary; we put those behind us.  It didn't seem to be a 

feasible alternative at this time and there are no plans for that at 

the present time. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell us what parts of 

ACS you're referring to and what other agriculture lenders or 

institutions that you had these discussions with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, Mr. Chairman, we would not 

be prepared to give the information as to who we negotiated 

with.  These were in a very preliminary sort of "what if" scene 

and they've asked us to keep it confidential, so we would not be 

prepared to disclose that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think I heard two 

different things.  You're at one point telling me you're in some 

preliminary negotiations, but before that you had said it had 

been looked at and decided not to proceed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is what I said, that we did 

some preliminary negotiations with some other institutions and 

decided not to proceed.  And that is now behind us, and they 

have asked us not to reveal the nature of negotiations.  And it's 

not ongoing, it's not ongoing.  The decision has been something 

that we just looked at very briefly and are not continuing with. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, I could agree 

perhaps you have a problem in discussing with us who the 

other players were, but you didn't answer the question as to 

what portions of ACS you had thought perhaps you should 

divest yourself of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, we didn't talk 

specifically about portions of it.  What we were looking at was 

the corporation and where there was areas of duplication and 

where somebody else might be able to deliver the same service 

in a cheaper and better fashion.  And that's what the 

negotiations were about, was looking at what the possibilities 

were.  And I guess what we concluded is there really weren't 

any possibilities because we are not now negotiating or talking 

to anybody. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Were some of these negotiations with the 

federal government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think in respect to 

the parties that we negotiated with, I'm not going to get into a 

list of who it was or who it wasn't.  I'm just saying that we're 

not prepared to reveal information that people have asked us to 

keep confidential. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you then tell me what, 

perhaps, loan portfolios you're looking at not 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

having within ACS, or removing from ACS? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, if you're talking about 

what we talked to other people about -- what we're looking at in 

the future for ACS -- I think some of the special loans are ones 

that are not likely to reoccur.  I think lending $1.1 billion out to 

farmers across the piece without any regard for need or security 

or repayment ability is not likely to happen again, and that's a 

pretty big chunk of what ACS is right now.  And that will wind 

down as those loans come due and are collected. 

 

That's probably not likely going to reoccur.  So that's one 

portion of ACS that's not likely going to be repeated in the 

future. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, do I hear you then saying 

that the part of ACS that you would like to divest yourself from 

would be the acreage loan that was lent out I think in '85 or '86? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not what you heard.  All 

I said was that we would . . . that that portion will likely wind 

down, and it's unlikely that we would do another loan like that.  

We are not trying to divest ourselves of any of it at this time. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So you have absolutely no plans in moving 

away from those loans that the farmers have with ACS -- no 

plans at all moving them to other lending institutions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- At this time we do not. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give me . . . well can 

you tell us how many dollars and how many participants there 

are in each of these loans, but in particular, the acreage loan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in the capital loans 

portfolio there are 6,495 clients.  Outstanding total 

$281,461,667. 

 

Under the livestock cash advance there are 9,206 clients.  Total 

outstanding of $84,640,392. 

 

On the production loan, there were originally 57,614 clients or 

approximately 18,000 who still have outstanding balances.  

And the balance outstanding on the production loans is 

$255,404,268. 

 

On the spring seeding loans, there was originally 12,559 

clients, approximately 800 that still have outstanding balance.  

The outstanding balance on spring seeding loans is 

$10,599,328. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give me a 

breakdown of how many of these loans, or how many dollars in 

participants, are in arrears for one year, two years, three years?  

A written response would be fine. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We will get this in writing for you 

if you desire.  But under the investment loans 

we have no delinquency. 

 

Under the livestock cash advance we have 1,758 clients who 

are delinquent and another 995 who are in recovery, which 

means that there are judgements or in court or something like 

that.  It works out to 19 per cent who are delinquent and 10.7 

per cent in recovery, and 70 per cent of the livestock cash 

advance is current. 

 

On the production loans, there are 65 per cent, 65.9 per cent, 

that are . . . pardon me, that's the clients who are paid up.  

Clients delinquent on production loan is 5,827 or 10.1 per cent; 

and in recovery, 2,599 or 4.5 per cent of the original clients. 

 

Spring seeding loan, we have 719 clients that are delinquent 

and 90 that are in recovery. 

 

And I think that's the . . . we can also put the dollar value on, if 

you like.  But we can send those over.  We can pick these 

numbers out and give you an answer in writing. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Yes, I would 

appreciate receiving that, just in writing would be fine.  And 

could you include how many foreclosures and what . . . where 

some of these people that are in arrears, where they are in the 

process.  Do you have that so you can give me, just in writing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Did you want the foreclosures by 

region, or they're in recovery, broken down by region?  Is that 

what you're asking?  Yes. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, a lot of these loans, you're 

lending to the farmers and ranchers at a lot higher rate than 

what the government is paying for their money on the money 

markets.  How much money -- I guess would be a better 

question -- how much money does ACS owe, who do they owe 

it to, and at what rate of interest do you owe that money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, our money comes from the 

Consolidated Fund but it's just flowed through.  They borrow 

the money and pass it on to us so that those loans are then in 

the name of the province. 

 

But it's the . . . in debentures there's 169.843 million; average 

interest that we're paying on that is 11.91 per cent.  We have 

$390 million in bonds.  The average on that is 10.23 per cent.  

So we have a total owing of $559.843 million and our interest 

cost is 10.74 per cent. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

how many regions make up ACS, and how have these regions 

been divided up around the province?  Is it by number of 

accounts or geographic locations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- ACS has five regions. It's 

geographic in nature, plus some consideration to client load 

where the regions are drawn. 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

Mr. McPherson: -- So each of the five regions have, what? -- 

one person in charge, or could you give me . . . perhaps you 

have a picture of what the corporate structure looks like and 

how it's controlled even, at each of these regions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In each region there is a regional 

manager plus two assistant managers, and in the office there are 

credit advisers. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Can you tell me . . . like each region would 

have the same number of management personnel, credit 

advisers or credit officers?  Are they equal? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the regions are basically 

equal; there'd be 28 to 30 people in each of the regions. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give us an overview 

of what the past board . . . in fact I would like to see who the 

members were on the past board compared to who is on the 

board of ACS today, and what role the past board played in 

comparison to what the present board plays. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, as the member 

opposite knows, we have rolled the ACS into the Department 

of Agriculture.  We don't have the list of the board members 

here.  I could do it from memory, but I . . . we can do it in 

writing; we can give you a list of board members, no problem.  

On the board now is the deputy minister, Hartley Furtan, and 

Dale Sigurdson who is the assistant deputy minister.  We no 

longer have a board made up of producers. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, what the 

past board did to participate in, say, the day-to-day decisions 

required to run ACS? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The past board met once a month.  

Their role, as much as any Crown corporation board was, was 

to be monitor of management, to make decisions with policy of 

ACS, or at least make recommendations of decisions for policy.  

This being a Treasury Board Crown meant that any decisions 

involving money, any policy decisions that had any financial 

implications, had to go through the usual routine of cabinet 

minister, Treasury Board, cabinet, caucus, and that whole 

routine.  But certainly they had some role in reviewing the 

policy of ACS. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So does the present board play the exact 

same role as the past board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No.  I think the board now is . . . 

the ACS functions very much as a part of the department rather 

than as a Crown corporation.  The board is still there 

nominally, but this is a reporting structure where the head of 

ACS reports to the assistant deputy, and the assistant deputy 

reports to the deputy and on up to the minister and through 

Treasury Board and cabinet, caucus, and very much as any 

other arm of government would do. 

Mr. McPherson: -- So then does the day-to-day operations of 

running ACS . . . Mr. Minister, that ultimately is in your hands, 

as far as who gets loans, who's hired, who's fired, and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, as the member wells knows, 

ministers don't participate in the running of day-to-day 

operations of government.  Just as lands branch and the 

decisions about who gets land and who gets hired and what the 

management decisions are in lands branch are done, that's the 

way they are done in ACS.  Norm Ballagh, who is head of 

ACS, will make decisions about management of the 

corporation, and the policy decisions are made in cabinet, 

caucus, and in here. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, my question then 

would be: does the present board make any of these decisions, 

or are all of those decisions left with Mr. Ballagh? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, the structure is very much 

as it is in the Crown corporation . . . or in the department, much 

as it would be in lands branch.  The manager of the lands 

branch is in charge of the day-to-day operation of the branch 

and decisions of importance may go up to his supervisor and on 

up through the chain to the deputy minister. 

 

So it operates very much the . . . Norm Ballagh, who is the 

head of ACS, runs the day-to-day operation.  He will certainly 

be consulting and taking direction as well from the board, 

which is the deputy and the assistant deputy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, so the present board, making 

up the deputy and the assistant deputy ministers, do they make 

any of the decisions as far as who gets foreclosed on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No.  Those are management 

decisions. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give us the list of 

how many employees ACS have in each of the regions in each 

of the departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we can give you that in 

writing.  As I said, there's 28 to 30 in each of the regions, and 

then there's head office. But we can break that down for you in 

writing. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And also, not 

just the regions, but how many employees you have in the head 

office, and I guess what changes have occurred in the last few 

years as far as number of employees.  If you could include that 

also. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we could. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Just so I have it clear.  Who then makes all 

the decisions regarding the approval of loans and settlements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Management approves all 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

loans.  Any settlement in excess of $125,000 will come to the 

deputy and assistant deputy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- All right.  So any loans that are over 

$125,000 are controlled out of your office, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not true.  What I said was 

any settlements over $125,000 will be brought to the attention 

of the board, which is the deputy and the assistant deputy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So I take it they would then make the 

decision, and not the president of ACS. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well it certainly comes to them 

with a recommendation from management, and their role is to 

review that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Are the loans and settlements, are they 

governed by a standard set of rules and procedures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, all settlements follow policy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Could you repeat that, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

sorry, I didn't hear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What I said was that all the 

settlements that are made are on the basis of a policy that we 

have. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Are there any deviations to those rules and 

procedures governing loans and settlements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, there aren't.  There certainly 

are all kinds of variations because of individual farm 

circumstances.  And basically our policy is to do this on a 

businesslike basis and recover the maximum amount of 

taxpayers' dollars.  So certainly there are no two farms alike in 

the province. The settlements on an individual basis may vary, 

but they all conform to policy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- So you could give me perhaps a list of how 

many exceptions and what sort of exceptions there are to the 

policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I can't give you a list because I've 

just said that we don't have exceptions to the policy.  We 

follow policy.  And as I say, they're all different.  Every 

settlement is unique and based on the farm, but they're all based 

on the same policy. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, to ensure quality of lending 

and settlement decisions, can you tell us what commitment to 

training staff that ACS has made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We do in-house training and 

upgrading of our employees.  We've recently had them through 

a course by mediation services and we had through another 

course on customer oriented interviews.  So we do attempt to 

upgrade our employees. 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Can you tell us 

what the roles and duties of the credit officers are? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The role of credit advisers is to 

appraise and give loans and to do follow-up and collection, the 

same as any loans officers would in a bank or Farm Credit or 

anywhere else. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, how many accounts do these 

credit officers administer on average in each region? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In the range of 4 to 500 accounts. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Can you tell me how many credit officers 

you have employed at present?  Well can you tell me how 

many credit officers were employed three years ago, two years 

ago?  I'd like to see just how many we have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have a complement of about 86 

credit advisers at the present time.  That hasn't changed a whole 

lot over the past number of years.  Most of the positions that we 

eliminated were in management and administration. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- How many positions are open, then, for 

credit officers in each region right now, or are there no 

positions open? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm told that at present there are 

about nine vacancies. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, can you give me the roles 

and duties of credit advisers?  I take it that that is another role. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, there's some confusion there.  

There was at one time both credit officers and credit advisers, 

and the credit officers were the collection people and the credit 

advisers were the people who lent it out.  That distinction 

doesn't exist.  We just have credit advisers now, so those were 

the numbers that I've been giving you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- They're one in the same at this point, Mr. 

Minister?  Can you tell me what the roles and duties of senior . 

. . Surely there's, like, senior credit advisers then, somebody 

who is overseeing the most of them, or all of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have a position of a senior 

credit adviser and those are people who have had more 

experience.  And what their duties are is to handle the more 

difficult cases and to help provide training for new people and 

so on. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, do you have senior credit 

advisers in each region, each of the five regions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes.  There are two of those 



March 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

in each region. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sorry.  I missed how 

many you said in each region. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm sorry.  There are two in each 

region. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Do you have any vacancies for any of 

these positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we don't have any vacancies at 

senior credit advisers. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Have there been some changes in that area 

in the last couple of years -- an addition to or some let go and 

others hired?  Could you give me a breakdown as to what 

changes have occurred. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- One senior credit adviser was 

promoted to assistant manager and then, of course, somebody 

else was promoted to his position. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, in the time left here 

I'd like to ask you a few Crop Insurance related questions. 

 

My understanding is that there is one employee left of the 

bunch that were terminated by your government in the spring 

of 1992 that has not been settled with yet.  And I wonder if you 

could bring me up to speed on that particular situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think, if we're right, the individual 

that you're referring to is negotiating a settlement.  It's being 

negotiated by his lawyers and our lawyers at the present time, 

and that's as much as I can say about where that's at. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the reason I ask is that 

almost all of the other employees that were involved have had 

their settlements arrived at a long time ago, and that this 

particular individual, for some reason, has not been dealt with 

and I would consider in a fair manner.  And I would like a little 

more detail as to why you can't arrive at a settlement with this 

individual when other ones were dealt with pretty well as a 

matter of course. 

 

What is particular about this situation that you don't want to 

talk about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well there isn't anything in 

particular that I don't want to talk about.  As you say, we had a 

number of people that were let go and the settlements have 

been finalized.  This one, I guess it's a situation of neither side 

being able to come to an agreement as to what a proper 

settlement is.  And as I say, it's still being negotiated and 

hopefully gets settled as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, can you tell me which legal 

firm is acting on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan 

and what legal costs you've incurred in this case from the time 

of the termination in May of 1992 to present? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Olive Waller is doing the legal 

work; that's the firm.  I don't know what the cost 

would be on the particular file.  We might be able to get that for 

you, broken down. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would be very interested in that, Mr. 

Minister, because my understanding of this case is that the 

individual involved was not a senior management position at 

all; it was someone who was quite a ways down the ladder.  

But in fact it would have been the type of case that normally 

would be dealt with by management, there would have been no 

problem; that people far senior to this individual were able to 

come to some kind of an agreement and move on with their 

lives.  This individual is under a great deal of both financial and 

mental stress because of this situation. 

 

And that's why I ask what particulars there are about this 

individual that make this case stand out, and why the taxpayer 

of this province is paying legal fees of a considerable amount, I 

would guess, over a two-year period of time, to terminate a 

fairly low-level employee.  There is something here not quite 

rational in the process, Mr. Minister, and I think I would like 

you to bring back -- because we're probably going to run out of 

time here -- more details to me of why your people can't come 

to some kind of a resolution in this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we have a very standard sort 

of severance package and I guess that obviously we've offered 

and it's not acceptable.  And I don't want to comment on it; and 

I don't know this individual or the case at all.  And we can try 

to get more information that we can bring to you and shed 

some light on it. 

 

But it seems to me simply to be a case of failure to come to an 

agreement as to what a settlement is. And obviously if it could 

be dealt with by management it would be. Obviously it wasn't 

able to come to a settlement, and therefore I think lawyers, as I 

understand it, are on both sides. And that's unfortunate.  But 

certainly I think we're dealing with the case as we dealt with all 

other cases. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just so I clearly understand, Mr. Minister.  

You've agreed to bring back the legal costs that have been 

incurred by your department in the prosecution of this 

particular item since the inception of the man's termination in 

1992 -- is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I agreed to attempt to get that 

information.  I don't know whether it will be available or 

releasable, but I certainly will endeavour to get that information 

if it's at all possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I believe that 

you have been made aware of this. I know the Leader of the 

Third Party has been made aware of this situation that this is 

the type of thing that I don't think the Government of 

Saskatchewan wants to really be involved in. 

 

Government is a very powerful organization when it wants to 

put all of its will and its ability to . . . (inaudible) . . . taxpayers' 

money together against an 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 1994 

individual.  And it seemed very surprising to me when this was 

made . . . when I was made aware of this situation, that here it 

would be two years down the road on a termination of an 

employee who was terminated for whatever reason -- I'm not 

sure -- but we can't seem to arrive at a settlement.  And I'm told 

that the individual is two years behind in his taxes because he 

can't pay his house taxes where he's currently living because he 

has no wherewithal to do so. 

 

And that's a fairly serious situation when government can use 

all of its resources to impede the solution.  And I think there 

has to be something awful drastic here, Mr. Minister, for you 

not to want to settle this situation.  So I'll look forward -- and 

leave it now -- and look forward to the next time that you're in 

the Assembly in your estimates to enlighten me and the 

Assembly more about this situation. 

 

I'll give the minister one more question for Crop Insurance.  I 

have a constituent who when he signed up for the GRIP 

program in spring 1991 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let me 

get the question off.  And at the time of his sign 

_up he also sent in a letter of termination with the 

understanding that that termination would occur at the end of 

the 1993 contract year. 

 

He was informed afterwards that because the government had 

changed the contract in 1992 that he would not be able to get 

out of the program as per his original declaration to Crop 

Insurance and is now in a very uncomfortable position going 

into the spring of 1994, having expected to be out.  His 

cropping rotations and patterns have changed significantly.  

Because of the number of specialty crops he's into, he is now 

facing a far higher premium load than anticipated because of 

those changes and finds it very unfair that his original 

declaration isn't being honoured.  And I also would appreciate 

some answers in regard to that when you next come into the 

Assembly. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 


