






















































Hansard: February 14, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 165 
 February 14, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
My first words must be words of welcome and congratulations 
to the newest member of this Assembly, the member from 
Regina North West who won the recent by-election. I know 
that she realizes that it is indeed a rare privilege and a rare 
honour to be selected by the voters of any constituency, but in a 
parliamentary system such as ours to serve in this legislative 
body — a body which has a great deal of history, lots of high 
drama, good debate about public policy . . . and I'm very 
confident that she will do do very well in representing the 
interests of her riding, the interests of her constituents, and of 
course representing the interests of her party. 
 
And on behalf of myself and my colleagues, those who have 
spoken and those who may not get a chance in this debate, I 
want to say welcome to you, and once again, congratulations. 
And I hope that your stay here will be a distinguished one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I must also note 
that, as the Speech from the Throne does, this is the 50th 
anniversary of D-Day and other important battles marking the 
end of the Second World War. It is important that we do not 
forget, that we do not forget not only at Remembrance, but that 
we do not forget those kinds of momentous events in history 
such as the one 50 years ago where men and women laid down 
their lives for the protection of freedom, for the defence of 
democracy — the ultimate sacrifice — those families right 
across Saskatchewan and Canada who served in that horrific 
and difficult time but who fought on the side of justice and 
freedom, on the side of democracy, and prevailed. 
 
It is their ultimate sacrifice which permits many of us today the 
freedoms in the Saskatchewan legislature and around the world 
to speak our minds and to do what we think is in the best 
interest of the people in the province of Saskatchewan and 
Canada. We should not forget; the Speech from the Throne has 
not forgotten. And as one member of this Assembly, I want to 
pay tribute to the families and to others who were involved in 
that very memorable and momentous moment in our history, 
the world's history. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I essentially have two parts to my remarks 
on this debate today. My first general approach is going to be 
an approach which will begin by borrowing from a quotation of 
that great parliamentarian, Sir Winston Churchill. Sir Winston 
once wrote: 
 

The farther backward you can look, (the farther backward 

that you can look), the farther forward you are likely to see. 
 

Those are wise words indeed. 
 

The farther backward you can look, the farther forward you 
are likely to see. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is a speech 
which talks of the future and which looks to the forward and to 
the future. And I would argue, is a speech that says that what's 
past is past; we're moving ahead; we're moving forward; that 
we have dreams — I'm going to speak about this — and these 
dreams are being realized, perhaps a little too slowly, but 
they're being realized. 
 
They're being realized by the people of Saskatchewan 
sacrificing in the way they've had to from time to time and by 
building on the virtues and the values which have distinguished 
our province from perhaps others in Canada — the values of 
cooperation, community, compassion, social and economic 
justice. 
 
But picking up Sir Winston's theme, I want to go back into 
history a little bit to sort of forecast what the future might 
bring. As has been noted in the Speech from the Throne and as 
many of my colleagues have outlined, 1994 is the 50th 
anniversary of the election of the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government of Tommy Douglas 
— 50 years ago a North American breakthrough. 
 
I think it's important to note that with that election in 1944, we 
began, as Saskatchewan people, the process of rebuilding and 
renewing after a period of devastation and despair occasioned 
by the Liberal government of the day. And I think it's also 
worth noting that in the 50 years since 1944, successive CCF 
and NDP (New Democratic Party) governments have governed 
for 34 of those 50 years. 
 
Thirty-four years in Saskatchewan in this legislature, with the 
support of the people, enacting Bills and policies to develop 
progress and to build this province; picking up where 
devastation was inherited; and building medicare and rural 
electrification; Canada's first Trade Union Act, an Act which 
was bitterly opposed by the Liberals of the day; the first Bill of 
Rights in Canada; public insurance; public utilities; parent-run 
day care; the Family Income Plan; the prescription drug plan; 
the children's dental plan; and one could go on. 
 
And above all, during those 34 years, exercising sound fiscal 
management, which provides the basis for all that progress. Not 
as a means to an end in itself, but as a means to a higher end — 
improving the quality of life for all of our citizens. Thirty-four 
out of 50 years is that history of compassion and community 
and economic and social justice. It all started in 1944 



166 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

 when we were called upon to pick up the pieces and start 
rebuilding. 
 
And we have been called upon subsequently. In 1971 we were 
called upon to rebuild again after seven years of again 
devastation by the Liberals between 1964 and 1971. 
 
And then we were called again November of 1991 to pick up, 
to rebuild once again after nine years of devastation, this time 
by the Progressive Conservative Party, now the official 
opposition. 
 
Seventeen years of those 50 years were assigned to either 
Liberals or Conservatives to run the affairs of this government. 
And what did those 17 years bring? What can we learn by 
picking up Sir Winston's thoughts of looking backward to see 
what the future might bring us? 
 
Well I want to touch on three areas as an example. First I want 
to talk about jobs and economic development, something whic
has always been a great test for Saskatchewan people, in fact 
anywhere on the North American prairie plain. 

h  

 
We don't have to go too far backwards to know what the 
Conservative government of the day, just recently defeated, 
what kind of a record it produced. Their jobs and economic 
development strategy is a landscape littered by the names of 
GigaText and Supercart and Joytec and Peter Pocklington and 
phantom furniture factories and phantom factories, and the list 
goes on and on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is not a question of making a bad 
investment or making a mistake. Any government can do that, 
any person can do that, anyone could so suffer. Rather, this was 
a policy over the last previous nine years, a policy which put all 
of the economic development and all of our job strategy, all of 
our eggs into one basket. It was free enterprise and it was big 
free enterprise at that. It was in effect directing money away 
from Saskatchewan and the progress of building steadily and 
surely and putting them into the hands of big-business 
operators outside of Saskatchewan and very often outside of 
Canada. Subsidies to big business while small-business people 
and working men and women and farmers held the bag. 
 
As a result, every man, woman, and child in this province will 
for years and decades pay and pay and pay for this kind of 
old-style, Tory-style economic development, so-called, which 
brought this province virtually to its knees. 
 
What about the Liberals' jobs and economic development 
strategy? Well here, Mr. Speaker, we have to go back a little bit 
further in the words of Sir Winston, back further in history to 
see what the future might bring. We did have seven years of 
Liberal government under the late Premier Ross Thatcher from 
1964 to 1971. 
 
It's interesting how it is said that there is nothing new under the 
sun. I have here in front of me the 1964 Liberal campaign card. 
 
Item no. 1, Mr. Speaker: 
 

A new Liberal government will turn its energies to the 
creation of 80,000 new jobs in its first four years in office. 

 
And how will it do it, Mr. Speaker? 
 

It plans to accomplish this by providing tax concessions to 
new industries or mines moving into Saskatchewan. 

 
Multinational, transnational mines which in fact moved in, in 
the case of potash, and flooded the market in potash; resulted in 
the United States anti-trust action, and virtually brought towns 
like Esterhazy almost to its knees before that situation was 
resolved after 1971. 
 
And how else are they going to do it? Well they're going to do 
it by: 
 

Promising to provide land at cost to new industries and to 
provide sewers and water on a local improvement basis and 
to make long-term loans available to new and expanding 
industries. 

It says in this 1964 approach. Which, by the way, the Leader of 
the Liberal Party currently in this House in the 1991 campaign 
that she conducted had similar tones and language. 
 
But what was the result? Not 80,000 jobs; no, just over 18,000 
jobs in four years — 25 per cent of their goal. And true to their 
big business — like the Conservatives — philosophy of putting 
all the eggs into one economic basket of development, they got 
into bed with the Parsons & Whittmores of New York, they got 
into bed with all of the large potash corporations of the world. 
As I said, they brought us to the point where we were on the 
verge of bankruptcy in communities during that period. And 
indeed it took a CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) government to come back 
in '71 and to start rebuilding, as it is taking us to do in 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on jobs and economic 
development we have had the benefit in this debate already of 
hearing the vision of the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader 
of the Conservative Party, and hearing the vision of the Leader 
of the Liberal Party, the third party. 
 
Today in 1994, it is the same words and the same philosophy 
and the same message. There is no difference between the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) and the Liberal plans in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, summarized bluntly and simply, their approach is 
this, and it's simple: the taxpayers take the risk; the promoters 
take the profit. We say it hasn't 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

worked, it won't work, and the people of Saskatchewan will not 
give the Conservatives or the Liberals a chance to return back 
to those dark days again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I want to talk about what we learn by 
going backwards, about what might happen in the future on tax 
policy. Again the recent history is fairly easy to understand 
because we're still labouring with fiscal and tax approaches 
which again, as I have said, have virtually bankrupted this 
province or almost bankrupted this province. 
 
In the 1980s we saw the spend, spend, spend approach of the 
Tories. And finally in 1987, I think it was, Mr. Deputy Leader, 
the magic year that the Tories understood that they could no 
longer finance their schemes, and they came in with a taxation 
policy. Well they talk about no taxes, but in 1987 they 
introduced an increase in the sales tax from 5 to 7 per cent, 
keeping in mind, Mr. Speaker, that they promised that they 
would eliminate the sales tax. 
 
They introduced a fuel tax of seven cents per litre. They 
introduced the flat tax, mindful, Mr. Speaker, of the fact that 
they promised that they would reduce income taxes by 10 per 
cent. They increased diesel tax to 15 cents per litre, aviation 
fuel tax from 2.9 to 7 cents per litre, a used car tax, a lottery 
tax, and on and on it goes. 
 
And by the way, we hear some debates about utility rates 
which, by the way, I think are in a different category than taxes, 
but leave that aside for the moment. From 1983 to 1991, as just 
one example, residential electrical rates rose by almost 60 per 
cent and farm rates by more than 50 per cent by that official 
Conservative opposition. 
 
The members of this House and the public would be well 
advised to keep in mind this kind of history and this kind of 
conduct. And they did it, I might add, Mr. Speaker, in their 
second term. In the second term when the chickens came home 
to roost, they piled on these taxes. And even at that, Mr. 
Speaker, for nine years, from 1982 to 1991, we ran a deficit, 
member from Regina North West, of a billion dollars each and 
every year. 
 
In other words, we spent a billion dollars more each and every 
year than we brought in by revenue on a government that had 
got drunk on its power, drunk on its authority, and sought to 
buy the voters and did so by allocating that money not to the 
people of Saskatchewan but to their big multinational, 
transnational corporations. We took the risk; the promoters 
walked off with the profits. That's where the money went. 
 
We look backwards to see what it might be in the future. You 
have to go back a little further to see what it might be like 
under the Liberals in the future, but there's no difference, Mr. 
Speaker. From 1964 to 1971, I read to you from the Liberals' 
platform promises about 80,000 new jobs and how they were 
going to bring in all these companies. Well let me read what 
else they're going to do. On taxes, do you know what they say 
they're going to do? They said in '64 they were going to cut 

sales tax to 4 and then eventually reduce it to 3; of course, that 
never happened. 
 
And what they did, like the Conservatives, just like the 
Conservatives, in their second term, the moment they were 
re-elected, they introduced a budget which to this day is called 
Black Friday. It's the budget that Davey Steuart — a person for 
whom I have a great deal of respect on a personal basis — 
today admits he had to introduce from under his desk because it 
had so many tax increases. 
 
The promises were one way, the taxes were the other way — 
sales tax up to 5 per cent; sales tax to accommodations, meals, 
and telecommunications; deterrent fees for hospitals and 
physician services. I remember that. And by the way, the 
promise that they campaigned on in 1964, Mr. Speaker, was 
this, and I'm quoting from their promise, quote: work to 
improve and expand the medical health insurance program. 
 
And what they did when they got elected was to try to kill the 
health plan by deterrent fees, was part of their taxation 
approach. Increase gas and diesel taxes, doubling the fee for 
drivers' licence, increase vehicle registration insurance 
premiums. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal legacy of that budget was a 
legacy of the highest set of tax increases in the history of 
Saskatchewan, not only to that time but to the history of 
Saskatchewan today. The largest. And they did it in the second 
term, right after they snuck by the election, much like the 
Conservatives. They did it after promising tax cuts, but they did 
it and they proceeded to tax like there was no tomorrow. 
 
You know, in this legislature we hear the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, and for that matter the Leader of the Conservatives, get 
up from time to time and say that Saskatchewan is so badly 
taxed. Well I would argue that, given the mess that we have 
inherited and given the attempt to balance reduction in 
expenditures with revenue in a sensible way, that our record is 
pretty good. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it's simply not true, it is not true what they 
say about taxation. Mr. Speaker, if you take into account 
provincial income tax, all tax credit and rebates, health 
premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, car insurance, 
telephone, home heating and electricity, as of March of 1993 
by family income, what do you see? 
 
You see the following. For a family of four making income of 
$25,000 a year, Saskatchewan has the third lowest of that 
basket of so-called tax increases. The third lowest. 



168 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

An Hon. Member: — Who's the highest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — The highest? Newfoundland, Liberal; 
New Brunswick, Liberal; P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), 
Liberal; Nova Scotia, Liberal. 
 
If a family of four makes $50,000 a year, in that same basket of 
so-called taxes, Saskatchewan is the fourth lowest of all the 
provinces in Canada. Who's the tops? Newfoundland, Liberal; 
Nova Scotia, Liberal; Quebec, Liberal; P.E.I., Liberal; New 
Brunswick, Liberal. The first five are Liberal governments. At 
50,000. 
 
Now if you have a family of four earning $75,000, we are 
seventh lowest. And guess who leads. Quebec, Liberal; 
Newfoundland, second, Liberal; New Brunswick, third, 
Liberal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in all cases, at 25,000, 50,000, or 75,000, unless 
the Leader of the Liberal Party wants to make a case out for 
those at 100,000 and higher, some of her friends, but at 25,000, 
50,000, and 75,000, in all cases the highest taxed provinces in 
Canada all are governed by Liberals. 
 
And I say the backward tells us that the future, if ever they 
should be taking a chance on the Liberals, will result in the 
same situation in Saskatchewan and that's why neither the 
Conservatives nor the Liberals are going to be re-elected here 
for a very, very long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Jobs and economic development, 
taxes. Liberals and Conservatives in the 17 years, what they say 
and what they do. 
 
I want to touch on one other area, one which I find particularly 
interesting and in some ways sad — working people and 
families, ordinary people. Sir Winston says, let's look backward 
to see what might happen to the future. Mr. Speaker, I wasn't 
sure I was going to enter into this debate, but I'll tell you what 
decided my mind to do so. 
 
When I listened to the Leader of the Opposition, and the Leader 
of the Third Party on the question of working families and the 
trade union legislation and what we saw, and why I decided to 
enter into this little backwards/forwards historical analogy and 
description of mine, was this spectacle: the Leader of the 
Conservative Party getting up and saying . . . sight unseen; he 
hasn't seen this legislation, hasn't been tabled in this House yet. 
In fact the Minister of Labour is still involved in consultations 
with this. Sight unseen, the Conservative Party says, we're 
going to fight this tooth and nail. Then the Liberal leader gets 
up two days later and she says — sight unseen — I'm going to 
fight it tooth and nail. In fact, she says, if you think the 
Conservatives are going to fight it, you ain't seen nothing until I 
get to fighting it. 
 
Each one of them taking the position that they're going to 
out-battle the other on working legislation for working men and 
women. What is this legislation intended to do? 
 
First of all, Labour Standards. Those who are not organized, 

those who are least capable of looking after themselves, those 
are the people who are at the bottom end of the scale. What we 
want to do is to provide some basic notice and some basic 
provisions of compassion for maternity leave or paternity leave 
— a variety of those things which say to them, you have 
fundamental rights. And here the Conservatives and the 
Liberals say, you have no rights. We're going to fight you tooth 
and nail. Sight unseen. Sight unseen. 
 
Then what do we do with The Trade Union Act? We said The 
Trade Union Act defines the rules which tries to make it a little 
bit more fair. Not to try to tip it one way or the other, but to 
make it more fair; to try to solve disputes in advance of an 
industry dispute. What does the Liberal and the Conservative 
leadership say? They say, sight unseen, we are going to debate 
and to fight this. 
 
Well I said that Sir Winston said, look backward and you will 
see what takes place forward. And that's exactly what has taken 
place in the past. Members in this House may not remember, 
but I do. 
 
I was elected in 1967 and the Liberal government of the day, 
their idea of working families help was the introduction of 
something called Bill 2. Look it up. Bill 2 was the most 
notorious, spiteful, most anti-democratic piece of legislation in 
the history of this House next to deterrent fees. Do you know 
what it did? It identified a so-called list of essential services. It 
was like opening up an accordion, the list of essential services, 
and said to all those people, you could not exercise your rights 
of free collective bargaining; simply taken away from you, 
undemocratically. You cannot exercise your rights for free 
collective bargaining. And finally, it took a CCF-NDP 
government to repeal that Bill. 
 
And that is what the Liberals did in the past — an all-out 
attack. And as Sir Winston says, as marked by the words today 
of the Leader of the Liberal Party, that's what they're going to 
do in the future, both on Labour Standards and Trade Union 
Act. 
 
And as for the Conservatives, of course, we know exactly what 
they've done. They have had a decade of poisoned labour 
relations as they sought to divide and conquer, as they sought 
to somehow play the game of rural versus urban. As they tried 
to say in the case of the one quotation I have here from the 
1990 Star-Phoenix report, Grant Schmidt: Labour minister 
scorns SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) 
ideas - doesn't dispute them, doesn't debate them; he scorns 
them. And he introduces Bill 104, again to take away the rights 
of ordinary working men and women, people who simply say 
look, we want a chance, a chance to have our basic rights 
defended — set out. 
 
Tommy Douglas used to say — and it's true — when you ask 
the question, why is it that these Conservatives and Liberals are 
so vehemently opposed to the ordinary guy, Tommy's line was: 
he 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

who pays the piper calls the tune. And those who pay the pipers 
of the Liberals and the Conservatives are the multinational 
corporations who want Saskatchewan to be a little Mexico, 
who want Saskatchewan to treat our working men and women 
with contempt and the lack of security. And I say that is not the 
Saskatchewan history and I say the people of Saskatchewan 
will reject that Liberal-PC attack on ordinary men and women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Looking backwards to see what you 
can see in the forward. What in the world is wrong, I ask the 
Liberal leader, to giving conditions for ordinary working 
families, strengthening their position in society? What's wrong 
with strengthening those people at the bottom end of our scale? 
Doesn't it translate to stronger communities and more hope? 
Why are you and the Conservatives so bent on attacking them 
and destroying them? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have a situation here which 
is a little bit like — one of my colleagues talked about it in this 
House today — a little bit like Tweedledee and Tweedledum 
— Tweedledee and tweedledeeder. 
 
In this House, the Tories and the Liberals fighting over the 
same ideological terrain. For jobs, we'll let the multinationals 
do the job for us and we're going to use our taxpayers' bucks to 
do it. For taxes, we'll tell you one thing, but when in 
government, we will act the other way as the top three, four 
provincial governments act. Being Liberal governments, we'll 
tax you, tax you, tax you. Liberals, Tories — tax you until you 
almost break the province. 
 
We don't care whether we run balanced budgets. What we are 
going to do is we're going to spend and spend and tax, and if 
we don't get enough revenue and we rack up a billion dollars a 
month, a year, so be it. That's the way it goes. We're not here 
for a long time; we're here for a good time. 
 
(1930) 
 
No wonder the NDP is called on 34 years out of 50 to come 
back and clean up the mess. No wonder they're only limited to 
17 years of power. And this is what's happening now — same 
old knee-jerk responses from the same old-line political parties. 
Fight the trade union legislation and the labour standards of 
working men and women. Give the jobs to multinationals and 
fight Main Street, Saskatchewan, Say one thing on taxation, do 
another. Don't provide the jobs. Same policies, same 
ideological base, the same programs which on two occasions 
over 17 years brought this province to the brink of bankruptcy 
and on our knees. No pride, no hope, nothing new. It's the same 
old bunch — the same old bunch. 
 
You can slash and you can burn. And by the way, you don't 
have to limit it to Saskatchewan. Just take a look at Alberta. 
Premier Klein says he's going to have massive cuts, which he's 
doing. Mr. Laurence Decore, Leader of the Liberal Party, said 
massive cuts is not good enough. We want brutal cuts, is what 
he said. That's what he wants. 
 
And they want brutal cuts and they want, in the case of the 
Liberals and the Conservatives here, what they want is 

sometimes brutal cuts, sometimes when politics dictates no cuts 
and no taxes. And they do it this way. The member from 
Shaunavon gets up and he says, what are you going to do about 
crop insurance? What about all the write-downs? That amounts 
to, what, about 200 million? Roughly $200 million, $200 
million of the taxpayers. 
 
He gets up the other day and he says, STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company), we've got to have the routes 
everywhere. By the way, when he was on this side of the 
House, he wrote letters all over his riding saying how good a 
job the STC board of directors and the government and the 
management were doing with respect to the protection of STC. 
Now he wants more millions. Where are we going to get this 
money from? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Taxes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — No taxes either. How are we going to 
do it? I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if you believe in the Liberal and 
the Conservative approach to fiscal management, you'll believe 
in yogic flying — and I don't think that you believe in that, Mr. 
Speaker — that's what you'll believe in. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, we have a few different faces in the official 
opposition and third party, but it's the same message of no 
hope, no solution, no governance, the same old misery. That 
may be their way, Mr. Speaker, but I guarantee you that it is 
not the Saskatchewan way. And that's why they will never 
assume office in this legislature, given their record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So what I wanted to say — I think 
I've made the point; I hope I have, in any event, Mr. Speaker, 
my first message — from history we learn. And those who 
don't are doomed to repeat the lessons of history all over again. 
 
And every once in a while they forget about good government 
and they'll elect a Liberal for a while, and then the NDP is back 
in to clean up the mess. And every once in a while they'll forget 
and elect a PC for a little while, and then we are again, elected 
again to clean up the mess. 
 
And it is just Tweedledee and Tweedledum. Some of them 
were Conservatives supporting the Liberals in 1964; now 
they're Liberals supporting . . . or Conservatives supporting the 
Liberals in 1994. That is the history in this House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, having come through what we have come 
through in this province over the last nine years, I know in my 
heart of hearts that that result politically will not come about — 
not come about. 



170 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a 
few words now about my second theme. I think I've made the 
point about the Conservatives and the Liberals and their history 
and their background. 
 
What I want to talk about now is the future, as I said at the 
beginning. And to me this throne speech is a strong reminder of 
the future. The last two years and this Speech from the Throne 
and in the budget this Thursday, what this is all about is 
building today for tomorrow. 
 
It's been difficult for us. We've made some mistakes, to be sure. 
And when people say to me, why do you have to do this, I try 
to give them all of the answers. But at the end of the day I say 
to them, we're building for tomorrow. 
 
You know something, Mr. Speaker? It never gets any better in 
politics than if you can say that. Of course you'd like to make 
things better during your time, for our time. But if you're able 
to say that you're building for our kids and their kids — not 
even for yourselves, but for their future — like our pioneers, 
like our mothers and fathers who came over from the Old 
Country, from all parts of the world, who worked hard 
morning, noon, night and day, who founded the CCF, who 
rebuilt this province, notwithstanding what the Liberal leader 
said about Tommy Douglas in her disparaging remarks about 
Tommy Douglas, if you have that kind of a spirit here, which 
we have that kind of a spirit, it does not get any better than that. 
 
That's what politics is all about, building today for tomorrow, a 
future for our youth, a future for this great land, for this great 
province. And this has been the challenge of every government 
and of every generation. 
 
And it has never been easy. Saskatchewan people have always 
had to struggle — struggle to gain a measure of control over 
our own destiny so that we could build our own special 
province and unique community built on compassion and hope 
and cooperation. We couldn't allow the outsiders to build that 
for us. They weren't here. They would simply plunder. We had 
to do it. 
 
And our history has been one of triumph in this challenge. 
We've triumphed over searing drought and killer frosts. We've 
triumphed over vast distances and isolation. And above all, Mr. 
Speaker, we've triumphed over the forces of the right, whether 
sometimes they have the mask of conservatism on or the mask 
of so-called liberalism — which is also conservatism — on; the 
forces of the right which constantly, constantly, constantly 
pressure and agitate and work against progressive change. 
 
They fought The Trade Union Act of 1944. They fought the 
Bill of Rights of 1947-48. They fought medicare. This year, as 
I say, is the 50th anniversary of the CCF in North America. 
Right here, as I said to the member from Regina North West, in 
this Chamber amongst these chairs, Douglas and his team and 
even those in opposition were part of a defining moment in our 
history, in our province's history, in our nation's history. 
 
Douglas and his government took a province that was on its 
knees and restored its pride. He rebuilt its common purpose, 

and it wasn't done easily and it wasn't done overnight. But in 
doing so, he began the long journey toward renewal and hope 
and faith. And for 50 years our movement, our government, has 
tried to follow in that spirit — not necessarily the footsteps; in 
that spirit — each time daring to dream of a better future, that 
which sustained those pioneers who built this great province of 
ours, and each with the courage and the vision to make that 
dream a reality. 
 
Well we're no different today. We too on this side dream of a 
better future. We dream of a day when we are free of the noose 
of the debt which has been wrapped around the neck of this 
province. We dream of a day when each child can use his or 
her unique talents and skills to earn their living right here at 
home. We dream of a day when no child has to go without 
breakfast, without shoes, without a decent roof over her head. 
We dream of a day when every citizen, regardless of age, 
gender, income, ethnic background, has equal access to jobs 
and education and health care and enhanced freedoms. And we 
dream of the day when we right the injustices, the wrongs of 
the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And we dream. And we dream. And 
we dream more than just in Saskatchewan or Canada but we 
dream of a world. Because that is our obligation as social 
democrats and citizens of the world. 
 
We dream of a world that is safer, stronger, and more secure 
and more at peace; of a world where an individual's worth is 
recognized as basic and intrinsic, not based on what he does or 
how much she earns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for us the question is never what is our dream; the 
question is how do we make it a reality. And every generation 
must seek new solutions to that question — solutions which 
respond to the changing needs and times. But always in pursuit 
of those solutions, basing our search on the fundamental 
principles, the bulwark of what Saskatchewan is — community 
cooperation, economic and social justice. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is what makes us on this side different from those on 
the other side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Today, as I've said, it's certainly been 
no easier than it's been in the past. In many ways it's been very 
much more difficult. Never before has this province, this 
country, been as financially strapped as it is today. Never 
before have we had to confront the magnitude of change that 
we face today, an instantaneous change. 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

The reality of global economics and interdependency, the 
explosion of technology, global communications, the reduction 
of national barriers through FTA (Free Trade Agreement) and 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) and other 
such deals which we think have attacked our independence as a 
country and a province — all of these demand new responses to 
achieve our dreams and our goals. 
 
So the question is, how do we build in the 1990s for the 21st 
century in the face of these pressures? How do we counter, for 
example, problems exposed and, I would even argue, 
aggravated by the media? 
 
Let me give you one example — problems of violence. 
According to Nielsen ratings, by age 18 the average person will 
have witnessed — a youngster, 18 — will have witnessed an 
estimated 200,000 acts of violence on television, either 
portrayed or actual, including 25,000 murders, by the age of 18. 
My point is this: never before have we as a society in 
fashioning our province, our Canada, been so strongly 
influenced by those and other media messages — and negative 
messages, wrong messages, messages not telling us what we 
need to hear about the nature of our community and our 
country. 
 
And finally, how do we deal with the rich lobbyists, the large 
corporations and multinationals and their spokespeople in this 
Chamber who constantly seek to slow or stem the tide of 
progress, who constantly seek to slow or stem, to deny our 
dreams that I've talked about? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there's one thing over the past 50 years 
that I think the lesson has taught us, histories have taught us, 
it's that we have to start where we stand. That's how we go 
about it. We have to start where we stand and we've got to take 
things one step at a time. That's how we got medicare. It began 
with a dream, the dream that every person, regardless of means, 
should have the access to basic, core health services. It took 16 
years to achieve, Mr. Speaker, because it was built and that 
dream was realized as the resources became available. 
 
It took a bold, fighting, committed government of Douglas and 
Lloyd to defeat the opposition of the Liberals and the 
Conservatives. And that black period in history called the Keep 
Our Doctors committee, the KOD, it took that determination to 
defeat that coalition. But we started where we stood and we 
took one step at a time and we pioneered medicare in 
Saskatchewan, the first in North America. And today it's part of 
what it means to be Canadian. That's what we did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — So, Mr. Speaker, when we assumed 
office two years ago, we started where we stood, in the 
quagmire of debt, in the despair occasioned by the 
free-enterprise government that had ruled. And we rolled up 
our sleeves and we said we have our dreams and we have our 
goals and we're going to follow history and the lessons of 
history. And we're going to start where we stand and we're 
taking one, two, and three and four steps along the way to 
repair our fiscal situation and restore integrity; to provide jobs, 

not on megabucks for megaprojects but downtown Main Street 
jobs; to renew our health care system, notwithstanding the 
opposition of the Liberals and the Conservatives. Just like they 
did in 1962, they said it would collapse. 
 
Same old arguments. And we said we'd start also by rebuilding 
agriculture to give the family farm some hope and to assist their 
dreams too. And we've come a long way in a short 26, 27 
months, Mr. Speaker, a very long way. 
 
Because we believe in families, we have made a strong 
commitment to work towards the well-being of children and 
their parents. That's in the Speech from the Throne. Because we 
believe in families, that's why we continue to focus on the goal 
of creating full employment. That's in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
That's why, because we believe in the families, we've increased 
aid to social assistance recipients of families in need — not like 
they've done in other jurisdictions — why we've strengthened 
family support services, not like they've done in other 
jurisdictions; why we've developed new, community-based 
approaches to preventative social education, and health 
programs. 
 
Health reform, health renewal, is an example. After months of 
consultation, this goal is designed to preserve the integrity of 
what Douglas dreamed and what we still dream into the 21st 
century, and to help our families in doing so. 
 
And so too why we've taken steps to improve the justice 
system. This Speech from the Throne talks about that. Or to 
protect against family violence; this Speech from the Throne 
talks about that. Or why we're protecting the working 
conditions of working men and women in the labour 
legislation. This Speech from the Throne talks about that. 
 
I repeat again: I don't know why it is the Liberals and the 
Conservatives, without even seeing this legislation, somehow 
cannot understand that stronger families mean stronger 
communities and a more self-reliant Saskatchewan. What is 
wrong with helping those who need this help? 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we made wonderful progress. 
Already we're seeing communities come together to rebuild and 
to renew health services. Oh there had been the odd Tories and 
Liberals who've been out there trying to thwart it, the member 
from Shaunavon being the most notable one, in his territory and 
elsewhere — unsuccessfully. But the communities are now 
going above and riding above this. 
 
The member from Kindersley still continues to chip away. Fair 
enough, I take his views as honestly held, as I do the member 
from Shaunavon. I just would say 



172 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

to the hon. member from Kindersley, if you care at all about 
what the history books will say about your position, be careful 
about the level of the opposition that you mounted here, 
because someday you will be down in the history books, as 
those of the Liberals, who have opposed this reform. 
 
A reform, by the way, which the Leader of the Liberal Party in 
the 1991 election campaign talked about. In fact in the 1991 
election campaign, the Leader of the Liberal Party, she said she 
would freeze expenditures to the Department of Health. Do you 
remember that, madam member? You would freeze them. 
 
And you said in your platform that you would set up regional 
district boards. I don't know why it is that you now oppose it so 
badly. Well I know the argument is, as the Conservative 
argument is, which is the oldest argument in the books from 
political opposition parties: I support what you're doing, but I 
don't like the way you're doing it; I got a better idea. 
 
I don't know what the better idea is. I know you got to fight the 
deficit but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, thank you. 
Mr. Deputy points out I'm deviating from my script. 
 
But just when I was looking this afternoon at clippings to make 
my few remarks here . . . This is from the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan paper. No, it's actually Kathryn Warden, 
Star-Phoenix In-Depth Editor. Party policy is a number of 
things — support a nuclear power plant. 
 

Saskatchewan could develop world-class standards for plant 
operation and waste disposal on nuclear . . . 

 
Still referring to the Liberal leader, the story says this: 
 

She'd also like to see a research centre devoted to the study 
of energy options, including conservation. 

 
I find that a bit interesting. First we declare that we want to 
build a nuclear power plant for generation, then we'll set up a 
study group to figure whether it's one of the options or not. 
 
And I don't think that's the new politics, Madam Leader of the 
Third Party. But in any event there's a whole series of these 
promises much along the lines of the 1964, backwards to 
forward. 
 
I'm going to give you two others here . . . three others. Health 
care: freeze provincial health care budget. I will be looking 
forward to your comments from the budget in this context. Set 
up regional health centres. And finally: introduce health care 
premiums for workers — for workers. That's the 1991 plan. 
 
I didn't make this up, and if the Liberal Party leader disputes it 
— and undoubtedly she will on some other occasion tell me 
what's wrong with it — but that's exactly what was said. 
 
And you see, it is this kind of a situation, this kind of a position 
that we take, that we see why some people say politics and 
politicians have slipped to the level that it has. I mean the 
Leader of the Liberal Party takes this point of view. I bet you 
the member from Regina North West didn't even know that was 
the campaign position in 1991. But you know now that that is 
the case, why they say one thing and they act another way. 

Even the Conservatives haven't totally done that, I mean quite 
totally. Pretty close to it, but not quite totally. 
 
And you know, I thought that the new politics was to say: look, 
this is where I stood, this is where I stand, and if you do what I 
think is right I'm going to applaud you. So we're doing what . . . 
maybe not identically, certainly not in the case of a nuclear 
power generator and the like. We have an energy institute and 
it will be giving us some advice on that. But I don't understand 
this. 
 
But what encourages me, Mr. Speaker — coming back to the 
main remarks in my second speech — what encourages me the 
most is this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, that doesn't 
encourage me all that much. But what does encourage me is — 
with the greatest respect to the member from Lloydminster-Cut 
Knife — what encourages me most is that the communities are 
not listening to these doomsayers and naysayers and 
backward-thinking people. The communities are coming 
together in regional economic development agencies to build 
jobs. They are coming together to build the hospital health 
centres. They are coming together to help diversify our 
agriculture. Because they know, that like we did in 1971, the 
NDP is now back giving them hope, and the journey of renewal 
is well begun and the foundations are well laid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — And the member knows this, the 
member from the North West knows this, in Regina, because 
her only campaign literature was MAs' (ministerial assistant) 
salaries, totally concocted out of old cloth and air — not 
factually true at all. And by the way, no apology from the 
Liberal leader to this effect, but that's neither here nor there. 
 
But what I found interesting, what I found interesting was this. 
Here you had the Liberals campaigning on MAs' salaries, 
period. Not a word on deficits, not a word on health care, not a 
word on job creation, not a word on agriculture — maybe that's 
not as relevant for North West in their minds, but I think it is 
because agriculture is everywhere in Saskatchewan. Not a word 
on working peoples and their concerns and interests, not a 
word. It was MA salaries. 
 
And you know what their answer is, by their political 
operatives of the 1960s and '70s, the same ones who are back? 
Well we won, Roy; we won. That's all that counts — we won. 
 
Well to me, my encouragement is that it isn't working. And our 
game plan is working. Our foundations of 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

fiscal and jobs and agriculture and health renewal is working. 
Retail trade up 5.3 per cent this year over '92. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Highest in the west. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Highest in the west, my colleague 
says. Even better than sales-tax-free Alberta. Wholesale trade 
up 9.2 per cent. You know urban housing starts down 8 per 
cent nationally, up in Saskatchewan; 28 per cent actually in 
Saskatoon. Manufacturing shipments up '93 over '92. Oil and 
gas way up — 175 per cent. Over $100 million in land sales, by 
the way — confidence. 
 
Agriculture, the fourth largest, fourth largest . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, you're saying in oil and gas. The member 
from Kindersley gets up in question period and says, what 
about the Kindersley area? Well he should speak to his mayor 
in Kindersley. She got up in SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and said that the Minister of 
Energy should be applauded for what he did in rectifying the 
energy situation in Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Fourth largest crop in history. Of 
course there are trouble spots. Wheat and durum prices are up, 
cattle prices are up, canola's through the roof, giving our 
prospects . . . our farmers excellent prospects for '94-95. Ag 
2000, our paper, like the budget plan, like the jobs plan, like the 
health plan — all written down, by the way — it's working 
now. 
 
Diversification: 12 per cent more acreage in the specialty than 
from the wheat crops, traditional wheat crops, in '93 and the 
prospects of the future are better. 
 
The REDAs (regional economic development authority) are 
being set up in the partnership paper that my colleague, the 
Minister of Economic Development, has got. 
 
You know, at the end of the day I feel optimistic about what's 
going on here. And I'm not alone. 
 
The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix business editor, Paul Martin, says 
this, quote: 
 

As we enter 1994, there's no doubt the fundamentals 
underpinning this economy are the strongest we've seen in 
years. Virtually every sector is doing better than it was a year 
ago. 

 
Mr. Martin said. 
 
And then Paul Martin goes on to say: 
 

We should feel good about our prospects in 1994. There are 
plenty of good reasons to support that notion. 

 
Well that's what the business editor of the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's not the Premier speaking and it sure isn't the 
Leader of the Conservative or the Leader of the Liberal Party 

speaking. And while I respect Mr. Martin very much as a 
columnist, even when he criticizes us, he does not write for a 
newspaper that is exactly our biggest supporters either, to put it 
mildly. 
 
So what in the world's wrong here? Who's out of step? My son 
or the army? According to the Conservatives and the Liberals, 
it's the army that's out of step. 
 
Look, I say to them and I say to the members of this House and 
to the public, as Mr. Martin says, we have many good reasons 
to be optimistic. Let's be confident. Confidence is contagious. 
If you have it, others will get it; your constituents, your 
colleagues, and the people that you work with in various 
organizations. 
 
Take a look at the trends. We haven't overcome our problems 
totally but they're going the right way, the trends. Be confident. 
And if you take a look at this you will get involved with others 
in spreading the good news. We are on the journey of renewal 
and hope and confidence in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — But I wish to close on this thought, 
Mr. Speaker. At times it seems that we're not getting there fast 
enough. I feel that; my colleagues feel that. Not fast enough. 
We're impatient with the progress; we've had our setbacks; 
there will be some in the future no doubt. 
 
But I ask all members and above all I ask the public to 
remember this: that while it may not be fast enough, the tread 
lines are fixed and the foundations are laid and if we pursue our 
plan with diligence on the goals of community and compassion, 
we're going to succeed. 
 
And I'm also asking you to remember this: that in reality in the 
exercise of managing the resources of this great province, 
which is our responsibility as a government but ours 
collectively, we are faced daily with constant difficult choices. 
 
Our progress from here will depend, Mr. Speaker, as it always 
has, on both a commitment to our dreams and our ability to 
make wise, practical choices in the day-to-day affairs of 
government. Dreaming and governing are two different things, 
Mr. Speaker, but I tell you this: you cannot have one without 
the other. Both dreaming and governance are crucial to success, 
crucial to good government. 
 
(2000) 
 
And that's what this government's all about — dreaming the 
dream of ordinary people, governing in the midst of difficult 
choices in a very difficult world, combine to provide good, 
compassionate government to give our people hope. That's 
what we're providing in this province now — opportunity 



174 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

and hope. 
 
But if our province is to prosper, I urge all members to be more 
committed to those goals and to their dreams and I urge all 
Saskatchewan people to be more patient, more ingenious in 
working towards their fulfilment. Because above all, above all, 
it doesn't get any better than to say that our task is to build and 
build well for the next generation, for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the philosopher William 
James put it this way: the greatest use of life is to spend it on 
something that will outlast it. The greatest use of life is to 
spend it on something that will outlast it. 
 
That's what we're doing. That's how we're spending our lives 
here. That's what this Speech from the Throne is all about. That 
is what this government is all about. That is what our tradition 
and our history is all about. And, Mr. Speaker, I urge all 
members to support the Speech from the Throne because that is 
what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
Thank you. I'll be supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. I am delighted to 
have the opportunity to take part in the debate on the throne 
speech. Unfortunately I chose the wrong place to take part in it; 
after that act, what am I going to do? A little bit of comic relief 
maybe and that's as much as we can expect, I suppose. 
 
I must say that two years ago when we first entered this House, 
I was extremely nervous to stand here and take part in the first 
throne speech. My kneecaps were going up and down and my 
trousers were shaking furiously. My mouth was dry. But I 
notice that after a couple of years of practice, it's becoming a 
bit easier. Maybe I'm just getting older and I don't realize how 
bad I was. 
 
But I must say, after listening to the mover of the reply to the 
throne there, the member for Regina Lake Centre and the 
seconder from Biggar there that — and the other members that 
have spoken since then — I think we've all improved. And it's 
becoming quite an enjoyable thing. One realizes how important 
the throne speech is and what it does in our life here at the 
legislature. 
 
And of course it's so nice to see the Speaker there and the 
Deputy Speaker, for that matter — happy, smiling faces, sitting 
up there like some contented high school teacher who's given 
his students something to do and he can sit there and relax. I 
sometimes think they would be better occupied if they had a 
cane to whip around in one hand. You know, it would help to 
keep the members in order that much easier. Take us back to 
the old days. Quick slap on the desk and everybody jumps to 
attention. 
 
And I would love to congratulate our new member from Regina 
North West on her election. I'm a little disappointed of course 
that she's not sitting on our benches, sir, where she would find 
much better company than she's got. But she's welcome none 

the less. And she starts out with at least one advantage over her 
other playmate there; her leader has not yet called her a yahoo. 
But then perhaps that's because she is a real Liberal and not a 
turn-cap. 
 
And I would point out to the member that she should be very 
grateful that it is our government that is in power at the 
moment. We passed a law last year saying that if there was a 
by-election, it had to be held within six months. And in fact we 
did it within four or five months. Despite the fact that the 
weather was so bad and there was a good excuse to say, oh 
we'll leave it till the spring, leave it till later, we didn't. 
 
We had the by-election and we had it in the worst weather and 
we all turned out for it in the worst weather and we had a good 
fight. If it had been the previous administration, she'd be sitting 
there out in the sticks, knocking on doors for the next couple of 
years, might even end up having to wait till the next general 
election in 1996. 
 
And I notice that the third party seems to have learned from our 
mistake, Mr. Speaker, sir. You notice that she's placed the new 
member for Regina North West behind the other member, sort 
of riding shotgun. We allowed him to sit on the back row, not 
too far from the door, and he strayed. I think perhaps we should 
club up and buy the member opposite a leading rein with some 
little bells on it or perhaps even a lasso. 
 
Anyway there they are, sir, one little, two little, three little 
Liberals, as the little song goes. And that's the way it's going to 
be. But I'm digressing a little bit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or three blind mice. 
 
Mr. Draper: — I thought we'd dealt with that, the member 
from Moose Jaw, but we could get back to it. As they always 
used to say in the 19th century, let us get back to our muttons 
and be glad the lost sheep has been found — by the butchers. 
 
Anyway, as I said, there are now three Liberals in the House. 
And this is a great advantage, because now one can speak to 
one side of any issue, a second can speak to the other side, and 
the third member can sit comfortably on the fence, instead of 
leaving all three functions to one poor member from Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — I was pleased to sit here and hear the new 
member's maiden speech this afternoon. And I went across and 
congratulated her and said, you know, it's really an excellent 
speech and I enjoyed it even more than when I heard it last time 
when the member from Saskatoon made it last year. But the 
content was all wrong. And I said I'd give her the opportunity 
of hearing my analysis of it. Here's me being like a school 
teacher now. 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

The member for Regina Rosemont has already pointed out one 
or two inconsistencies in it, and I'd like to add a couple more. 
The new member complained about the quality of debate here. 
She was surprised that the quality was so poor. When you . . . 
that sort of surprises me. How can she be surprised? 
 
The galleries here are open every day we're in session — last 
year, the year before, and any year before that. And this lady 
lives in this city. Is she telling us that she's never been to listen 
to the debates in the House before standing for election? That 
strikes me as surprising that somebody who stands for election 
to come to this House, doesn't bother to visit the House and sit 
and listen and know what the quality of the speeches are. 
 
The important thing is, she tells us that the quality of debate is 
surprisingly poor. Well if she's surprised, she hasn't listened to 
them, either on TV or here or even in the movies. It seems odd 
that somebody who is interested in coming to this House 
should not bother to listen to the debates and see what goes on. 
 
That strikes me as inconsistent. Perhaps she prefers it to be like 
Christmas, where the parcel's all wrapped up and got little 
stickers on it and she's dying to know what's in it, but no, she'll 
wait until Christmas morning and then she'll get the surprise of 
her life. Well the lady's got the surprise of her life. 
 
Anyway, so she's only got herself to blame. And she complains 
about the quality of debate and she tells us that the residents of 
her riding of Regina North West have been decimated. 
Decimated? Did somebody stand them up against the wall and 
count up to 10, take the 10th person, shoot him, count another 
10, take the next one, shoot him, count the next one, shoot him? 
That's what decimated means. 
 
And I haven't heard of any murders in Regina North West 
recently, or any assassinations, nobody with an uzo or an Uzi or 
whatever it is, or an AK-47, but the constituents in her riding 
are decimated. There must be blood all over the place and the 
population must have gone down something terrible. 
 
It's possible that the member should have used the word 
devastated. I throw out that as a suggestion. She can look it up 
in the dictionary when she has time. The point being this, that 
little girls shouldn't use big words if they don't know what the 
meaning is. 
 
Anyway, and then we get the complaint that we're saying nasty 
things to people in the gallery, or visitors were getting insulted, 
and they're sorry about that. But anybody comes and sits in the 
gallery gets to hear what they hear. They don't have to sit in the 
gallery. They can sit at home, they can sit in Australia, they can 
sit in Russia. We talk about people the way we see it. 
 
And this is the point of being in this House, that we can. We're 
not going to get sued. We're always polite, we're always careful 
of the words we use. And the point of this Assembly is that we 
try to be as honest with each other as we can about ourselves 
and about people in the gallery or anywhere else in the country. 
 
If the Prime Minister himself sat up in the gallery, sir, we could 
pass remarks about him; it's certainly acceptable. And as far as 
turncoats go, and renegades, it's open season on them any time 
of year, whether we're in session or not. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — And our Premier made several remarks 
concerning one of my favourites, Sir Winston Churchill. It was 
in 1945 during the great election in England that I took part in 
my first campaign. A lady stood for the Primrose League. In 
those days even the word conservative was not acceptable. It 
was called the Primrose League. And she went out in a car with 
a great big horn on it, you know, with a little loudspeaker . . . 
Her name was Barrett — very interesting. She lived across the 
street from me and there used to be a brand of shoes called 
Barrett. And their slogan was, walk the Barrett way. And she 
sat there shouting into her little microphone: vote the Barrett 
way. 
 
And a school friend of mine from across the street and myself, 
we went out handing out leaflets; he took one sidewalk, I took 
the other. And there was a picture of Winston Churchill on the 
front, and turn it over and there was a picture of Mrs. Barrett. 
So that was my first election campaign. I was only nine years 
old at the time. It took me another two years to be turned to a 
socialist. 
 
But it eventually stuck, it eventually stuck. Anyway, the 
reference to Winston Churchill and with reference to turncoats 
and with reference to insults and so forth, possibly the lady 
does not know that Winston Churchill himself crossed the floor 
twice — not once, but twice. First he was a Tory and then he 
became a Liberal and then he became a Tory again. 
 
And it was because he was a turncoat that he was never in 
power in the '30s. When he did go back to the Tories, they just 
didn't trust him and they sure weren't going to put him in the 
cabinet or give him anything where he could have information 
which, if he decided he was a Liberal once more, that he could 
take it with him. So until the war broke out he got absolutely 
nowhere. And this is what happens to turncoats and renegades, 
people who betray their friends and their principles. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Draper: — And this nicely brings me back to the 
question, the matter, the epic, the saga of the Second World 
War. Most of you don't remember it but I do. And the throne 
speech laid a lot of stress on the year 1944. And 1944 was a 
particular significant year for me, sir. It was a year that my only 
sister, Heather, was born and I remember that event quite 
vividly. I was eight or nine at the time. 



176 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

My family was scattered all over the globe. One uncle was in 
Burma, the second fought his way from Egypt through El 
Alamein and Tobruk, across to Sicily and up the boot of Italy. 
A third served with the Royal Canadian Air Force, a bit of a 
distant uncle, but he was there, Billy Ormisher. And he served 
in the Battle of the Atlantic, first on the western side and then 
from Liverpool on the eastern side of it there. But he took his 
part in it, as did the others. And although D-Day occurred in 
1944 and was the culminating push in the Second World War 
. . . without the successes of the blockade from the west and the 
drain on Nazi resources to feed the battle in the soft underbelly 
of Europe. 
 
And of course the Russians on their front. It would not have 
been possible to launch a successful invasion of France. And it 
is only just and right that those people who were so 
contemptuously referred to by Lady Astor as the D-Day 
dodgers should also get recognition and be vindicated in the 
throne speech, sir. 
 
And after experiencing World War II to the full, I have made a 
point of taking part in the Remembrance Day celebrations 
every year — first in Lafleche and more recently in 
Gravelbourg. When I became mayor of Gravelbourg I took 
pride in laying the wreath donated by the town of Gravelbourg 
at the cenotaph. 
 
And as the MLA for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I have made a 
point of going to a different town every year to do the same 
thing. The first year, '91, I went to Assiniboia; in '92, Willow 
Bunch; last year in Coronach — and I laid the wreath on behalf 
of the provincial government. And this I have already arranged 
to do in Lafleche in 1994, and next year I imagine I'll be doing 
it in Gravelbourg. 
 
That gives me great pleasure and great pride to do that on 
behalf of our government. And I'm not saying this in 
boastfulness, sir. I bring this up simply as an indication of one 
of the functions I think it my duty to perform in my 
constituency and perhaps as a suggestion that . . . perhaps the 
other members are already doing it in their constituencies or 
perhaps this is something that they could do. If they're doing it 
already, well and good. But I make this as a suggestion to 
members on both sides of the House, to all parties. 
 
Now in that year of 1944 the election of Tommy Douglas was 
an equally seminal event, sir. I didn't know anything about it at 
the time, but the political repercussions were as profound in 
their way as the Normandy landings were in the military field. I 
was not in Canada at that time, sir, of course, but it was as a 
direct if rather delayed result of that election that my wife, my 
family, and myself migrated to Saskatchewan. 
 
Medicare attracted many doctors from the United Kingdom and 
the Republic of Eire in the '60s, and I was one of those. 
Saskatchewan laid the foundations for health care, particularly 
here and the rest of the Canada, and the repercussions are being 
felt in the United States even more particularly today. Not only 
that, but the National Health Service in Britain has been 
successively improved over the years to try and stem the 
outflow of doctors from there because of the shortcomings in 
their system compared to that which we have in Saskatchewan, 
thanks to Tommy Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd, and those 

predecessors of yours. 
 
And you know, we've been told repeatedly and here again 
today, that Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction in North 
America to elect a democratic socialist government. And I'd 
rather like to refute that, in an odd sort of way, because I 
believe that if you inquire further into the matter you'll find that 
not only was this the first jurisdiction in North America, I think 
you'll find it was the first jurisdiction in the whole North and 
South American continent that we had a socialist government 
elected. I don't think there was anyone in South America or 
Central America, from pole to pole, from the Atlantic to the 
Pacific. And I think we ought to bear that in mind that he led 
the way, not just in North America, not just in Canada, but the 
whole American continent. And he deserves the greater honour 
for that. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition last Wednesday spent a lot 
of time telling us what the Premier told the delegates at SUMA 
a couple of weeks ago. And I've got something to say on that 
score. Excuse me a sec. 
 
As councillor, and later, mayor of Gravelbourg, I find myself 
spending what always seems to be the coldest weekend in the 
year in SUMA convention. And now I'm in the legislature it 
looks that I'm still entitled to my dose of frostbite, alternately in 
Regina and in Saskatoon. And now I'm expected to go to the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention as well for my sins. And this year I had the dubious 
pleasure of listening to the acting temporary interim leader of 
the Tory Party. 
 
And I use the word Tory Party deliberately and specifically, sir. 
Tory is from an old Irish word, and you yourself helped me to 
look it up. I had some vague knowledge of this but I'd forgotten 
about it. 
 
And I took a photostat from the page of the dictionary 
specifically to back up what I'm saying, because the Tory 
originally is an old Irish word meaning outlaw, and it seems 
particularly appropriate. And the official title is particularly 
inappropriate. I mean, progressive? It's a contradiction in terms 
when applied to them. And I can't remember them ever 
conserving anything in nine years and more of what is 
laughingly called government. 
 
And the member in question, not related to Mr. Bobbitt of 
course, promised, and I quote this — I actually listened to his 
speech, sir — "to build our province in the face of adversity." 
And that's the exact quote. 
 
And he never bothered to point out that that adversity was 
created by a combination of the efforts of his previous 
administration in cahoots with the federal administration of the 
equally discredited Brian Mulroney. He declared that he would 
be "happy to let 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

others take the credit." That's another direct quote, sir, and 
again very appropriate. So there's no way that they could take 
any of the credit. To them alone belongs the debit, sir. 
 
And he made a pious promise to have an all-party committee to 
make public board appointments, which is fine. But why on 
earth didn't they do this during the nine years that they had the 
power and sat here? Don't know. 
 
He demanded, demanded a public utilities review board, which 
again is fine. They had one. They produced one of their own 
and they called it public utility review board. By any other 
name it would smell just as sweet. But they closed it down in 
1986 because it was far too cumbersome and too expensive. So 
if it was too cumbersome and too expensive then — I mean it 
was their own creation — why did they close it down? What's 
the difference now? Why is it not cumbersome and not 
expensive now? You know, I really don't understand this. 
 
And then you whimpered about fixed election things, yet his 
government even went over the five years that were legally 
allowed anyway by one day, just to prove that they could do it. 
I just sort of wonder whether the member spent his summer 
holidays in Damascus. He certainly seems to be blind to facts. 
 
And now, sir, and now, sir, he sends me a sheaf of forms, a 
sheaf of forms for me to hand out to my constituents for them 
to write questions on, to return to him so that he can ask our 
government those questions. Is he telling us that he's so out of 
touch that he's got no questions he can ask himself? And to 
those of his followers, those guys who go galloping off madly 
in all directions in search of the Holy Grail, do they not have 
any questions they could ask? 
 
So I thought I could possibly give you some assistance. They 
could start question period by asking please, sir, what day is it? 
And they could follow that up by please, sir, what time is it? 
And then as a grand finale he could inquire, did I have lunch 
yet? And then he can lay back in his chair and count 138 Tory 
votes jumping into a ballot box and go to sleep safe in the 
knowledge that the member for Saskatoon Greystone will be 
happy to take over the duties of opposition later. 
 
And here are the forms, sir, 10 copies, and it's not photostatted; 
it's actually signed by hand. The Leader of the Opposition . . . 
Mr. Premier, I want to know . . . possibly the other members 
got them, I don't know. 
 
But it's incredible. I mean, we all know that the New 
Democratic Party forms the best governments that this province 
has ever had. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — The implication seems to be with these forms 
is that they want us to form the opposition as well. And if they 
would care to resign their seats, then I'm sure we could find 10 
excellent candidates who would stand in their ridings and be 
elected and we could all be on the government side with the 
exception of . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Draper: — It just makes me wonder if the member really 
knows what the parliamentary process is about. Does he not 
think that I ask questions? I burn the telephone line. I don't use 
as much as the member of Shaunavon. In fact I think when any 
member of the cabinet sees me coming they duck into the 
washroom — they don't even care if it's the ladies' washroom 
— just to get out of the way of my stupid questions. I've 
answered a thousand questions — we've got them all on our 
computer — to my constituents over the past two years. And 
unlike some people who believe six impossible things before 
breakfast, we believe in the possible. 
 
And that very same day that SUMA . . . we had a double bill. 
It's a long time since we had a double bill at the movies, isn't it, 
but that day we had a double bill. After the Leader of the 
Official Opposition spoke, came the leader of the unofficial 
opposition. Her first salvo was about post office and rail line 
closures. But she didn't make any reference to the federal 
government in whose jurisdiction these matters lie. She kept 
talking about the provincial government. 
 
And I would appreciate it, sir, if you would allow me just to 
turn the lady around and face east, point her nose in the right 
direction, and then she can get out her little prayer mat — it is, 
when all's said and done, Ramadan — and she can make her 
obsequies to Prime Minister Jean Chrétien and whichever 
ministers are responsible for Canada Post and the railways. 
 
Now some people have said I'm a bit facetious. I don't know 
where the hell they got that idea from. But really I would 
appreciate it, because my constituency is very badly affected by 
rail line closures and post office closures, and I really would 
appreciate it if the Leader of the Third Party could intercede 
with the senior government in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Draper: — If she can deal with those issues, sir, and give 
us satisfactory answers, it would not be just my neighbour from 
the west that might consider joining her on the other side of the 
House. Well if somebody delivers, you go back to that store. 
But first of all you have to deliver. 
 
But I do truly believe that this province has embarked on a 
journey of renewal. I know that many people fear the new and 
cleave to the old. But time and events move only in one 
direction and we have no choice but to go where this road that 
we all stand on takes us. 
 
We are restoring sound financial management. We have 
drastically reduced the deficit and we shall balance the budget 
in 1996. 



178 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — It's not comfortable and it's not pleasant, but 
then neither is a syringe full of penicillin to a sick child, but it 
has to be done. It has to be done and that's it. 
 
There are certainly disagreements as to details; some 
disagreements as to methods. We can't expect 54 people to 
agree on everything. And there's going to be problems arising 
along the journey, like the débâcle with the federal government 
and Quebec's multifaceted problem of smuggling and financial 
crunch and the problems they're having with their native 
population on the reserves. And we're going to have to deal 
with this and we'll have to solve it. And there's no reason why 
we can't. We've solved worse problems; we'll do this one. 
 
It's a tautology to say that we need jobs and economic 
development. There's not a province in the country that's not 
competing in the market for jobs, economic development, and 
tourists. And Canada's not the only country. It's the same all 
over the world. 
 
And we in this province are besieged daily with TV 
advertisements to go and ski in Montana or go to Deadwood, 
South Dakota, to gamble, or to Las Vegas, or take a trip on the 
Love Boat, which is fine. And one of the positive things that 
comes out of this in my mind is that there's somebody who's 
making those adverts and paying for those adverts, is beaming 
them at this province. 
 
Now these people are not fools. And if they're spending to put 
adverts into this province, they must be expecting to get 
something out of it. And what they're expecting to get out of it 
is money. And if they're expecting to get money out of it, they 
are saying to us that there's money in this province. And there 
is. We just have to use it better, and we can do that. 
 
But the avenues that excite me the most are those that lead to 
the so-called information or electronic highway. A couple of 
months ago I spent 12 very long and very intense days on a 
course in the use of a computer — something that had been, so 
to speak, a closed book to me for all these years. I've two 
younger brothers and they're both computer whizzes — one's a 
computer consultant for the federal government of Australia, 
and the second one is a computer consultant to one of the banks 
in England. I'm not quite sure exactly which because we don't 
really keep in touch — he's 18 years younger than I. I was just 
born too soon. 
 
Maybe you, Mr. Speaker, have read George Orwell's book — 
1984. It was actually written in 1948; he simply transposed the 
integers. And it was very prescient. In every room in every 
building, for those who don't remember the story, there was a 
telescreen on the wall. And through that telescreen, Big Brother 
could watch and hear you. And at the same time it was a 
receiver, because they would broadcast news and propaganda 
and education, music, at any time and all times, day and night. 
And for good or for ill, that time has arrived. The prophecy has 
proved true. 
 
With a keyboard, a screen, a fax, hard drive with a CD ROM 
(compact disc read-only memory), a modem, phone line, and 
now you add a video camera to it, and it's possible to 

communicate with anyone in the globe at a moment's notice. 
That really is incredible. The possibility looms of being able to 
go to work and not actually leave your home. 
 
We could have a session of this legislature with nobody coming 
to Regina. We sit at home in our constituency offices with our 
equipment, and we could debate and vote simply by pressing a 
button in front of it and it would show up on the Speaker's 
screen or the Clerk's screen, whichever. It wouldn't be the same 
fun, would it? Not to see all these happy, smiling faces. 
 
But we see it in the daily news nationally every day. Peter 
Mansbridge links up to somebody in Ottawa, London, 
Jerusalem, Australia, and the reception is perfect. It really is. 
Even two hours later here — what the hell to do with it for two 
hours while it's going to get from Toronto to where we catch up 
in time, I don't know. But they do it. And what I'm saying, sir, 
is the technology is available and the market is there. We 
should go for it and we should go for it now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — And there's a reference in the throne speech to 
the Channel Tunnel somewhere between England and France. 
And this strikes a particular chord in my memory. This has 
been known colloquially in England as the Chunnel for 
donkey's years. As a kid, we always talked about the Chunnel. 
And for the information of members, the Channel Tunnel 
Company was formed around about 1890 — over a hundred 
years ago now. 
 
And it was quite controversial. Many authorities trumpeted 
about the danger for the country by digging a back door into 
England, you know. And the argument at the time was, yes, 
what would have happened if there'd have been a Channel 
Tunnel a hundred years previously? Napoleon's Grande Armée 
could have come thundering through the tunnel on horseback 
and overwhelmed England overnight while Admiral Nelson 
was sailing impotently on the waves on the English Channel, 
you know. And it was a big problem. There were motions in 
Parliament to stop it in case the Germans and the French 
ganged up against poor, helpless England. 
 
And two attempts have already been made to dig such a tunnel. 
And if you visit south-east Kent there's one place where you 
can actually see the entrance at it from one of the previous 
attempts. It failed because they ran out of money — it was too 
expensive — and they didn't have the technology to dig the 
tunnel, as we have now. 
 
There's one machine still left in the tunnel. They let it 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

dig its own grave, and they've left it in there. That machine — 
that one machine which is about half as long as this Chamber 
— cost $10 million. And when they completed it, they backed 
it up and they turned it at any angle and let it dig a little tunnel, 
and they just . . . the driver got out and they just left it there — 
$10 million worth. They reckon for any other tunnel, depending 
on the climate, depending on the soil conditions, depending on 
the water conditions, they'd have to design an entirely new 
machine. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It's probably in China by now. 
 
Mr. Draper: — It's probably still going. You just never know 
your luck. If you hear the ground trembling under your feet, 
you'll know it's passing through on its way . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It could. Oh now, that's a point. Maybe we 
should get it — dig an underground railway between Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Anyway, when I was in high school in Westcliff in Essex, our 
mathematics teacher brought in copies of The Times and taught 
us to read the stock market tables. And one of the examples that 
they used was the Channel Tunnel Company. It was virtually 
bankrupt, and it was only worth a penny or a penny farthing a 
share. But it was still listed 60 years after. And as I say, it sticks 
in my mind. And as I say, the controversy over building the 
Channel Tunnel was so great that it makes our discussions over 
the fixed link to Prince Edward Island look like unanimity. 
 
But since World War II, with the incredible bombing and the 
use of power troops and the invention of intercontinental 
ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads and all those sort of 
things, it's made all the arguments against the Channel Tunnel 
obsolete. And now I feel very proud to stand here in Regina 
and feel indirectly linked to this vision of my youth of the 
Channel Tunnel. I'm linked to it by a wholly-owned 
Saskatchewan Crown corporation — SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — Who could have imagined when your 
forebears in the CCF bought out all these local telephone 
companies — Lafleche rural, Gravelbourg rural, Mossbank, 
wherever — and combined them into the one Saskatchewan 
government telephone company so many years ago, that the 
modern SaskTel would own a communications company of 
world-renowned quality in our own so-called mother country. 
 
Now we talk about teaching our grandmother to suck eggs, 
whatever that may mean. I've never seen anybody sucking 
eggs, frankly — I used to blow them as a kid to collect the 
shells, but never suck them. But now our own home-grown 
Saskatchewan scientists are showing both mother countries — 
England and France — how to communicate. Wouldn't it be 
nice if Regina could teach Ottawa and Quebec and Toronto to 
communicate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — But I don't think we quite have the technology 
for that. 
 
And vaccination is very much in the news now. We talk about 

biotechnology. And of course vaccination was introduced in 
England in the 18th century by a doctor. And he wasn't a 
specialist; he was a general practitioner. And he wasn't a city 
general practitioner either; he was a rural general practitioner. 
Just like me, only more so. Talk about horse-and-buggy days, 
that was it. And he discovered the vaccination against 
smallpox, which was world shaking at the time — very 
controversial again, but world shaking. And in the 19th century 
of course, the kudos swung to the famous Pasteur Institute in 
Paris. 
 
But now Saskatchewan's developed its own vaccine and it's 
exporting them all over the world. And again we're competing 
with and succeeding against England and France and so many 
other countries that consider themselves far in advance of us 
technically. There's nothing we cannot do if we really set our 
minds to it — nothing at all. 
 
But we seem to have got a very zoological trend in this debate, 
sir, what with mice and cats of many colours, and turncoats and 
catastrophes. Why even the member from Nipawin over there 
went rabbitting on about horses and cows yesterday. 
 
But I would like to go on to greater things — elephants, to be 
precise, and white ones in particular. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, the white elephants in south-east Asia are sacred. You 
can't kill them, and you can't make them work because they are 
gods. 
 
And one of the problems is that if a person falls out of favour 
with the local bigwig, the local chief, you could end up with a 
gift of a white elephant for Christmas. And you go gradually 
bankrupt feeding the voracious beast, a beast that you can't put 
to work and it's going to out-live you. And it's a serious matter 
in places like Thailand and Malaya. 
 
And it strikes me that the male member — and we'll forget 
about Bobbitt again — of the Liberal Party seems to be a 
modern-day white elephant. Now on January 22 which was a 
Saturday night, 1994, it was the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone's turn, now that she's a party, to air her views on 
Provincial Affairs, that five-minute political broadcast 
sandwiched between the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) national news and the provincial news. 
 
During the whole time she repeated the phrase, your Liberal 
MLAs, with the accent on the plural. Yet she never once 
mouthed the name of you know who. She never even referred 
to his constituency on radio/TV. She could have used his name, 
used the constituency; it didn't matter. Not once. And she kept 
on stating that all the citizens of Saskatchewan could rely on 
their Liberal MLAs. It was quite noticeable. 
 
(2045) 
 
And this is the lady who's going to introduce new 



180 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

politics into Saskatchewan. Yet when she was asked by Murray 
Mandryk — it's in the Leader-Post here, January 3, 1994 — 
why she didn't ask the nameless one to resign his seat and run 
as a Liberal candidate in the by-election, replied, no one's ever 
done that before. 
 
I would have thought you would imply doing precisely what no 
one else has ever done. But maybe I use the wrong dictionary. 
Or perhaps the member from Saskatoon Greystone spent her 
time in wonderland or behind the looking glass with the queen 
who believed six impossible things before breakfast. 
 
But I think I have a solution to her problem, now that she has a 
third member, and is no longer in any danger of losing her 
allowances. You see at one time she was an independent 
member because she was by herself. But then when she got her 
recruit she became a dependent member. Yes, because she 
depended on his loyalty. If he crossed the House once he could 
have crossed it again, or gone over there, and then she'd be 
back to being independent. So she's in a lot of trouble. But now 
she has a third member, she's safe. She can keep all her 
allowances, all her expenses, and she can be called a party. She 
can have a party every day. 
 
And now I would suggest that, now when she's safe, she asks 
the member for Shaunavon to resign and stand in a by-election. 
But first of all she was doubtful whether the Liberals in 
Shaunavon would accept him. It's no problem. He can stand in 
a nominating convention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — And I met the previous candidate at Reg 
Gross's roast the other day in Swift Current, and he would be 
delighted to stand again. And they can choose between the 
sitting member for Shaunavon or the previous, Mr. Ruehs, the 
candidate, and then we will know what the Liberal Party in 
Shaunavon wants. And after they've made that choice, then the 
whole constituency can make their choice in the following 
by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — And then she'll have a working elephant to 
which she can give an honourable name. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: — But perhaps the peripatetic member s 
anonymity is part of the new politics. It's possible the Leader of 
the Third Party is teaching him to be humble, you know. 
Perhaps we're going to have self-effacing politicians, and that 
certainly would be something no politician has ever done 
before. 

' 

 
And our new member for Regina North West could end up in a 
similar problem because I noticed that during the by-election 
there, there were billboards with the candidate's name, but the 
photograph seemed to be the photograph for the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. Do we have a new cult of the 
personality, a new Stalinism arising in the third party? Do we 
have a new Great Helmsman, like Mao Tse-tung, developing 
over there? Perhaps another Prime Minister Gandhi or Mrs. 

Bandaranaike? Do you remember that one? 
 
Anyway, to get back to important matters. I was very pleased to 
hear from the Minister of Health on Friday morning there in 
question period, that there was an ongoing needs assessment 
throughout the province for health care. She was very 
conciliatory in answering the question from the member for 
Wilkie. And that sort of reassures me. It reassures me very 
much because I'm very worried, as you might know, about the 
problems with the rural health care. 
 
And if there's needs assessments going on, I would take it and I 
would certainly hope that if the needs assessment indicates that 
beds for respite care, palliative care, terminal care, and 
assessment and observation are required, for example, because 
this concerns me, say, at Ponteix, that perhaps they would be 
provided. 
 
But one of the major problems with health care reform is the 
lack of comprehension of the general public and the opposition 
and their cohorts. We've all noticed this. But it becomes really 
glaring at times. And I have an article here that was published 
in a quasi-medical journal called Family Practice, February 7, I 
believe. 
 
And in it there's an interview with the vice-president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association. I shan't name him and 
embarrass him but unfortunately he presumably will be the 
president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association next year. 
And we got a problem here. 
 
In this article he states that there are two problems with the 
health districts. I'll quote here: 
 

For starters, most of the newly formed rural health-care 
districts have at least 12,000 people each. This is 2,000 too 
many per district, according to . . . family physician and 
vice-president, Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Not only is the number of people in each district too great, 
but the actual number of districts — 30 — is also (much) too 
high . . . 
 
"There's no one in the province, including the Department of 
Health, who thinks this new structure is sustainable." 
 
He predicts that within five years the number of districts will 
decrease. 

Now that's really quite fascinating. You know, I mean the 
districts may be too big; this is a matter of opinion. There may 
be too many districts — that's also a matter of opinion. And he 
doesn't give a number of . . . he just says 10,000 rather than 
12,000. But he doesn't say 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

how many districts there should be. If 30 is too many, perhaps 
25 is a better number. 
 
The problem is that to comply with both this august doctor's 
suggestions simultaneously, we're going to have to dispose of 
upward of 100,000 inhabitants of Saskatchewan. If you're 
going to reduce the number of people in each district and 
reduce the number of districts, we're going to have people we 
can't accommodate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This is where the decimation comes in. 
 
Mr. Draper: — That's where . . . Not only is she using words 
that she doesn't understand, she's been reading papers she 
doesn't understand. 
 
Anyway, he doesn't offer any method of doing this, you see. 
And I would like to suggest that we could possibly buy them 
one-way bus tickets to Alberta and they would make up for Mr. 
Klein's government's loss of the citizens that he bought 
one-way tickets to British Columbia. 
 
But of course it's also possible that the eminent doctor, like 
some other doctors like Dr. Mengele — who actually was a 
dentist but it doesn't matter — but perhaps he has some idea of 
a final solution for this X-plus population, in which case I hope 
that he will allow us to wait until spring when the ground will 
be softer so it will be a lot easier to dig the mass graves that 
will be required. I only hope that the eminent doctor's medical 
knowledge is a little bit better than his mathematics, otherwise 
there's going to be a lot of trouble with patients in Saskatoon. 
 
But finally I'd like to finish on a couple of suggestions, simple 
measures which I think fit in well with the wellness model and 
cost very little, and I think these are quite important. The first is 
simply to clear all the sidewalks in all the towns with 
something like a bobcat — of snow, that is. 
 
Now during the six years I was mayor of Gravelbourg, I did 
this because many of the elderly people just didn't have the 
strength to clear their sidewalks. And I noticed this because I 
was called out to do house calls; they couldn't get out of the 
house to come to the hospital or come to my office, so I did 
house calls. 
 
And for some reason or other a family would just . . . the young 
people aren't interested in shovelling snow for a few bucks 
now. It's possible that cigarettes in Saskatchewan are too cheap, 
Madam Minister; maybe you should put the prices up. But if 
we did this, and if it prevents one fractured wrist and one 
fractured hip in each town, each winter, the savings to the 
province in medical care, surgery, would more than pay for the 
cost of clearing the snow three or four times every winter. 
 
The cost of a prosthesis that goes into the hip can cost . . . it can 
be anything from $1,000 up. They're made of very expensive 
and very good material — titanium steel and such, and 
vanadium steel. In fact, they're so expensive, they're so 
expensive, that doctors are discussing the idea of reclaiming 
them from the dead so that they can be used again in the same 
way as you might reclaim skin, or eyes, or an internal organ. 
They're enormously expensive. And I think that this is 
something that we might be interested in legislating — that 

sidewalk snow will be cleared — in the same way as we 
legislated that roadway snow must be cleared to keep highways 
open. 
 
And with all this concern of . . . about additives to our food, I'm 
surprised to see so many cafés in this province that provide 
whitewash made from inedible oils to add to our coffee. We 
even get it in this building. As a physician again, I'm worried 
about additives, but when you think of something like these 
coffee whiteners, which are nothing but additives and 
chemicals, the effect of this on the long term really worries me. 
 
We've been eating sugar for hundreds of year, we know the 
effects. But we've been eating this Coffee-mate, and Coffee 
Rich and junk just for a few years. What's going to happen 
down the line? We really don't know, and I think it's something 
we could look into. If you go into Alberta, you'll find that every 
café even at the truck stop, they give you pure cream or half 
and half, and I think we could do the same here. And apart 
from its public health measures, I think it would give our dairy 
producers a fillip. If they can do it in Alberta, they can do it 
here. I don't know whether it's done by legislation. This is 
something that we could find out. 
 
And I would like to leave you with one final thought, Mr. 
Speaker, sir. And that is this: success is the result of good 
judgement and good judgement is the result of experience, but 
experience is the result of bad judgement, which makes it seem, 
sir, that the absconding member for Shaunavon has at last got 
his foot on the bottom rung of the ladder to success by 
demonstrating his bad judgement by crossing the floor. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it gives 
me great pleasure to join in the throne speech debate. It's a little 
hard . . . difficult to follow both the Premier and the member 
from Gravelbourg, but I will certainly try my best. 
 
I firstly want to congratulate the mover of the Speech from the 
Throne, the member from Regina Lake Centre, and the member 
from Biggar who seconded the motion. 
 
We on this side of the House appreciate the contribution of 
every member in this House and I want to congratulate all of 
my colleagues on their excellent contribution to this debate. 
 
I also want to welcome our newest member, the member from 
Regina North West, and I know you will enjoy this House 
immensely. I enjoyed very much the by-election in Regina 
North West. I took part in some 



182 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

late evening canvassing, and the people in north-west Regina 
are no different than Kelsey-Tisdale. They're great people and I 
enjoyed their comments very much, and I know you'll represent 
them very well. 
 
Today I want to talk a little bit about the pride I have in being 
part of a government that has courage to make the tough 
decisions. I know people in private business, I know farmers, I 
know people that have households, like myself, who have 
children that are going to university. The soldiers we talk about 
in the throne speech have had to make some tough decisions. 
We're used to making the tough decisions. 
 
(2100) 
 
A tough decision seems hard for the moment, but if we think 
about it, it's for the future that the reward is there for. Some like 
to run from tough decisions and I think we've noticed that in 
this House. But to run from a tough decision, like I mentioned 
earlier, just helps your feelings for the moment. It doesn't help 
for the future. 
 
The soldiers made it a tough decision, but it wasn't for 
themselves for that immediate second; it was for the future 
generations, for their children, for us. And those decisions are 
not easy. But with determination and knowledge of what is best 
for the future, we make those decisions. 
 
People expect a government that's trustworthy, they expect a 
government that is hard-working, and they expect a 
government and want a government — and I found that out in 
the by-election in North West Regina — they want a 
government that has the ability to make those tough decisions. 
 
They also want to be a part of the decision-making process. 
They want to be a part of rebuilding Saskatchewan and 
rebuilding our economy. And they've told me, the people in 
Kelsey-Tisdale, the people in Regina North West, are saying 
that we have that leadership. They're proud of that and I'm 
proud of that. 
 
We also have worked hard with all sectors of the community, 
and they appreciate that. They're involved in our 
decision-making and they feel a part of solving the 
Saskatchewan problems and concerns. They feel a part of 
giving us their ideas. 
 
The Minister of Finance, for instance, has gone across this 
province talking about budget, the pre-budget of 1994, the 
pre-budget of 1993. She has consulted with people all over the 
province, asking them what they feel — are we going in the 
right direction? 
 
The Minister of Labour is now talking to both business groups 
and labour groups, working people, small business, about what 
new labour legislation or new ideas in labour legislation that 
can be brought forth that is satisfactory to the different people 
that are involved. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development has gone from 
community to community, from the board of trade to the 
chamber of commerce to working people to the industry itself, 
talking about tourism authorities and what role does the 

government play and what role does the private sector play. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture has gone across the province 
asking farmers what do they need, what do they see in a farm 
safety net and in a direction for agriculture? 
 
Just the other day I had the privilege of meeting with SADD, a 
group of high school students from across the province, 
Students Against Drinking and Driving. The Minister of Justice 
was there and the minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). We talked to them; they talked to us. 
Very open discussion about drinking and driving. 
 
And now today the Associate Minister of Health has said that 
we will consult with school children from across this province 
who will help determine policy and direction for this 
government to take in regards to drinking and driving, tobacco 
use amongst minors, and drivers' licence and how they pertain 
to you. So people are involved with this government in the 
decision-making process. This is what people want; this is what 
we've given them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — Today it was almost I guess 
unbelievable, or strange . . . it was a strange feeling I guess, 
that when the Associate Minister of Health announced this 
consultation process with the students across this province, that 
even the opposition members, the members from Kindersley 
and the member from Saskatoon Greystone actually tried to 
agree with us — didn't really fully, because I guess it wasn't 
politically smart; I'm not sure of the reason — but sort of 
agreed with us that this is the right direction, with reservations. 
But I really think that maybe I see, and I hope I see, a type of a 
new willingness that maybe they're going to join with us as we 
move forward. I don't know; I hope so. 
 
Our Minister of Health and the Associate Minister of Health 
has travelled this province talking about health care, talking 
about wellness, talking about regional decision making and 
how the different communities can decide, the different regions 
can decide their health care needs. Knowing that there's a core 
service there, but what different needs are there in Tisdale in 
comparison to Melville, or what different needs are there in 
Prince Albert in comparison to Saskatoon. We involve people 
in our decision making. This is what is needed and this is what 
the people want. 
 
As a government we respect and recognize the talent and skill 
of the Saskatchewan people. We know it's not good enough just 
to rely on outside solutions. We look to our neighbours, we 
look to our communities for the Saskatchewan type of solution 
or the Saskatchewan solution and the Saskatchewan direction. 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

In Kelsey-Tisdale and across the province and indeed in Regina 
North West, the Saskatchewan people were telling me — and 
in our consultation process too the Saskatchewan people tell me 
— that one of the most important things is to live . . . 
government must live within their means. And this government 
has taken that to heart and since taking office just a couple of 
short years ago have reduced our expenditures by 7 per cent, 
the only government in Canada to do that. 
 
We are running an operating surplus of over $500 million. 
However, we have to look at the old Tory debt, the $16 billion 
or whatever, and find $850 million of taxpayers' money to pay 
the interest on it. 
 
Well I guess we can only speculate of what we could do with 
$850 million in this province. I can think of, certainly as 
Minister of Highways, can think of quite a few roads that I 
could fix. I think we could . . . $850 million is almost like 
having two additional education systems like we presently have 
in the province of Saskatchewan. So just think of what we 
could do in education or agriculture. 
 
The initiatives of our Finance minister as well has reduced our 
deficit since 1991 by over $1 billion. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are telling me, yes, some of the decisions you 
make affect me, but I know they're tough decisions and I know 
they're the right decisions. But I will take part in it; I will help 
you with it, as long as we get rid of the deficit. We have a 
four-year plan to get the deficit to zero by 1996 and this is what 
the people want. They want to see their tax dollars, they want 
to see their sacrifice, reduce this debt load, because they're 
concerned not only with themselves but they're concerned also 
with their children and their children's future. 
 
Living within our means has taken a little bit of a different 
angle as well. I think we have taken some initiatives within 
government. We don't get much credit from the opposition — I 
guess there's no political points in doing that, so they don't do it 
— but the freeze on MLAs' salaries is one; cutting cabinet 
ministers' salaries by 5 per cent is another; reducing MLAs 
from 66 to 58. Now that's courage, and I don't think I'd see it in 
either of the other two parties. But you see it here, not in our 
second term of office but in our first term of office. 
 
Also there are other areas that we've had to look at in 
government. If we were going to be responsible to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, we had to look at the deals of the 
previous administration — the Weyerhaeuser deals, the 
Bi-Provincial upgrader, the NewGrades, the Crown Lifes, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And in doing that we 
have saved the people of Saskatchewan millions and millions 
of dollars. We don't get any credit from the two opposition 
parties, but eventually I think they will come onside and they 
will say to us, yes, I believe you're doing the right thing. I think 
the people of Saskatchewan will demand it of them. 
 
Another area that the people of Saskatchewan ask for is a 
strong economy and jobs. The Minister of Economic 
Development released a few years ago the Partnership for 
Renewal and the economic strategy basically outlining 31 
initiatives for economic development in Saskatchewan. Not 
only 31 initiatives, but these initiatives had dates so that 
opposition members, the people of Saskatchewan, could say to 

us, look, you're off course. 
 
That's the first time I think in the history of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that initiatives have completion dates. And it forces 
the government to complete their strategies on a certain date. 
It's a timetable, it's accountability, and it's important that the 
Saskatchewan people . . . well that report card, I guess, they can 
give us a little check or a little cross if we don't do it right. 
 
I attended meetings with the minister in Hudson Bay and in 
Melfort. And the one thing I found interesting, it wasn't just a 
meeting for that community alone but it was for many 
communities in the surrounding area. The understanding now is 
that an individual community on its own probably will have a 
very difficult time of surviving. But communities working 
together, whether it be in health care or economic development 
or whatever sector, must work together to succeed. 
 
The Saskatchewan people are saying this more and more every 
day. They believe that working together with their 
neighbouring community, who they probably would have not 
talked to or not agreed with a few years ago, is their belief on 
how to succeed in Saskatchewan. 
 
REDAs, the regional economic development authorities, is part 
of that initiative. Mr. Speaker, it will mean that communities 
will work together to develop economic initiatives, planning, 
promotion, and marketing of their region — rather than just one 
stone in a gravel pile, but it's like the whole gravel pile working 
together. 
 
The Tourism Authority Act will allow the participants of the 
tourism industry to develop our many tourism initiatives. And I 
can just think of a few in Kelsey-Tisdale area. There are many 
vacation farms; the Elk Festival at Greenwater; the Mushers 
Marathon in Hudson Bay. These are some of the initiatives that 
could be marketed around the world. And these initiatives are 
not government by themselves, but it is government working in 
partnership with industry, with communities, and with the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(2115) 
 
The Trade Development Act will bring business and 
government together to increase the province's ability to export 
unique products. And I'm sure in your area, in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, in Prince Albert, in many areas of the province, there 
are a lot of unique products made by very talented people. All 
they need is a little help to market them. And this Trade 
Development Act will not be just government by themselves, 
but it will be government and people, the 



184 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

partnership between the private sector and government 
promoting this. That's the only way things work now — is 
partnerships and government as the facilitators and not just the 
doers. 
 
The Partnership for Renewal strategy recognizes the 
importance of small-business workers, Saskatchewan people, in 
building our economy. We are consolidating all governments, 
provincial and federal, municipal services, that will allow these 
companies better access to information, better access to the 
different government programs. And this is an initiative that is 
supported by business. 
 
Can government become better facilitators in Saskatchewan for 
small business, for entrepreneurs? The throne speech says we 
can and yes, we are going to. We can work together for the 
betterment of all. 
 
Small business is the main job creator in Saskatchewan, and so 
we were able to help them a bit by reducing the small business 
corporations tax and introducing the manufacturing and 
processing tax credit to encourage small-business investment in 
processing. We are continuing to phase out the E&H (education 
and health) tax on direct agents used in manufacturing. 
 
As Minister of Transportation, I am very pleased to oversee the 
operation of the Transportation Policy Council as part of the 
Partnership for Renewal economic development strategy. The 
aims of the council is to ensure that the transportation policy in 
the province of Saskatchewan supports opportunities for 
economic growth, and that our system meets the needs of our 
communities and is reliable and affordable service for the 
1990s and beyond and is in partnership with the federal 
transportation policies. We are not doing this in isolation; we 
are doing this with the involvement of representatives from 
SARM and SUMA and we are consulting with all stakeholders. 
 
My department is also very active in participating in the 
national strategic highway improvement program. Under this 
program we will continue twinning of Highway 16. This will 
offer greater safety to the people of Saskatchewan, especially in 
the north-west part of the province, but also to a lot of 
Trans-Canada travellers. It will also help our tourism industry 
in the north-west, Mr. Speaker, as it will allow more people 
access to that area. 
 
So not only are the people and government working together 
now, Mr. Speaker, which is quite unusual from the last 10 
years, but also interdepartmentally departments are working 
together to achieve strong, healthy policies that will give us a 
strong, healthy province with strong foundations that will not 
be easily dismantled. 
 
Another area that people have said that government and they 
have to work together is to control government spending. In 
that area I want to talk a bit about the Department of Highways 
because I'm very proud of some of the measures that have been 
taken to cut costs and increase efficiencies. 
 
This year the Department of Highways has started two business 
process improvement projects. They involved review and 
purchasing and accounts payable and a fleet management 
system. The new purchasing/payables system will reduce the 

duplication that is needed at the department and reduce the 
dealings in regards to accounts by seven days, and it is 
estimated that we will save $400,000 this year. The fleet 
management system will mean a more detailed scheduling of 
repairs and preventative maintenance and the expected savings 
is $550,000 this year. 
 
My department also relies on the employees to design and 
construct 20 new snowploughs. These snowploughs will not 
now be built out of the province but will be built within the 
province; 100 per cent Saskatchewan products, and the savings 
is estimated to be $160,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — The equipment section of the 
department will tender the repair parts on a whole provincial 
basis rather than on the individual location basis, and the 
estimated savings there, Mr. Speaker, is $90,000. We're going 
to use in-house duplication services at a savings of $25,000. 
Saskatchewan maps will now be printed only every second year 
and the savings there is $88,000. 
 
And this one here, it's kind of sad, but actually the department 
is looking at the idea of replacing the minister's photo and 
signature from the highways map and replacing it with 
advertising. I guess this shows, Mr. Speaker, that nothing is 
sacred in these efforts to cut costs. 
 
This might not seem great in the scheme of things, Mr. 
Speaker, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well especially the 
picture, I agree. But taking each and every department and the 
savings that are made, it will add up to a lot of dollars. And we 
have to remember that if we look after the pennies the dollars 
will start looking after themselves. 
 
One of the other areas that people have told me, in Regina 
North West, in Kelsey-Tisdale, and across the province is that 
we must work together to protect the family farm. And I am 
very proud of this government's commitment to agriculture and 
the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Farmers have been out ahead of government when it comes to 
the world of agriculture markets. The seeded acreage and 
specialty crops has increased sevenfold. There are 12 per cent 
less cereal crops seeded this year than there were last. Cattle 
and hog production are going to bring revenues to our economy 
of over a billion dollars — that's the highest ever. 
 
As the throne speech indicated, Saskatchewan is the world's 
largest producer now of green lentils, mustard and canary seed. 
And I know for a fact that in the 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

north-east the farmers in my area have diversified into alfalfa, 
canola, peas, leaf-cutter bees, honey production, and many 
other areas of diversification. 
 
It's been tough out there. Last year, for instance, we had the 
early snow in September. But farmers are taking responsibility 
for their destiny and they're working to achieve. They realize 
that just relying on government is not enough, that there are 
things that they can do. 
 
Last year the government budgeted $320 million to support 
Saskatchewan agriculture; 231 million had to be directed to 
income support programs like GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program), NISA (net income stabilization account), and 
tripartite stabilization premiums. 
 
Is this the best way? I guess I ask, and the farmers ask me. 
Farmers and government are realizing that farm support must 
be improved. The Farm Support Review Committee, the 
Minister of Agriculture, have been consulting with farmers 
across the province about new farm programs that would 
support the family farm and farmers' efforts and changes, 
changes that see benefit to their industry. 
 
Their main concern is the stability of the family farm. They 
also want a program that is more market sensitive. They don't 
want to rely just on the taxpayer. They also want a program that 
will look at the costs of production or consider the cost of 
production. And they want a program like I mentioned earlier, 
that is more tax friendly. 
 
The policy document Ag 2000 — and I hope most of you read 
it — was written after a lot of consultation with the farming 
industry and it serves to lay out the guidelines of provincial 
efforts to facilitate, to promote commercially viable, 
self-sufficient and sustainable agriculture for the future, always 
stressing the importance of the family farm and reaffirming that 
agriculture is still our number one industry. 
 
As Minister for Sask Water, I would like to point out the 
involvement of that Crown corporation in assisting the growth 
of agricultural processing and economic development. The 
PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 
Development) agreement, which is a federal-provincial 
cost-sharing program, provides assistance or provided 
assistance just recently to Infra-Ready Products, a subsidiary of 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And what this company does is 
micronizing. It's a micronizing processing facility that uses the 
technology to process wild rice, whole grains, lentil products, 
to reduce cooking time for consumers and open new markets 
for high value processed farm products like cattle feed. 
 
PAWBED is also assisting in development of the New Dawn 
Foods which will process Saskatchewan fruits and vegetables 
for export. PAWBED agreement is also supporting the 
development of fish farming in Lake Diefenbaker by Agpro. 
The fish raised here will find a market in places as far away as 
Montreal and will create new jobs for local people. 
 
Sask Water is also participating in experimental use of hog 
effluent in irrigation at the Elite Stock Farms, which will use 
new processes to handle this waste product and return nutrients 
to the irrigated soils. So we're not only looking at economic 

development but at soil protection at the same time. 
 
These are not the megaprojects that the former administration 
looked at. These are smaller scale but very relevant 
Saskatchewan type of . . . I guess Saskatchewan's way of 
getting out of our situation. Partnership with Saskatchewan 
people with communities on a small scale, not on a 
megaproject scale. 
 
These achievements have been taking place at the very same 
time that we're working with our financial situation and 
reducing our deficit. We have to deal with the legacy of the 
huge debt, the burden of debt, but it proves that at the same 
time if we work together, the people of Saskatchewan and the 
government and the opposition parties, that we can create a 
climate of economic development and job creation. 
 
The other aspect that I have been told by people in my area is 
that we have to make government more accountable to the 
people that elect us and that we serve. And we have done that 
and we will continue to do that. 
 
We've opened up the Board of Internal Economy. Annual 
reports by Crown corporations are now presented to the 
Legislative Assembly. Public Accounts are available in 
Saskatchewan libraries. We have mid-term financial reviews; 
we have earlier budgets; we have third parties receiving their 
budget notifications and information a year in advance. We 
now no longer own our office furniture but it belongs to the 
Crown. And that's just to mention a few. 
 
And people have been very supportive of those initiatives. I 
don't get a lot of credit from neither the Liberals nor the Tories, 
but I do get credit from my constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: — The throne speech is a road map that the 
government intends to use to move ahead, with the support and 
the input of the people of Saskatchewan. We will move ahead 
and at the same time reduce the burden by the huge borrowing 
and the large debts created by the previous administration. 
 
And I want to thank firstly, the people of Kelsey-Tisdale who 
have supported this process and are willing to continue to 
support it, and in fact all of the people of Saskatchewan. I want 
to thank the people for their ideas, their effort, and their 
understanding. And I will be supporting this journey of 
renewal. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



186 Saskatchewan Hansard February 14, 1994 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm pleased to enter 
the debate on the Speech from the Throne this evening. I do so 
with pleasure but also with some trepidation, as those of my 
colleagues who have spoken before me have done so with 
eloquence and sincerity, not to say humour, and that seems to 
be particularly true this evening. 
 
So it is with some nervousness that I stand here, but also with a 
great deal of pride, as I believe that to speak in this debate is 
not only an honour but an important part of my responsibilities 
as an MLA. I believe that the people in my constituency, 
indeed all the people in Saskatchewan have the right to hear the 
thoughts of their elected representative on the throne speech, 
which does after all set the government's plan for the legislative 
session. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I am pleased and honoured to 
share some of my thoughts on this journey of renewal, which is 
the focus of the Speech from the Throne. First I would like to 
commend my good friends and colleagues, the members from 
Regina Lake Centre and Biggar, and congratulate them on their 
fine words when moving and seconding the Speech from the 
Throne. It is a privilege to be asked to do this, and they have 
shown by their remarks that the Premier made a wise choice. 
 
Over two years ago, Mr. Speaker, when I first spoke in this 
House, I congratulated you on your election as Speaker and 
wished you well. May I say, as I said then, that yours is a very 
demanding position, and I believe that you have well earned the 
full support and confidence of all members of this House. I am 
sure that with your guidance, the business of this House will 
continue to be handled effectively, fairly, and with the decorum 
the people of Saskatchewan expect and deserve. 
 
I would also like to congratulate and welcome the new member 
from Regina North West. Life as a member of this Assembly 
brings many challenges and a great deal of work, but it is 
fascinating to discover the variety of interests and concerns of 
one's constituents and to represent them as best as one can here 
in this House. I hope that you will find this work as rewarding 
and satisfying as I have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be part of a government that 
honours its commitments — in this case holding a by-election 
within the six-month time frame requirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could not rise to reply to the throne speech 
without saying a few words about my constituency of 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and the people who live there. Many of 
those people are truly exceptional. For instance, I do not know 
when, if ever, someone from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden has 
represented Canada in the winter Olympic games. But in 
Lillehammer right now is Michael Hall, a speed skater from 
Regina Beach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Michael competed in the 5,000-metre speed 
skating competition yesterday. The winner broke the world 
record, and Michael placed 22nd overall, and we're all very, 
very proud of him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Ms. Murray: — There are extraordinarily gifted people living 
in my constituency, men and women, young and old, involved 
in a wide variety of activities and careers, and I thank them 
again for giving me the privilege of representing them. 
 
Physically, Mr. Speaker, Qu'Appelle-Lumsden is a beautiful 
constituency encompassing as it does the chain of the calling 
lakes, rivers, rolling hills, and vast prairies. One of the best 
ways to appreciate the extent of its beauty is to go trail riding 
though the Qu'Appelle valley, and this is something I try to do 
whenever I have the chance. People come from many parts of 
the world to do this, thus making a significant contribution to 
Saskatchewan tourism. 
 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden also has a rich history. The rural 
municipality of South Qu'Appelle is the oldest in the province. 
The town of Qu'Appelle will be celebrating its 90th anniversary 
this summer, and I imagine that will be quite a party. 
 
Fort Qu'Appelle was the scene of the historic signing of treaty 
4. This happened over a hundred years ago in 1874, and it was 
one of the treaties signed by first nations people and Canada, 
and this event continues to be celebrated every year. 
 
Fort Qu'Appelle has also recently been the site of another 
milestone in the relationship between aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal people. The people of the Star Blanket Band 
and the town of Fort Qu'Appelle have reached an agreement to 
establish an urban reserve in that community. Reaching this 
agreement took extraordinary patience, compromise, and 
sensitivity on the part of many, many people. 
 
I would especially like to acknowledge the fine work of Mayor 
Fran Hahn, Noel StarBlanket of the Star Blanket reserve, and 
Vic Taylor from the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat. This 
is not only significant in Saskatchewan but in other 
jurisdictions across Canada as well and will help to establish 
better and better relationships between first nations people and 
their neighbours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope to have the opportunity to speak at greater 
length about aboriginal issues sometime during this session. 
But to all first nations people in Saskatchewan, and particularly 
to the people of Piapot, Muscowpetung, and Pasqua in 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, I would like to say that this government 
is committed to involving Indian and Metis people in all parts 
of Saskatchewan's society. 
 
I ask you to listen to the words of my colleague, the Minister 
responsible for Indian and Metis Affairs. He has said, our 
mission is to chart the direction which 



February 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

will see Indian and Metis people as full and equal participants 
in our society on their own terms, based upon their culture, 
traditions, and community values — full and equal participants 
in our society, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to working towards 
that goal. 
 
There are many elements of the throne speech which are 
important and which merit further discussion. Many have been 
mentioned by previous speakers and will, I am sure, be 
addressed by speakers to come. 
 
However rather than expressing, for example, my total 
commitment to restoring the financial integrity of the province, 
for which this government has already done so much, or 
speaking on Agriculture 2000 — our Strategic Direction for the 
Future of Saskatchewan's Agriculture and the Food Industry, or 
my particular interest as an educator, the welfare of children 
and the establishment of a children's advocate in the 
Ombudsman's office or any of several other vital initiatives 
outlined in this speech, I would just like to take a moment to 
talk about a subject very close to my heart. Wellness and its 
application to the lives of us all. 
 
Health reform for me, quite apart from delivering health 
services more effectively while using our available resources, 
health reform for me means helping individual people to be 
open to change. And this change can be truly profound. Part of 
this change means accepting and supporting what has already 
been done by this government. For instance, the replacing of 
over 400 former health boards by 30 new health districts with 
local residents serving on the boards of these new districts and 
making the health care choices appropriate for their area. 
 
This change also involves people being open to the new ways 
health services will be delivered. The vision for our health 
reform involves healthier individuals in healthier communities. 
The big change that I see and welcome and encourage in 
people, is their change to healthier lifestyles. I realize that to a 
certain extent our health is predetermined genetically, but we 
all still have choices. And it is in our lifestyles that we make 
perhaps the most important choices. Healthier eating, regular 
exercise, and wise lifestyle decisions can do much in disease 
and accident prevention. We can all become involved in 
Saskatchewan's health reform by taking more responsibility for 
our own health and that of our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize that our population is ageing. 
The average age in many communities is a good deal higher 
than it was 10 years ago. And while we all know that age is a 
state of mind and that being young at heart is vital to a long, 
happy, and healthy life, none the less as people age they do 
require more extensive health services. 
 
Seniors generally want to lead independent lives and thus want 
to remain in their own homes as long as possible. Seniors use 
and value community based services more than any other 
group. As we work towards wellness the government has 
supported and enhanced community based services such as 
home care. Clearly it is better for seniors to stay at home 
whenever possible as an alternative to moving to an institution. 
 
Home care can be cost-effective. It can respond to the 
individual and the community's changing needs. Home care is 

people centred and promotes their control and independence. 
Many health centres are now providing services that were never 
available before, and seniors are some of the main beneficiaries 
of these. For example, foot care clinics, nutrition counselling, 
and blood pressure clinics are some of the health options now 
offered. 
 
Our government has also introduced wellness grants which 
have helped many communities establish initiatives related to 
health promotion and disease and injury prevention. Seniors in 
particular have benefited from these community based 
programs. 
 
Our concern for the health and well-being of our seniors is but 
one of many ways that this government is seeking to make 
things better for the people of Saskatchewan. Since the days of 
Tommy Douglas and the first CCF government 50 years ago 
now, we have shown in this province that we are one of the 
most progressive jurisdictions not only in North America but in 
the world. 
 
The Pan American Health Organization says our health reforms 
could serve as an inspiration and impetus for change. A health 
professional in Australia says Saskatchewan is about a 
generation ahead in relation to commitment, knowledge, and 
support for reorienting the health system to a more balanced 
response. A generation ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray: — Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to be a member of a 
government that is once again showing leadership in health 
reform. I'm proud to be a member of a government that has 
made difficult decisions involving everyone making sacrifices 
on the management of our financial resources and yet can still 
show fiscal integrity in working to eliminate the original $1.3 
billion deficit. I'm proud to be part of an open, honest, and 
accountable government, and I'm proud to support the 
government's plan as it's outlined in the Speech from the 
Throne. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:45 p.m. 
 
 


