






















































Hansard: February 28, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 507 
 February 28, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 9 -- An Act 
to repeal The Agriculture Development Fund Act be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Earlier this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I was giving the Minister of 
Agriculture a number of examples of the good things that the 
agricultural diversification fund has provided through the years 
of its existence, and I was therein trying to encourage the 
minister to reconsider his position.  I realize that the fact that he 
has introduced the Bill to now cancel and abort the agricultural 
diversification fund, that being a fact he won't probably go 
back and change that.  But at least we might encourage him to 
come up with a plan to replace the agricultural diversification 
fund, a building block to continue the work that is being done 
in that area, rather than to just lump all of that money into 
general revenue that has been ear-tagged for agricultural 
research and development and have that money just get lost in 
the shuffle and never be used for agriculture.  That is our fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that by not allowing a program of this 
nature to exist, rural Saskatchewan will be further deteriorated, 
and we encourage the minister to take responsible action in this 
direction. 
 
The examples I talked about earlier today were real 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, not just fluffy talk about what 
should be happening in the agricultural sector.  These were real 
examples of things that have happened in the past and we gave 
you, I think, some good examples of some rather odd projects 
that in fact came through and became real diversification and 
real moneymakers for farmers out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) are famous for talking about 
lofty goals and throwing money at study after study, Mr. 
Speaker.  In fact I think you will recall that I call this the NDP 
disease.  We study and we study and we study and then we set 
up a commission, and then we have a study to study the 
commission, and then we set up a board.  And the board studies 
the commission and the commission studies the board and then 
we have a study to study what the study was about, and we 
study and we study some more. And that's what I call the NDP 
disease because in the middle of all that, all we've done is hire 
an immense bureaucracy of people to study the same things 
over and over again, and we never do accomplish anything and 
we never do start anything new. 
 
Maybe they figure if they step up studies and keep up studying 
every issue that comes back, they won't 

actually have to make any decisions and that's possibly true, 
Mr. Speaker.  They may never have to make a decision.  But in 
reality they've come along with an idea that we should have an 
Agriculture 2000 program and as I see it to date, Mr. Speaker, 
I think they'd better call it Agriculture 20 program, take off a 
couple of zeros because I think there's at least 1,080 too many 
ideas there for these people ever to come up with.  And I don't 
think there's any hope whatsoever that they can fulfil that kind 
of a mandate, so I think they'd better come back to the reality 
and maybe they can come up with 20 ideas and they might not 
even be good ones at that. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, for the NDP to talk about the need 
to diversify our agriculture and food sector is correct.  We do 
need to do that kind of thing. 
 
We have to diversify.  That's what was recognized in the 
agriculture diversification fund originally, was the need for 
diversification in rural Saskatchewan.  But when the 
government rolls such an important initiative like ADF 
(Agriculture Development Fund) into the General Revenue 
Fund the importance is completely lost.  The focus of 
diversification is lost because we no longer have that specific 
organization doing that specific job and the focus of that 
attention won't be on the minds of the minister or the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And we need to have that kind of a focus if 
we're to fulfil this mandate to actually achieve the goal of 
diversification. 
 
Bill 9, Mr. Speaker, allows the government to roll ADF into the 
General Revenue Fund so it can be revised and changed and so 
that the money can be spent in other places, not in 
diversification of agriculture.  And that is what we are arguing 
against today. 
 
We've already seen examples that my colleague pointed out, 
about a million dollars here and there that has been allocated to 
this fund, and suddenly poof, just like some magic again, that 
money seems to have disappeared.  It never went into 
agricultural diversification.  It never went into agriculture 
anyplace that we can identify.  In fact it's gone. 
 
I'd like to know where did the money go.  Somebody should 
tell us.  Where did this money go?  We have this magician in 
the crowd again, this Houdini effect again, all of a sudden poof, 
another billion dollars -- a million dollars rather -- has 
disappeared. 
 
And you can bet that the money won't be going towards 
agricultural research at the hands of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have done absolutely nothing for the 
agricultural industry today.  In fact all they've done is destroy 
rural Saskatchewan.  And anything that has been associated to 
agriculture has been wiped out, destroyed, converted, or 
changed, or has disappeared.  And you can bet, Mr. Speaker, 
that the ADF that we know will not exist in the future and it 
will never exist again under this government. 
 
I challenge them to prove me wrong.  The track record 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

that we have here is so bad that we are absolutely convinced 
that this program, once it's gone, will never, ever see anything 
to replace it, and agriculture will be sold down the river once 
again. 
 
I think you can also bet safely, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
members opposite are finished making the decisions on this 
program and others about agriculture, that rural Saskatchewan 
is going to barely exist any more as we knew it in the past. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, there are so many things that we 
should be pointing out to the minister responsible, so many 
things that I don't think that he has fairly and honestly 
considered when he made this horrendous error in judgement to 
totally wipe out the agriculture diversification fund and the 
mechanisms that surround it -- we believe that there are so 
many things that need to be said about that -- that all of my 
colleagues have decided that they want to talk about this very 
important issue. And we want and need time to get our research 
together to make sure that we can make a proper and fair 
debate out of this thing and to make it into the kind of debate 
that the minister himself can understand so that he can reverse 
his decision by at least introducing some new program to take 
the effect of the one that he's wiping out. 
 
We know he won't be pushed into a corner.  We know that he 
wants to save face. We're going to let him save face.  We're 
going to allow him to do that.  We want to give him some time 
to rethink his position and to come up with an alternate 
program that he can offer to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
us. 
 
And so with that I would move that we now adjourn debate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 10 -- An 
Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the other day when the minister 
introduced the Bill -- actually, it was on Friday last -- and at the 
time, Mr. Speaker, I had indicated that certainly our caucus 
would make a determined effort to get the Bill out into the rural 
communities and talk to the individuals who would be directly 
affected by this Bill.  And I would almost suspect, Mr. Speaker, 
that many of these organizations may not have even received 
the Bill yet since it just went out Friday, and who knows how 
our mail system works . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the 
member from Humboldt says, deep consultation.  Well it seems 
to me that we want to be . . . We want to consult as well.  We 
want people to know what's . . . We want people to get back to 
us with any concerns they have or to point out any defects in 
the Bill that would affect their industry. 
 
The minister indicated the other day, Mr. Speaker, that 

fruit growing is . . . or commercial production of fruit is a 
growing industry in Saskatchewan and we certainly don't 
dispute that.  I think many people in this Legislative Assembly, 
my colleagues and government members, maybe even the 
Liberal members, are aware of the increase that has taken 
place. 
 
As through the '80s . . . The government in the '80s worked and 
talked about diversifying and adding value added to our 
products in the province of Saskatchewan.  And most recently 
the Minister of Agriculture even brought out a paper called 
Agriculture 2000 where he suggested that if Saskatchewan is 
to move ahead in the near future into the future, we're going to 
have to look at alternate ways, alternate crop production and 
ways of putting that product on the market in a value added 
form versus just sending the raw product out of the province 
and then paying to transport it back.  And with that we don't 
disagree.  We certainly agree that we need to pursue avenues in 
which we can add more value to our product. 
 
But it's also apparent, Mr. Speaker, that through the decade of 
the '80s and even into the early '90s, the commercial fruit and 
vegetable industry has probably grown beyond the anticipation 
of the government members of the day, the government 
members of today, and certainly what the government appeared 
. . . through the '80s.  As many people were really wondering, 
are there individuals willing to take the time to diversify 
because I think, when you look at fruit and vegetable 
production, it's not quite as simple and not quite as easy as 
wheat production in the province of Saskatchewan.  And 
maybe that's one reason it took so long for people in 
Saskatchewan to take a serious look at alternate crops and 
alternate methods of crop production.  Because of the fact that 
while wheat prices were high, it was probably the simplest and 
the easiest crop to grow and a crop that you could pretty well 
depend on. 
 
But we have seen through the last decade many, many 
individuals have diversified their farming operations.  Why did 
they diversify, Mr. Speaker?  They diversified, and they moved 
from the strictly wheat production into oil-seed production, and 
in some cases, people moved into the fruit and vegetable 
industry, and we've got a thriving industry.  And I can 
understand why it's time we updated the legislation, especially 
when the last piece of legislation was the original, The 
Vegetable and Honey Sales Act was brought forward, 
introduced and passed in 1947.  And that act provided for 
inspection, grading and packaging standards for vegetable and 
honey commercially marketed in Saskatchewan.   But at that 
time, it certainly didn't anticipate the growth in the industry, 
and I can appreciate why the Minister of Agriculture has 
brought forward this piece of legislation, bringing the 
legislation up to date with the demands in the industry and 
certainly with the expansion of honey and vegetables in this 
province -- vegetable marketing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of a number of the products that 
are available.  We're all aware of the growth industries.  My 
colleague, this afternoon, 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

talked about the blueberry industry.  He also talked about fish 
and granaries . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, farmers 
turning old granaries into avenues of production.  Now it may 
not be along the basis of fruit and vegetable but it would seem 
to me if you can raise fish in an old granary, you can probably 
establish a mushroom plant or something like that, and get into 
commercial production. 
 
But I know that one of the things that Saskatchewan is really 
noted for -- and that was brought to our attention back in the 
World's Fair in Vancouver -- was the saskatoon berry pies that 
were just being picked up.  People were lining up for . . . and I 
think even if you . . . anyplace you go in Saskatoon, a 
restaurant that specializes and has saskatoon berry pies 
available, or wherever you go in this province -- you will see 
people line up because it's something that we can really take 
pride in. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers and 
individuals have shown that they have a knack for finding ways 
to get into alternate crop production.  They're certainly 
interested and they've shown that they can find different 
sources and avenues of adding value to their product.  And I 
believe it would be very appropriate.  The government tells us 
they have done serious consultation. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we have had a difficult time . . . we haven't 
had the same opportunity because we weren't aware of what 
was coming in this piece of legislation.  And even though I 
can't adjourn debate, I would think that we would like to take 
the time to allow a few more individuals to speak on this Bill, 
as well as hopefully have a few days in order to allow some of 
the vegetable and honey producers who are interested in the 
impact of this legislation to get back to our caucus, Mr. 
Speaker, before we move further. 
 
So at this time I'm going to take my place and allow someone 
else to enter the debate. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  During the second 
reading of this Bill, the minister stated that the commercial 
production of fruit is a growing industry in Saskatchewan, and 
we in the opposition certainly agree with this assessment.  
There are many producers in Saskatchewan who produce fruit 
in an effort to bolster their farming operations. 
 
This Bill will allow for the establishment of these regulations 
dealing with marketing of these products.  Because this Bill 
affects many producers with . . . Our caucus is in the midst of 
consulting with those various groups and individuals.  
Regulating an industry can have both positive and negative 
effects, Mr. Speaker.  We want to ensure that this legislation is 
what the producers want and need.  Because we have been 
unable to complete our consultations in such a short time 
between the introduction of this Bill and the second reading, I 
ask that this Bill now be adjourned for a second time. 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 15 -- An Act 
respecting Certified General Accountants be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I indicated the other 
day that we would like to have further opportunity to review 
this Bill.  And I'm just going to make a few short comments, 
and one of my colleagues, or two or three, or maybe some 
government members want to respond. Although one of the 
things we have found with a number of the Bills that have 
come forward is that a number of the Bills that we have seen to 
date really are just housekeeping Bills, and we certainly aren't 
going to spend a lot of time just speaking in this House and 
trying to drag the Bills out.  But we also would believe that it's 
appropriate that the opposition have an appropriate amount of 
time to consult with individuals who would be affected by the 
legislation before it comes forward, before we allow it to 
proceed through second reading and into committee. 
 
I think at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will allow one or two of my 
colleagues, or any government members, to speak on this Bill if 
they so feel it and just make some comments before we would 
ask for further adjournment. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is a new 
Bill, Mr. Speaker.  It's not an amendment to a piece of 
legislation that was already in place so it's going to have an 
impact, Mr. Speaker, on the general accountants of this 
province. 
 
I think it's very important that the people who will be affected 
will have the opportunity to review this piece of legislation, to 
make their views known both to the government and to the 
opposition members.  There may well be something within this 
Bill that needs to be revised, needs to be changed, that perhaps 
amendments need to be put forward to make any corrections or 
any changes that the accountants wish to have placed before 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I feel that it's necessary to have a certain amount 
more time, since this Bill was just presented last week, for 
people to have a look at it.  At this time, I would move 
adjournment of debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister to introduce his officials, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

to first of all introduce Michael Shaw, the deputy minister of 
Environment and Resource Management on my right.  Behind 
Michael is Les Cooke, the associate deputy minister in charge 
of policy and program divisions.  Directly behind me is Ross 
MacLellan, the assistant deputy minister in charge of 
operations division.  On my left is Bob Blackwell, the assistant 
deputy minister in charge of the management services division.  
And on his left is Donna Kellsey, the director of financial and 
the administrative services division.  I welcome my officials. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 
Minister, officials, welcome this evening.  I notice it takes a lot 
of officials to keep the Department of the Environment and 
Natural Resources going.  Perhaps, Mr. Minister, you could 
explain the purpose of your department and what has happened 
within it in the last year in context of the amalgamations of the 
various departments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 
appreciate the question.  On March 17 last year, we 
amalgamated the Department of Environment with what was 
previously the Department of Natural Resources.  This brings 
us very much more focused into a sustainable development 
approach within the department, where the issues of 
development and environmental management appear as part of 
the responsibility of this one department.  Just in summary then 
the responsibilities that this department now exercises are the 
responsibilities for the environment, for forestry, wildlife, 
fisheries, and parks as well. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think 
we'll have an interesting discussion this evening with that large 
amount of Saskatchewan property that we have under your 
department. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many people are now employed within your 
entire department, and how does that compare with before 
amalgamation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the question.  
The two departments combined -- if the numbers I have here 
are correct; I believe they are -- had 1,378 employees when 
they were separate and independent.  The combined department 
now has 1,314 employees. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's a small decrease in the number of 
employees.  I'm sure the people who are no longer there don't 
think it's small, but . . . What areas were those positions 
eliminated in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Last year most of the reductions, Mr. 
Chairman, were reductions in administration efficiencies 
resulting from the integration of the department and a general 
move across government to increase the administrative 
efficiency of government.  Other departments made parallel 
adjustments.  There is a small decrease this year of 10 
employees, mostly from the parks area, and eight of those took 
early 

retirement, so we've tried to minimize the impact on real jobs 
here for people. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You say that 
the majority of the people who are no longer with your 
department came out of the administration area; however, I 
notice in the budget documents that the estimates in '93-94 
were for 7.315 million for administration.  In the '94-95 book, 
your estimates for the '93-94 year were 7.412 million, which is 
a change of almost a million . . . $100,000, excuse me.  Why 
that discrepancy in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the record, as I 
am reading it, says that there was a reduction in administration 
from $7.5 million last year to $7.3 million this year, which 
would be consistent with the reductions I've spoken about. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, 7.315 was the figure that you gave 
in the budget last year, in the budget documents of last year.  In 
the budget documents of this year, the number for last year's 
estimate is 7.412.  That's on page 42 on the top right-hand 
corner -- those figures.  Can you please explain that difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd ask the member to look 
at the issue he's asking us to look at, and look down to where 
the sum is for each of those two years, '93-94 and '94-95, where 
the number for '93-94 is 7.539 million as it is in this year's 
budget record, and the total is 7.332 for this year.  There is a 
line in between there where $127,000 was added in each case. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  In the 
Supplementary Estimates for '93-94 we see under 
Environment and Resource Management an additional $11,000 
allocated to your department.  What was that for, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: --  Mr. Chairman, the $11,000 you refer to 
would be simply an administrative expense slightly over the 
budgeted amount but slightly in excess of it, yes. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- So there was no particular item that 
caused the administration to exceed its budget by $11,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- My officials tell me that there were two 
additional fund audits that were created last year which account 
for that money.  There were $7,300 spent on the audit of the 
environmental protection fund and $3,000-and-some spent on 
the audit of the forest renewal development fund. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  In item 
no. 2 on the Environment estimates, we see accommodations 
and central services.  I'm assuming that is monies paid out to 
another government agency.  Is that correct?  And if so, how 
many agencies does Environment and Resource Management 
pay funds to? 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question.  
You're right, this is the payment to another department of 
government, the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, and that is the only agency to which we pay rental 
fees. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's interesting 
to note that in this year's budget there's a significant increase 
from last year's spending on this -- almost $400,000, slightly 
less than $400,000.  And it's interesting that this is one of the 
major increases in the Environment budget and that it's monies 
that goes to another government agency. 
 
So what's happening here is that monies can be pushed through 
the Environment department to allow SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation) to make a profit, and 
you're simply redirecting government funds which go back 
through CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) which can then be turned around and allocated 
back to the Consolidated Fund as a dividend from CIC or held 
up within CIC itself to be turned back to the government at 
some other time which would be deemed appropriate by the 
government. 
 
Why this increase, Mr. Minister?  What are you getting now 
that you weren't getting last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all the Property 
Management Corporation is not a CIC Crown nor is it put in 
place to make a profit.  SPMC is there to act as a facilities 
corporation for government to access facilities at the best cost. 
 
What happened last year, I believe, is that there was an 
underestimate of the value of the space that was needed for the 
department.  The correction was made for this year, as the 
object of these exercises is simply to properly allocate costs for 
the space that government departments need. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well again, Mr. Minister, in the 
Supplementary Estimates accommodations and central 
services took an extra $220,000 last year.  What was that for?  
Was this for the additional space?  You said you went from 
1,378 employees to 1,314.  I would think that if you have less 
employees within your department, that you would need less 
space; so why do you need more space? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in the process of estimating 
the impact of space requirements as the two departments were 
pulled together, there was an underestimate of the space 
required.  So this is not a case of needing more space.  As the 
two departments were amalgamated last year the reality was 
that more space than had been predicted was required.  The 
cost of that space is the difference that shows up increased in 
this year's budget.  It was just written off last year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'd like you to explain, Mr. Minister, 
what you mean by written off last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I would ask the 

member to hold that question for when the minister in charge of 
Sask Property Management is here to answer the detail of the 
administration of Sask Property Management Corporation.  But 
as I say . . . As I recall it, and if I need a more detailed answer 
than this you can ask me, is that allowances were made for the 
department to pay the additional fees last year.  It was an 
adjustment made within government to allow for the greater 
space required over the estimates that had been anticipated 
when the amalgamation occurred. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're certainly 
managing to confuse me on this one. 
 
You're saying that it was written off last year, that the 
government . . . that SPMC allowed you to have additional 
space, but then you have this additional $220,000 that was 
charged to accommodation and central services on last year's 
estimates, '93-94, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now did you pay for the additional space that you received?  If 
so, was it the $220,000, or where does it come into the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- May I try to put this clearly, and hopefully 
finally, for the member opposite, Mr. Chairman. 
 
As I said, when the estimates were made for the departmental 
requirements, the savings were overestimated and in the 
process of them going through the year and finding what the 
real need was, the department absorbed some of the $400,000 
excess you see in the movement from last year to this year and 
in the Supplementary Estimates they were provided with the 
difference to make up the difference, the total of which now 
appears in this year accurately for next year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think we 
have that one now. 
 
Is there or are there any other payments which your department 
makes to any other government agency or body, such as central 
vehicle leasing.  I don't know where your department gets its 
vehicles from.  Are there any other payments from your 
department to another government agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the major part of any 
payments that are made to other departments go to SPMC for 
accommodation as just discussed.  For vehicles that they 
provide, SPMC operates the Central Vehicle Agency.  Then 
there are, because we operate the park systems, the direct 
expenditures on power in the parks, and of course the operation 
of the department through telephones, so SaskTel, but in terms 
of direct other arrangements, the vehicles and the facilities are 
both provided through SPMC. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- What was the change, Mr. Minister, 
from last year's estimates expenses on SaskPower, '93-94, to 
what you're estimating this year, '94-95? 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll take notice of that 
question and provide the answer to the member directly when 
we can get that information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you 
also provide that information for SaskTel and SaskEnergy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, thanks, we will. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What other 
items would we find under accommodation and central 
services?  When I read through the list here, it doesn't talk 
anything about vehicles.  What other kind of items would be 
found in there that might be significant or that I would think are 
significant, that aren't listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for the 
question.  The issues for which this subvote provides are listed 
here.  And the reason vehicles are not listed in this subvote, as 
we answered before, the vehicles are provided through SPMC.  
But they are provided in a number of locations throughout the 
budget within those units where these services are required for 
the vehicles.  So the vehicles actually don't come under this 
subvote.  So this subvote here lists those items that are paid for 
through here. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many 
vehicles then would your department be operating that belong 
to SPMC or any other agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman.  The department uses about 
450 vehicles.  Most of those are field vehicles in the wildlife 
and forestry and parks administration. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Has this number changed since last year?  
Is it basically the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's basically the same 
number. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Since it's 
basically the same number, what has been the effect in the last 
year on your vehicle expenses, last year, and what are you 
estimating this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, to the extent that those can 
be accumulated, we will accumulate them and forward them.  
There may be some need to wait for SPMC rate setting before 
the final, exact number can be determined in each branch.  But 
we will get you the most accurate information we can get you 
now, and if there's significant change, we will do it another 
day. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Can you break 
that down?  I'm not sure whether your department pays for the 
fuel costs in those vehicles or if that's paid for by SPMC.  Can 
you break that down as to the fuel costs for your fleet of 
vehicles, and also for the licensing cost for that fleet, if you are 
responsible for that? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman.  Those costs are through 
SPMC.  We can undertake to get the information for you 
through them, but it  . . . and if you wish that, we will.  But this 
is more directly an expense of SPMC. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How do you 
break down the costs from SPMC for each vehicle?  Do you 
pay a flat rate per vehicle or do you pay the operating expenses 
or how does that work, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, SPMC sets a rate per 
vehicle plus the operating costs that are incurred by our 
department. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well then you 
should be able to find that information from your own 
department as to the operating costs for those vehicles.  And I 
would suspect SPMC perhaps has that information also.  But if 
you're paying it out of your budget, then you have that vehicle 
and I would request that you provide that, please. 
 
I'll go down a little further under subvote 3, environmental 
assessments.  Environmental assessment program.  What's 
involved in that, Mr. Minister?  And I notice that there's a 
decrease there of almost $90,000 in funding.  If you can explain 
that, please. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to 
respond to the question the member asked.  There are two items 
in the sub-programs there where reductions are budgeted for 
this year.  In the first case, it is a reduced estimate for public 
consultation on legislation that's expected.  There's a lower 
number there expected than we had anticipated.  And on the 
Uranium Board of Inquiry, we pay our share of the costs to the 
Uranium Board of Inquiry, and it's simply a cash flow.  And it's 
anticipated that the amount of money required by the Uranium 
Board will be lower than it was last year. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I hope when 
you say that you're spending less money on public consultation 
it means you have less items to take out to the public, rather 
than you're going to consult less with the public on the items 
you are bringing forward.  Mr. Minister, I think it's very 
important that people have the opportunity, that the general 
citizens of this province have the opportunity, to make their 
views known whenever a piece of legislation comes forward, 
particularly when it's dealing with the environment. 
 
We've seen perhaps, in the last year, that environment has taken 
a back burner position in the public view.  But I think, Mr. 
Minister, that it's still very much in the forefront of the 
consciousness of most people in this province.  If you talk to 
the children in the school system, they are very aware of the 
environment and its importance and think that it should be front 
and centre 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

in most issues. 
 
And I would hope that when you say less public consultation, 
you're not trying to exclude the people from participating in 
this issue.  I think it's very important that they be given an 
opportunity to speak -- and not just speak in Regina and 
Saskatoon, but speak across this province on those issues.  Mr. 
Minister, what items are you planning to spend this $590,000 
on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the member 
opposite for the number of comments that he has made.  I want 
to assure the member that there is a much stronger focus on 
public consultation now than when his colleagues were in 
place, and I want to ensure the member that the department 
believes that's valuable and will continue to work in that 
direction.  There was provision last year for some special 
consultation on The Environmental Assessment Act.  That 
consultation has been completed and we'll no . . . that money 
will no longer be required in the budget. 
 
But I can tell you that as a matter of public interest, there is . . . 
environment is not on the back burner in terms of the public 
interest.  I think the public acknowledges this to be one of their 
most important issues, but they believe that it is being well 
managed.  And I can tell you that the minute that issue is not 
well managed -- as the members opposite might remember 
from their days on Rafferty -- the public will be very quick to 
respond and let you know that something's not well managed. 
 
The department is focusing very much on participation and 
policy making, on consensus processes where possible, and in 
every front where we have major discussions these processes 
are being engaged.  We will be beginning a new process on 
wildlife issues, quickly, where all the stakeholders with a 
significant interest will be at the table.  And this is the approach 
we've used on used oil and many other things. 
 
I can tell you as well that a couple of issues that have been 
controversial in my time in this portfolio are issues that resulted 
from a sense that some people had not felt involved in the 
discussions around the regulations when they were established. 
 
With respect to the underground storage tanks that your 
colleagues . . . when your colleagues passed the regulations a 
number of years ago, which are now coming into force, there 
was a sense from the small-business owners that they did not 
have an opportunity to participate and have their voice heard.  
It does not mean the results didn't have a significant validity, 
but it does say that your colleagues erred in not allowing a 
significant part of the community that was affected by 
regulations to have a say at the time when they were 
introduced. 
 
And I can list other examples, Mr. Chairman, of similar sorts of 
examples where the public ought to have had a greater say 
because it's their lives that are being affected.  And we are 
extending the consultation 

as broadly as we can now to try to make up for some of the 
errors of the members opposite in years past. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Indeed 
there was, say, lack of consultation with some projects in the 
past, particularly Rafferty and Alameda.  Well, Mr. Minister, I 
attended a number of meetings throughout my corner of the 
province dealing with those particular issues where people had 
the opportunity to express their opinions.  Maybe not 
everybody agreed with what was being said, and not everybody 
agreed with what was being done, but people did have the 
opportunity to express themselves. 
 
On the issue of the underground storage, I'm afraid I don't 
know what happened there.  I wasn't following the issue at all.  
But, Mr. Minister, people learn by finding what happened 
before and learning from those examples what was right and 
what was wrong.  And indeed the public has grown with the 
environmental issues.  Ten years ago very few people wanted 
to have input.  They didn't understand the environmental issues.  
They had no particular interest in them unless they were 
directly affected. 
 
People are now realizing that even though they may not own a 
service station that has an underground storage tank, they are 
affected by the decisions and by the actions that are taken there.  
Today the people who have the underground storage tanks want 
to have more consultation with you and your department.  
They're not happy with what's happened five years ago, they're 
not happy with what happened two years ago, and they're not 
happy with what's happening now. 
 
They need to be able to sit down and talk to you.  Your 
department and yourself need to go out and talk to the people 
affected.  And it's not just the people who own the sites that 
have the underground storage, but it's the communities, it's the 
RMs (rural municipality), it's the urban municipalities, it's the 
financial institutions who may be left holding the bag for the 
costs. 
 
I saw an article dealing with an issue in the St. Lawrence.  The 
federal government is looking at a ship that sank a number of 
years ago that still contains oil.  They're going to remove this 
oil and float the ship out of there and salvage this product 
before it pollutes the St. Lawrence River and causes a major 
environmental damage.  But who's going to pay for that, Mr. 
Minister?  The federal government is going to pay for that.  
Obviously at some point in time somebody owned that oil and 
somebody owned that ship, but they're not the people who are 
picking up the bill for this. 
 
When you look at the underground storage tanks, yes, today 
somebody still owns that site, most likely.  There are a few 
sites that titles are not clear, but in general somebody owns that 
site.  But the person who now owns that underground storage 
tank was not the sole person to benefit from the fuel that was 
stored there or the fuel that was sold out of that site.  The 
government benefited. 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

If you look at your taxes right now on fuel, the government 
takes about 50 per cent.  It might even be more than that.  The 
oil company whose name was on the sign benefited from the 
sale, and the owner of the site benefited from the sale, Mr. 
Minister.  I think there's a policy decision here that needs to be 
made by government as to what is their responsibility in this 
issue. 
 
You're looking at costs right now of 20 to perhaps $300,000 to 
clear up some of these sites if it's needed.  Well the individual 
small town, rural Saskatchewan service station cannot possibly 
pay those kind of prices.  The $20,000 he might be able to 
handle, but he certainly is not in a position to handle 2 and 
300,000 -- especially when the fuel that went through that 
pump the government got 50 per cent of the benefit for. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that when it comes time to consult 
with people, that's one of the items that needs to be consulted 
about.  You need to go out to the public and talk to them as to 
what they think should happen on those underground sites.  
Who should pay? 
 
If you've got one part per million of gasoline outside of that 
fuel storage tank, is it important that the tank be removed?  Is it 
important that all the soil be removed?  Because what happens 
to that soil when you remove it?  You simply take it to another 
site, spread it on the surface, and allow that fuel to evaporate. 
 
Now are you causing more pollution by allowing that fuel to 
evaporate into the atmosphere than you would by having left 
that small amount of contaminant in the soil, Mr. Minister?  So 
I think there's some very big policy decisions here, and some 
very big issues that you need to address, and I'd like to hear 
your views on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question of 
the member opposite, to allow me a chance to respond briefly 
to it. 
 
First of all I want to say that, thankfully, things do change.  I'm 
not sure exactly what the hearing process was during the 
Rafferty-Alameda debate, but I'll tell you one thing: no one 
would have accused the government of the day of having 
listened to whatever consultation they engaged in.  And I can 
tell you, that by . . . I'll tell you that by contrast we set up 
consultations with the purpose of listening. 
 
I want to say that one of the very first groups of people that met 
with me when I took over the responsibilities for the 
Department of Environment was the group of concerned 
citizens from the constituency of the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood.  And we had a discussion through 
which I initiated a review of the regulations that we inherited.  
And as a result of that review, we established an action plan 
which is allowing a longer period of time for people to comply 
with the regulations as set out by the government of your party 
earlier. 
 
I want to say as well that inherent in the question you 

ask are a number of myths.  The purpose of the regulations, and 
as we've adjusted them, is not first to deal with contamination. 
The hope is that we prevent contamination.  The hope is that no 
underground storage tank ever leaks and I think it only makes 
good business sense to try to work with service station owners 
to ensure that storage tanks never leak. 
 
The fact is when tanks approach 18, 20, 25 years, they are 
virtually guaranteed to leak.  So the purpose of the regulations 
is to anticipate when such environmental damage might occur 
and, in everybody's interest, replace them or provide protective 
mechanisms so that they will not leak, before some 
environmental contamination takes place.  I hope nobody 
would disagree with that basic intent. 
 
Then if one finds that leakage has occurred and there is a 
hazard as a result of it -- and there are many hazards that can 
result from leaking gasoline tanks including vapours finding 
their way along buried lines to people's basements and causing 
explosions; including getting into aquifers or penetrating plastic 
fittings in water lines, resulting in chemicals in the water which 
can be cancer producing -- when there is a leakage that is a 
hazard, then there needs to be a clean-up. 
 
The dilemma is that these are real business costs, as much as it 
is part of the real business cost of a farmer to put in the crop 
and to control weeds and to control pests.  So it is a real 
business cost to replace a tank that has worn out, and the 
dilemma and the dilemma for which I have a great deal of 
empathy is that for a number of small service stations, the 
annual cash flow is not large enough to pay for this real 
business expense.  Yes, in some cases, there has been a 
previous leakage, but that isn't necessarily the case in many of 
them. 
 
The fact is that here is a facility that is getting older, that is not 
doing the business it used to do, and to actually do the business 
of protecting against spillage by replacing these tanks before 
they leak, is a business cost that is very difficult for many of 
these service stations to endure. 
 
(2000) 
 
We have, as a result, in our action plan, allowed the 
communities to decide whether there will be an extension of 
time, because it is the community that in some senses is 
affected by either the closure of the facility, or any increased 
hazard by an extension.  So we've asked the community to 
provide a judgement with us so that it is a community 
judgement on whether extension should be provided, and we 
will try to be sensitive in that regard. 
 
Additionally, I've set up a task group which involves the full 
spectrum of people involved in the service station industry.   
And I'm expecting a report from them shortly to receive further 
advice from them on what we ought to be doing with respect to 
managing this very sensitive issue, so that we do in fact 
practise sustainable development, paying attention to the 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

economics, the environment, and the impact on the community. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, coming 
back to our underground tanks . . . And you could argue that 
yes, I was part of the government that last few years in the 
1980s.  But I can tell you this, Mr. Minister, that had myself 
and a few of my other colleagues had our way, Mr. Hodgins 
wouldn't have had the ability . . . and I'm not sure if that's one 
of the reasons he left this House on that whole argument over 
the environment question -- but we had some very significant 
arguments on that.  And I think some of your staff around there 
may know of some of the discussions that took place even on 
some of the legislative review at the time. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when it comes right down to it, what serious 
studies has the department entered into to justify or to say that 
tanks after they're 25 years are probably faulty or leaking or 
that every tank leaks and that we've got to . . . Just because a 
tank is 25 years or a service station has been in business for 25 
years, it's time to dig them up regardless of whether a person 
has just bought the business, has only been in business for two 
years and really doesn't have the kind of revenue to justify the 
changing of the tanks. 
 
It would seem to me that there may be a lot of tanks out in rural 
Saskatchewan, and I think when you get down to it even the 
agricultural sector . . . When you look at the problems that are 
going to be faced with this legislation that's coming forward 
and who knows what we're going to have two or three years 
down the road, there isn't going to be a citizen across this 
province that will not be affected by one little department of 
government. 
 
And I think, number one, I'd like to know what kind of 
intensive studies were taken; whether or not there were in these 
studies a process that the department can go out to a site and 
determine whether or not there are actual problems with that 
site that would justify, simply because of a time period, that 
tank should be removed or that a site should be cleaned up.  I 
wonder if you could respond to that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the previous member had 
talked to us about consultation.  I want to say that in the 
process of managing environmental affairs we have, I think, 
with the Canadian Council of Ministers of Environment, one of 
the best examples of trying to bring reasonable measures 
together on important environmental issues so the public has a 
chance to speak through all the stakeholders in the community 
on important issues. 
 
And there have been a number of important issues around 
which this has happened in my time as president of the 
Canadian Council of Ministers of Environment, and in the time 
since then, where to deal with forestry and energy and other 
kinds of issues we have brought together stakeholders from 
every sector to advise us on what we should do on 
contaminated sites, on a number of issues.  So that then you 
have a national framework for discussion of 

these issues within provincial jurisdictions. 
 
I'm not sure that the process was complete at the national level 
with respect to underground storage tanks when the discussions 
took place in the province, but there was some western 
guidance generally on the issue of the corrosion of steel 
underground storage tanks.  And the initiatives indicate that 
once tanks are in excess of 15 years old, they start representing 
a very high probability of leakage. 
 
There is another factor with respect to tanks, which is static 
electricity.  I've spoken with feedlot operators who have 
purchased tanks which have been dug up, which have not been 
cathodically protected so that the static electricity does not 
become an agent for corroding the tanks, where tanks that have 
only been in the ground five or six years have been severely 
pitted.  And that information, I think, is accepted generally as 
the reason why one of the protective mechanisms that service 
station owners are now requested to use -- if they put steel 
tanks in -- is cathodic protection so that this electrical impact 
on pitting the tank does not take place. 
 
I guess I would like to see any evidence that suggests that's not 
right.  We can provide studies that have formed the background 
for this general approach, but I think more importantly it is not 
the question of whether steel tanks rust or corrode when they're 
underground.  We know they do and we have a pretty good 
idea about how long they are safe in that environment.  The 
important thing is that we anticipate that as closely as possible, 
that we change those tanks and protect those tanks.  We allow 
them to live as long as they can by adequate protection, but that 
we change them before they do spill some of what they contain 
into the environment and cause a hazard to the environment.  
And we're attempting to, through adjustment of the regulations, 
make these as sensitive as we can and, as well, through 
adjustment of the regulations, make the clean-up as low cost as 
can possibly be made under the circumstances. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 
we're not disputing the fact that steel tanks aren't going to rust 
and corrode and eventually create a problem.  What I was 
basically asking: what criteria was developed in all the studies 
you've done that would suggest . . . I would think that there 
would be . . . in your studies you would have determined that 
under certain soil conditions tanks break down.  Some tanks . . . 
steel breaks down quicker than in other conditions.  And to just 
say, let's say after 15 years steel tanks are obsolete or I mean 
they've outlived their usefulness, they must be dug up, it would 
seem to me that you'd have a process where you could do some 
studying and assessing, maybe through soil samples or 
whatever, that would determine whether or not is essential that 
those tanks be dug up and new ones put underneath. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could, first of all, give us tonight any 
studies that you have done, or the studies you have done.  
Release those studies to us so we've got some information on it. 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

And as well, in the process of all the study that has been 
undertaken, are there some alternate methods whereby you can 
test these sites prior to, rather than just going in -- whether it's a 
service station operator, whether it's, say, on a farm or a 
manufacturer's site -- that you can assess how much damage, if 
any damage, and maybe it's an ongoing thing once you've done 
a test? 
 
If that site is still clean, if you will -- no contaminants, no 
problems -- then it would seem to me that that site should be 
allowed to operate to the point . . . with the understanding that 
eventually it's going to have to be probably cleaned up.  Or I 
shouldn't say cleaned up, but maybe the tanks removed and 
new tanks put in. 
 
But we must have . . . surely there's a process that allows for 
some testing of these sites so that we're just not demanding 
every 15 years that steel tanks be dug up.  Because as I said, I 
would think there are different soil conditions all over the 
province and the rust factor would be different under these soil 
conditions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I agree with the member 
opposite that varying conditions may well cause a difference.  
As I had indicated earlier, the probability of leakage increases 
very quickly after 15 years.  The limit that we have placed on 
the length of time a steel tank can be in the ground is 25 years.  
Till then it can be demonstrated that these tanks are not leaking, 
they will not have to go if they're not in a Class A site, they will 
not have to be upgraded.  And according to the regulations as 
we . . . or according to the action plan that we have put 
forward. 
 
But I think the member forgets one thing which we should not 
forget.  This is not an issue of government; this is an issue of 
business cost.  The member opposite is talking about the 
potential leakage of a tank or their needs to replace it as though 
this were first a government concern.  It is a government 
concern only in that if it ever starts to leak it is a public hazard 
and therefore a concern of my department. 
 
But this becomes very much a business proposition for the 
service station owner.  If the service station owner extends the 
life of the usage of a tank to avoid a $20,000 capital outlay -- or 
whatever it would be to replace the tanks 
_- and as a result suffers contamination of the soil that might 
cost $40,000 to clean up for having stretched it two, or three, or 
four years longer than was advisable, this is a real business cost 
for the owner.  And our involvement in this is only as trying to 
identify the issues of public safety, public health, and the 
impact on the environment of what happens when you let it go 
too long.  Therefore the regulations as we've put them in place, 
and therefore trying to fine tune them to minimize the impact. 
 
But at the end of the day, just like if the brake line breaks on 
my truck, and I run into the side of my barn or whatever and 
cause damage, that's not a good business judgement on my part.  
I would have been better off to have addressed that safety 
concern on my vehicle before it caused additional damage.  
And so is 

it with owners of service stations that have tanks.  It doesn't 
take away any of the financial dilemmas that your colleague 
raised earlier, about how do you pay that cost.  That's a difficult 
question, especially for small service stations when their cash 
flow's not high.  I acknowledge that.  But much of this is a real 
cost of doing business. 
 
Once a steel tank is of a certain age, there's a risk of it leaking, 
there's a certain capital cost in replacing those tanks.  But there 
is a more severe cost if they're not replaced, and leakage 
occurs, and the soil remediation has to take place.  We can be 
as sensitive as we can about all of that.  We can review the 
regulations to make sure that they are not too harsh, make sure 
that we properly balance the environmental concerns and the 
business concerns.  But at the end of the day, to allow a tank to 
leak and create that extra expense is a business judgement, and 
if it's allowed to happen, it's not a wise business judgement. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 
certainly I think anyone running a hog operation might have 
trouble keeping the brake linings right up on their trucks. 
 
Mr. Minister, certainly when you talk about fuel tanks, and I 
think any small dealer whether they are an independent dealer 
or working with a large corporation, I'm not sure what the 
process is, but I would think that any dealer out there would be 
very foolish if they didn't have a measure or some way of 
measuring their tanks on a nightly basis because yes, it's going 
to be dollars out of their pocket if their tank starts to give them 
problems.  So I would think that most dealers who are being 
very shrewd and honest business personnel will do everything 
in their power to guarantee that they don't have any leakage. 
 
And I would also trust and hope that as we're changing and 
developing regulations, that our developing methods that we 
can use to . . . and I believe you already have some, as new 
tanks are put down, different ways -- I don't know if you've got 
what you call snippers and other avenues of checking the tanks, 
so that down the road you've got an avenue that you can check 
rather then just digging up, to see indeed, just to measure 
whether or not this tank is really leaking, other than the process 
today. 
 
(2015) 
 
But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, there must be a process 
in place. And you indicated that you're working with groups to 
allow for a time period.  And I think one of the areas, one of the 
communities that has hit the news and even the national news, 
is certainly the community of Wapella -- struggling just to keep 
one service station in business. 
 
And it wasn't the fact that they did have two; the one just ran 
into problems, a business problem, and had to close the doors.  
But the other business, and I believe the tanks have only been 
in eight years -- it's a fairly new business -- and I think one of 
the problems, what 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

happened in this situation and maybe happening across, 
especially rural Saskatchewan, maybe even urban 
Saskatchewan, is the fact that some of our major oil producers 
or companies are using the changes in regulations as a means of 
getting out of providing some of the small, independent dealers 
with their fuel. 
 
And it would seem to me that if we can work with our small 
dealers; work with our small fuel dealers, whether they're 
independent dealers or whether they're working for a company; 
if we've got methods of testing and of course, today I trust, as 
with the regulations, we've got the type of equipment that can 
be installed that, who knows, maybe these tanks can last a 
lifetime, more than 25 years, maybe 50 years, maybe through 
two or three dealers, depending how long an individual 
maintains a business -- although nowadays businesses change 
hands, it seems, in 5 or 10 years.  They don't last through the 
lifetime of one operator and then pass on to the next generation. 
 
So these are some of the concerns I'm raising, Mr. Minister, 
and the fact that I think people are asking out there, number 
one, let's design some mechanisms that give us the ability to 
test and not just run around the province digging up a site 
because it's 15 years old. 
 
And also as my colleague mentioned, I think maybe we need to 
look a little bit in the long term as well as the fact that the 
overall impact, I don't think, should be strictly borne by the 
dealer themselves.  I think maybe the major companies have a 
factor, and I think it's government that puts down the 
regulations.  It's government that brings in the regulations and 
it seems to me . . . and certainly we derive a fair bit of revenue. 
It seems to me that government possibly could be a member, or 
should be a member as well in some of the changes, not only 
the changes, but helping with some of the clean-up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, on some of the topics that 
the member raises, one in particular I am not in a position to 
comment authoritatively, what the motivation of the big oil 
companies has been in rationalizing their system over the last 
number of years, whether it has been in fact as the member 
opposite suggests, to try to minimize their risk through these 
kinds of ventures.  That's a question somebody else will have to 
answer. 
 
But I want to say that there are dilemmas with the traditional 
measuring of tanks in that, because of temperature changes and 
volume changes that I'm sure the member opposite learned 
about when he was taking grade 10 science, fuel can be 
pumped into a tank at one temperature and represent a different 
volume when it cools down or whatever the fact may be, so that 
there are errors there.  And it's my department's advice that 
often when leaks are found in service stations, companies have 
kept decent records and have found in spite of that that leaks 
have occurred that they have not detected, because it doesn't 
take very much every day to amount to a significant spill. 
 
But again, as the member opposite has suggested, 

there are new mechanisms now to deal with that in addition to 
the cathodic protection we talked about for steel tanks 
underground which reduces the rate of corrosion.  There are 
piezometers which are installed in the areas near the tanks 
which do provide a measure of gasoline fumes that would 
result from spillage.  We're going to be requiring better tank 
level alarms that identify when tanks are going to be full so that 
they don't spill through the filling process.  And generally we're 
looking at ways of sensibly avoiding spills and sensibly 
extending the lives of tanks as long as we can. 
 
As I may have not mentioned explicitly before, we have given 
a one-year extension to all service stations from the original 
due date of the regulations as passed by the members opposite.  
And then in areas that are not high-risk areas, extensions 
beyond that are going to be allowed for people to address the 
questions of the safety of their facilities and the environmental 
soundness of their facilities as sensitively as can be done, 
recognizing that these are major expenditures for small service 
stations particularly.  We have no lack of empathy, as I said 
before, for the difficulty this kind of investment causes. 
 
I think we need to remember that if we don't make the 
investment in preventing the tanks from leaking, then the costs 
associated with clean-up are even more difficult to handle and, 
at the same time, pose risks to both humans and other parts of 
the life systems that support us. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, how does the department determine 
the damage that is going to be caused by a leak?  How 
extensive before they would call for a digging up of the site or 
a clean-up of the site?  How do you determine that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have the 
concentrations with me, but they grade the concentrations 
according to the nature of the area, the nature of the subsoil, the 
nature of the aquifers nearby.  And while some level of 
contamination is allowed if there is no hazard to the public, 
these gradations are all according to measures of risk.  So it 
very much is a risk management approach.  I could forward to 
you the department's guidelines in this regard if that would be 
helpful to you. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- I think it would be appropriate, Mr. Minister.  I 
certainly wouldn't mind seeing those guidelines. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason I ask that is because a lot of questions 
are being asked as to how we go about the process of clean-up.  
And many people would wonder why in the world we would 
dig up a site.  If you've got a good clay base it would seem to 
me that product isn't going to move through that clay base that 
significantly.  It probably will stay in that format versus 
digging it up, hauling it out, and spreading it out on the surface 
and discing it. 
 
Where are the toxins going, Mr. Minister, if they're not seeping 
off into the air?  They're evaporating into the 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

air.  It would seem to me we would be just as well to leave it in 
the soil where it presently is if it's not really moving anywhere, 
rather than putting it out on top, spreading it out, trying to get it 
to evaporate.  Or if we happen to get a rain -- which we tend to 
get once in a while in the province of Saskatchewan -- then it 
would seem to me that it leaks back into the soil.  I for one 
have a hard time trying to understand how in the world this is 
called a clean-up if it just seems to me that all we're doing is 
adding to some of the environmental hazards we're trying to 
protect ourselves from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 
the member opposite is asking.  These are all questions that I 
had a chance to ask very early in my portfolio because people 
asked me those questions as well, and they continue to.  I make 
a point of asking wherever I stop, when I'm travelling across 
the province, to find out how these regulations are affecting 
people and they almost always tell you. 
 
And the other reality is I have difficulty going to church on 
Sunday, or to choir practice on Tuesday nights, or anywhere 
else for Christmas dinner where somebody isn't raising these 
very questions that you ask.  And I think we shouldn't 
underestimate the extent to which people feel these questions 
and need to understand the basis for these actions.  And I 
appreciate the questions being asked because this provides one 
more opportunity to try to provide some understanding of the 
reasons why these issues need to be addressed albeit as sensibly 
as possible. 
 
I asked the very specific question that you asked about heavy 
clay, saying it wasn't my opinion that gasoline would travel far 
in this clay.  And yet I'm told that right here in Regina there is 
contamination in this heavy clay here going down 90 feet in 
places where leaks have occurred.  We cannot assume that once 
the gasoline is in the environment that it will not migrate 
somehow, somewhere. 
 
As I was having a discussion with a friend of mine who was 
once my student when I taught science in Milden more years 
ago than I want to acknowledge, he said . . . when I said this 
program was going to be on W5 a few months ago, he said 
come and have them talk to the people in our building in 
downtown Regina where we now are having to completely alter 
the ventilation system to keep the gasoline fumes out of this 
building, because from somewhere gasoline is migrating 
through Regina heavy clay, through somebody's parking lot 
walls into the air system of the building. 
 
We need to acknowledge that gasoline, once it's exposed and 
free, will travel somewhere, hopefully not too far and hopefully 
not doing too much damage, but it can't simply be ignored.  
And hence when a clean-up is required, the member opposite 
asks the question of what sense it makes then to dump it on the 
land. 
 
That technique is called land farming and the purpose of it is to 
expose these hydrocarbons that are in fuels to microbial action 
so they are broken down to carbon dioxide and water in a 
harmless fashion.  When 

contaminated soils are dumped on a surface they are not simply 
abandoned there and left to wash or migrate.  They are to be 
cultivated on a regular basis to aerate, to allow bacteria to act 
and to allow the action of the sun to work with the bacteria to 
break down the substances in the soil. 
 
The member opposite has, like me, probably seen piles that 
have been temporarily stored in places, and people have asked 
these questions.  These are storage plans that are part of the 
final disposal of that soil, at the end of which they must be 
treated in some fashion, and presently the most economical 
fashion of treating those soils is by land farming. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Well you called it farming or working this land up 
to break the hydrocarbons down and the toxins to, I guess 
release them or break them down so they . . . I think you 
mentioned something about hydrogen and water.  That soil -- at 
the end of the day, is that soil suitable for vegetation?  In the 
process, I'd like to know, is it treated in some form and how do 
we know that it's totally free of all the contaminants we've been 
trying to get rid of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The question the member asks reminds me 
of a story a friend of mine told me once.  He had cut his finger, 
caught it in the auger and gone to the doctor.  And the doctor 
was sewing it up and my friend asked the doctor as he was 
sewing it up, will I be able to play piano when this heals?  And 
the doctor said, oh of course.  And my friend said, well that's 
good because I couldn't play it before. 
 
So if the soil was productive soil before, once it's been treated 
in this fashion it will be productive soil again. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Except for the fact, Mr. Minister, once you've dug 
up . . . and in a lot of the subsoil and a lot of cases there's . . . in 
the Regina area of course we've got heavy clay loam that goes 
down some substantial feet.  But come out to our area and start 
digging around and that is substantially different type of clay 
and try and farm it afterwards and see if you're going to be able 
to grow anything on it without having to really add some other 
products to that soil.  It would seem to me that we're talking 
different soil types, and that's what I'm saying.  Is it necessary 
to dig up every pocket of soil type and just to aerate it out?  
From what I gather, your officials are telling me that yes it is.  I 
wonder how many of them have really taken the time to burrow 
around and see where it's all disappearing.  Can you answer 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Two corrections.  First of all, I hope that I 
have not inferred that all soil around underground storage tanks 
needs to be moved and treated.  It only requires treatment if it 
is considered to be hazardous in its location, and those 
measures, as I've said earlier, we will forward to you in terms 
of what those guidelines are.  Otherwise the material can be 
used as back-fill again if the tanks have been dug out and 
removed and new ones put in their place.  Or if no tanks are 
replaced, it's used as back-fill if it's not hazardous. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

The other inference that you incorrectly took from my 
comments from before -- and maybe I wasn't clear enough in 
describing the process -- was that this soil is dumped on your 
and my clay loam where we're going to grow the canary seed 
next year.  For the most part that isn't what happens.  What 
happens is that, on landfill sites where registered, there are 
places where this soil can be distributed thinly and then worked 
on sites approved of by my department for that purpose.  It's 
not out on your or my back forty, and it's in a controlled landfill 
setting. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Toth: -- So I take from the first part of your answer that 
there are situations where it isn't that necessary to dig up sites.  
I lost my train of thought for a minute there.  In the other 
situation, when this soil that's put out in these sites . . . and it's, 
as you say, farmed, what kind of costs have been incurred to 
date to try and revamp this soil, and who covers the costs for 
bringing this soil back into productive nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 
member opposite for the question.  The cost is a cost that is a 
responsibility of the owner, and as I said before, it suggests that 
it would be good business practice to instigate measures in 
one's facility so one did not incur the cost of having to treat the 
soil because the cost of digging it up and trucking and land 
farming it is a significant cost.  But it is only the cost of 
digging it up, providing the site, and cultivating it on a regular 
basis for a six- or eight-week period till the contaminants are 
broken down. 
 
The comparative other costs, if one were to have to use some 
other form of bioremediation where one would actually use a 
soil treatment facility that did not use the natural landscape and 
the natural action of microbes and the sun, could be very, very 
much higher. I would think in the order of 100 times the cost of 
the land farming system. 
 
I have read some articles on this topic suggesting that some day 
in the future, people might challenge the land farming 
mechanism on the grounds that the fuel is not all broken down 
by microbial action. Some may in fact be escaping as a vapour 
and evaporate rather than be broken down and so people who 
have concerns about vapour leaking in the atmosphere suggest 
that there may come a time when we conclude that land 
farming isn't an adequate treatment measure.  Contemplating 
the cost of alternate measures would be very much more 
financially damaging by comparison. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess that points out 
the one thing I mentioned a little earlier about these vapours 
from this soil that's being land farmed. 
 
You mentioned the cost to the owner.  I don't remember the 
exact location, but I remember, I believe it was the small fuel 
retailers who were in, and mentioned a place where the tanks 
were being done up and they had to do a clean-up where they 
were 

anticipating something like a $70,000 cost to replace tanks that 
turned out to be almost a $500,000 cost for clean-up.  I'm not 
sure if it was through the process of digging it up and they 
found that there was contaminants, and they dug out a much 
larger area . . . And when I think of digging up an area, because 
I happen to live in a suite, on the east, just off of Broadway, 
there's a service station out by an OK Economy and two years 
ago I think they started digging it up.  They dug the front part 
up and now I've noticed they've got to the back part.  They 
must have dug up that whole lot.  I'm not sure how deep they 
went. 
 
When you talk about these costs and we say, well it's the 
owner's responsibility, now if those tanks have been there say 
15 years, that business has changed hands three times.  The 
person who has just taken it over all of a sudden has a major 
cost on his hands where the department comes in and says, 
there's contaminants in the soil here.  We're going to have to 
. . . This is going have to be dug up; you're going to have to 
change the tanks.  And I think that's one of the questions that 
not only are we raising but that are being raised with us all the 
time. 
 
And you continue to argue that it is the owner's responsibility.  
It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, who are we protecting the 
environment for?  Is the environment being protected just 
because it's for that owner?  It's for each and every one of us.  
We have a part in the reason the service station is over there.  
We have a part in why those fuel tanks were put down there 
because we ask for convenience -- service stations. 
 
Let's take a look at all the landfill sites around the province, 
and that's another major problem that we'll probably get into as 
we discuss this a little further.  It's for the convenience of 
people.  I guess maybe what you're asking individuals to do is 
go and build their own little landfill site and start burning their 
garbage on their own property rather than hauling it to a major 
landfill site and have lightning strike every once in a while. 
 
But I just can't buy your argument, Mr. Minister, that it's got to 
be simply the owner, when we as a public not only benefit in 
the taxation on fuels but we benefit -- every one of 
us -- benefits from the cleaner environment we live in and we 
all have a part in it.  We probably had a part in the reason some 
of these problems are incurring right now; it wasn't one person.  
Every one of us has in some way had a part in that.  And that's 
why it would seem to me that as a government we're setting the 
regulations; we should also play a role in helping people out 
through a problem that in most cases people inherited. 
 
And I don't know how many situations are like one community 
that I represent where a young couple had bought this business 
about five years ago and with all the regulations coming down, 
and they seemed to be turning enough money that . . . In fact I 
was told their payments were all up to date; they probably had 
the business pretty well three-quarter paid for, but all of a 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

sudden they realize the cost.  There wasn't enough to justify 
him digging up his tanks, and he went and handed the keys 
over to the local lending institution.  Who's going to be 
responsible for the clean-up there?  I guess you're going to 
argue, well it's the lending institution for having given the loan 
because they now own the property. 
 
So that's why it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that we all 
should have a part.  Now the department would argue no, it's 
the responsibility of the owner. 
 
I think . . . was it the Saskatchewan taxpayers are talking about 
the fact that if the government doesn't balance the budget, the 
Premier should be decked, or cabinet should be decked, with a 
5 or 10 per cent salary decrease every year.  Maybe it's time we 
started looking at some of the people setting regulations and the 
fact that their little . . . rather than just sitting in an office here 
in the city, maybe some of them should be out there running a 
service station for a while so that they get a better 
understanding of what the people on the outside, who are 
paying the taxes to pay their salary, are going through when the 
regulations come down. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, don't you agree that this is something that's 
not . . . goes beyond just the individual but it's something that 
we're all involved with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I hope the member 
opposite's leader wasn't listening when he was talking about 
what you would do to his salary if you weren't balancing 
budgets, because all of your colleagues would presently be 
bankrupt if they'd followed the suggestion that he just 
suggested.  And that might be a just reward for the havoc 
they've wreaked upon Saskatchewan citizens for their 
irresponsibility. 
 
The dilemma with the operation of businesses -- and the 
member opposite may have some advice in this regard -- but 
when do you as the government, or do we as the government, 
conclude that somebody has been the victim of a circumstance 
and when the taxpayers somehow should come up with money 
to compensate?  Because somebody, knowing there is a 
risk -- a business risk in the liability -- will consider this in the 
purchase price of a facility.  And if the next person does not, 
then how does it make that judgement? 
 
But at the end of the day, the reason that you or I as farmers, or 
as fuel dealers, or as a business person engaged in some other 
form of business through which contamination to the 
environment and some public risk might occur, one of the 
reasons why we try to avoid that kind of circumstance is 
because of the liability that we incur in putting someone else at 
risk.  And if my gas tank were to leak causing the water supply 
of a community, or the neighbouring farm, or whatever to be at 
risk, or causing the well in someone's pasture to be 
contaminated so their cattle get sick, and somebody traces that 
back to my contamination, then I'm liable to pay for that. 

And I don't want to be in that position as a business person.  I 
don't want to be responsible for somebody else's losses, and I 
don't want my farm put at risk because I didn't manage that risk 
carefully.  I say to the member opposite that certainly this is a 
matter that was not as well understood 10 years ago as it's 
understood today. 
 
But I'm not clear when the member opposite would have the 
government intervene in a circumstance like this because, as I 
said earlier, I make the business judgement about when the tank 
that I'm using is at risk.  I make the business judgement about 
whether to buy a service station with a tank that might be at 
risk.  I either take that liability on from the previous owner by 
buying it without condition, or I reserve the right to hold the 
previous owner responsible and through court action pursue 
that.  These are all ways in which this is measured in the 
business sector. 
 
I wish I had money.  I wish we as a government had money to 
help everybody who was in a situation of business risk because 
of one factor or the other.  But I'm not sure that that would be a 
fair allocation considering that some people don't find 
themselves in that circumstance because they've made their 
business judgements differently.  And it's a very difficult 
measure when government begins to try to intervene in that 
kind of circumstance. 
 
At the end of the day, having guidelines and regulations that 
affect this are useful because it gives the business owners a 
guideline about when they really are at risk, so we've tried to 
flag that for them.  It gives them a sense about when they will 
be at risk if they allow contamination to occur, and it protects 
the public and the environment from the damage caused by 
contamination.  And while I recognize that this can be difficult 
for people who have to make the investment, it is a real cost of 
doing business in that environment. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it would seem to me that the 
minister who has suggested that had there been reductions to 
premiers' salaries or cabinet ministers' salaries through the '80s 
that there would have been substantial reductions at that time, it 
would seem to me if the minister has been following the 
auditor's report there wouldn't be any people left on the front 
bench because there'd be no salaries.  No one would want to 
stick around and do a job for nothing. 
 
I also recall the fact, Mr. Chairman, that the present minister, I 
think, was a voice for the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association sometime in the '80s who was one of the 
individuals who was always complaining.  He wasn't talking 
about deficits at that time.   As chairman of the school trustees 
association his major concern was the government was cutting 
back, wasn't giving him enough to work with, was changing the 
formula from 40 to 60 per cent to a 50/50 or 46/55 . . . or 45/55, 
pardon me.  And I think, Mr. Chairman, for the sake of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan, it's time, as the 
Premier said the other evening, that the real facts were thrown 
out there. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

The Premier stands in his place, the Minister of Finance stands 
in her place and says the deficit is under control.  And then the 
Premier has the audacity to stand up after the federal budget 
and suggest that we should look at the overall picture.  It's not 
whether the Minister of Finance brings the accumulated debt or 
the Consolidated Fund under control; it's the Consolidated 
Fund along with the other avenues of government that have to 
be brought totally under control.  And I would suggest in the 
province of Saskatchewan we face the same thing. 
 
Where was the minister when his colleagues were writing off 
debt in the Crowns and transferring it and building up a 
substantial debt on the consolidated side back in 1991, rather 
than taking the budget that was presented by Mr. Hepworth in 
1991?  He could brag to the people today that they're already 
operating on a balanced budget on the consolidated side. 
 
If you want to argue about finances and about spending in this 
province, the deficit isn't under control.  You're close to 
balancing the consolidated side; it's just a matter of . . . But you 
really haven't been as honest with the people of Saskatchewan 
as you could have been in the fact that no new taxes . . . Since 
when haven't we had no new taxes?  Just because power rate 
increases and telephone rate increases and environmental spill 
clean-up is the responsibility of the owner, isn't that a tax? 
 
(2045) 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if we want to start arguing about the 
finances of it, let's put the real financial picture out there, so the 
people can really determine whether or not we've got things 
under control.  And if you're going to look at that, you've got to 
look at the unfunded pension liabilities which the auditor 
mentioned last year in his report that the government 
conveniently left out of their report.  That's a cost to the people 
of Saskatchewan; that's a cost to the taxpayers.  That unfunded 
pension liability which is helping, well, pretty well everyone in 
this room, all the people, the elected representatives here since 
1981 are now on a money funded, so it's a different sort of a 
pension plan. 
 
But when we look at this aspect about whether we've got it 
under control and we've got to do these issues on the 
environment, so we can protect the environment, so we can 
control our deficit, I think that, Mr. Minister, in my mind, here 
again I don't think you're really being totally honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I thank you for taking the time to at least assure us -- and I 
believe you -- assure us that there has been some consultation 
take place, that you are looking at ways in which you can work 
with businesses who are caught in this predicament or business 
people of having . . . running businesses or where storage tanks 
need to be replaced, and they're looking at major costs.  But 
again, Mr. Minister, I would suggest we need to look at some 
of the other alternatives. 
 
When government becomes involved or if 

government becomes involved, I don't really know, but those 
are some of the questions that I think have to be and will 
continue to be asked.  And whether you're here in two years 
time, whether you're even here as minister . . . maybe we're 
going to have to argue with a new minister next year; I don't 
know.  I'm not sure if the Premier is going to want to leave you 
in the hot seat on the environmental issue, Mr. Minister, but it 
would seem to me that this is a question that's going to continue 
to be out there until we reach a point where we determine 
whether or not the public is really all that concerned about the 
environment.  And I think I just read a headline the other day 
that the environment seems to be an issue that has dropped 
from the public's attention, that it's now jobs and deficit, and 
the environment is down here; whereas two or three or even 
five years ago, environment was almost the number one 
concern that seemed to be cropping up in people's minds. 
 
And so as I say, Mr. Minister, there are a number of issues 
there, and I don't think we should be always working to try and 
to confuse the issue that we're discussing today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I did not hear a question in 
those last comments, but I want to assure the member opposite 
that we did . . . that the reason we began consultations is 
because the regulations as they existed in this regard did affect 
people.  And the reason we have an advisory committee is 
because we want all the people involved with these issues to 
have an opportunity to express them in a way that influences 
government policy. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite, with reference to his 
long monologue about finance, which relevance I didn't quite 
gather to the discussion we'd had to that point, I want to say 
that if the member opposite had been listening to my address on 
the budget speech the other day he would have recognized that 
having addressed the tragic budget deficit left by the colleagues 
opposite, that the next issue on our agenda was the issue of the 
environmental deficits we face as a society, both locally and 
nationally and internationally.  And it's very clear to me that 
those have to be done in a way that's sensitive to the economy 
and to the communities that are affected.  And it will continue 
to be our objective, my objective as minister, to make sure that 
initiatives taken by this department will respond to those three 
elements of sustainable development: the impact on the 
economy, the environment, and the community.  Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 
Minister, you may want to make comments about the deficit 
accumulated by the previous government but you have to stop 
and take a look at where that deficit is now.  According to the 
taxpayers' association in this province you've accumulated over 
$2 million since October 21, 1991 . . . over $2 billion of 
increased debt.  The auditor says that you have run up the debt 
to over $20 billion total now, so I think, Mr. Minister, you have 
some answers . . . some 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

questions to answer for thereto. 
 
I'd like to carry on with the underground storage tanks.  You've 
mentioned some policy changes there, that you've had a 
one-year extension in place, Mr. Minister.  I believe that 
extension is running out shortly -- April 1, I believe.  If that's 
not correct then you can correct me on that.  You also talked 
about communities being put into the position of judging 
whether or not a tank should be removed or not, whether an 
extension should be given.  I wonder if you would mind 
explaining that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the regulations as they 
were passed by the members opposite, came into effect April 1, 
1994, were scheduled to take effect.  The action plan which we 
announced a number of months ago now will extend the 
compliance date for everyone by one year to April 1, 1995.  
And then for people who do not have facilities on class A sites, 
which are very high-risk sites because of the soil and the 
proximity to other facilities or aquifers, all of those will have 
an opportunity for a further extension.  And according to the 
advice we received in the action plan, that extension would be 
granted with community approval.  And the exact mechanism 
for community approval has not yet been determined ,but 
presently on environmentally managed circumstances we use 
either local elected bodies and/or public meetings to gain that 
kind of approval. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, have you considered the 
liability consequences of going to a community and them 
saying, yes, we believe this site should be given an extension.  
What kind of liabilities would that community be assuming if it 
was to agree to that kind of an extension? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I spoke earlier about the 
liability resting with the owner, the liability for damage 
resulting from environmental contamination still rests with the 
owner.  If I'm a farmer and I place my used oil in a place that 
contaminates a water supply or something that someone else's 
cattle depend on, I become responsible for that.  If battery acid 
accumulates somewhere in concentrations because I placed my 
batteries in a certain place and they leak and affect someone 
else, I the owner, am liable for that. 
 
But the community does take on some responsibility in making 
the judgement for the extension.  The community needs to be 
satisfied.  The community could in fact, not grant an extension 
and thereby requiring someone to meet the earlier compliance 
dates if the community felt that this was a concern to them.  
Because in the end these are difficult to measure risks when a 
tank is not yet leaking, but a tank can start leaking on any day 
of the week. 
 
And it would seem to me that in a public meeting of that sort, 
the community would be concerned about the security and the 
extent to which the owner was safeguarding the community in 
their own action plan for upgrading.  So while the community 
will not take on a liability in that decision, they will take on 

responsibility for guiding that decision. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I would suspect that if 
your comments were brought before a court of law dealing with 
this type of an extension where you're saying that the 
community will not have any liability, but will have 
responsibility, I would suspect that a judge when it came down 
to monetary compensation, would say that if you have 
responsibility you also have liability.  And I think a good 
number of communities would greatly fear that because that's 
the situation they're being placed in right now. 
 
If someone has walked away from a site or if they can no 
longer find the owner of a site, there are fuel storage tanks right 
now that have been in the ground for more than a half a 
century.  There may or may not be an owner to those tanks.  I 
know of communities, village sites, that no longer exist as a 
village, but yet there was a fuel storage tank under the ground 
and that fuel storage tank in most likelihood, is still there.  It's 
now owned because of taxes, by the RM or the 
village -- another community.  So who has liability if a 
community says yes, we think this tank can remain in the 
ground for a period of time and we are assuming responsibility, 
even though they're not assuming liability? I would strongly 
suspect that a judge in a court of law would say, if you have 
some responsibility you also hold some liability. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the circumstance the 
member describes is not dissimilar from the circumstance our 
department engages in on a regular basis.  The fact that 
somebody might be in compliance with our regulation but still 
have their facility leak and cause damage, does not cause the 
department to become liable for the contamination that arises 
from your facility.  You as the owner continue to be 
responsible for making the business judgements. 
 
In protection of the public, the regulations are there to try to 
ensure that in almost every case those regulations cover off the 
circumstance.  But in trying to be sensitive, as you're 
encouraging, there may be times when, because of the 
particular circumstances and the way your facility was 
installed, it might leak at an earlier date and you retain the 
responsibility as a business person to deal with that and to 
suffer the financial consequences of contamination or damage 
to someone else.  I'm not a lawyer but this is the way it applies 
in the administration of our department and in the 
administration of the circumstances you describe. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If you're 
going to allow communities to have some responsibility in this, 
or some say, I think then it would be important for you to also 
give them some comfort in stating that they would not be held 
liable. 
 
I'd like to know how many tanks have been replaced in the last 
year, these underground storage tanks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know if the numbers 
are available for how many have been replaced.  I will give 
them to you if they are available; 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

if not, I'll give them to you later.  But about 50 per cent of the 
tanks in the province are in compliance.  Again, may I remind 
the member opposite that the tanks don't have to be replaced to 
be in compliance; they have to have proper protection and be in 
the ground for less than 25 years.  And presently, with a year to 
go now before the regulations come into force, about 50 per 
cent of the tanks in the province at this time are in compliance. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I'm disappointed that you 
wouldn't know the numbers on this, because this has been an 
important issue, not just this year but last year when the 
Environment Committee toured the province this was one of 
the major items that came up at every meeting.  And we 
questioned you on this last year, Mr. Minister, and I would 
have to assume that your members that were also on that 
Environment Committee pointed this out to you, that this was a 
major issue. 
 
And you've had the past year where these tanks were being 
removed, and I'm disappointed that you wouldn't know what 
the number is because it has caused a major financial strain on 
a good many people in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many tanks have leaked, to your knowledge, 
in the past year, that your department has found? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are about 7,500 sites 
in the province, and as I said earlier, about half of those are in 
compliance.  I don't know the exact number that have been 
upgraded or dug up in the last year, but in my. . . I am guessing 
several hundred of them have been. 
 
And the best judgement my officials can make is that, 
associated with those, probably there would be spillages with 
respect to half.  Those may not all be leak spillages. Those 
could be spillages during filling or surface spillages on site.  So 
there are many different causes for contamination. 
 
But in the last eight months, there have been five very serious 
spills that represent potentially hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in clean-up and damage, so you get this range of 
activity from tanks at risk and having lower levels of 
contamination from leaking to potentially major, major leaks. 
 
And to repeat the question as the member opposite has put it is 
instructive in terms of identifying the difficulty here.  The 
member opposite asked the question: how many tanks have 
leaked in Saskatchewan in the last year?  And if someone had 
an answer to that question, some of these safety measures 
would be less critical.  One of the reasons that tanks above 
ground are, for some, easier to manage is because you can then 
tell when leakages do occur. 
 
But the great dilemma of tanks sitting under the ground, you 
don't know what conditions exactly 

they're experiencing.  You don't know what corrosion has taken 
place.  You don't know when spills have occurred and surround 
the tank that may end up migrating to other sites and causing 
danger, and it's generally because they're under ground and 
therefore unknowns that this becomes a difficult issue. 
 
It's also the reason why we've, in the new regulations, required 
the installation of piezometers through which you can detect 
leaks and catch basins underneath bowsers and a number of 
measures to try to minimize the risk of contamination 
happening from the leaks. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well again 
I'm disappointed that you did not have a number for the number 
of leaks that your department was aware of in the past year.  I 
would have thought that would be a statistic that would have 
been fairly simple for your department to track because either 
you have a leak or you don't have.  You can guess as to the 
number of leaks that you would have based on 7,500 
underground tanks, but your department must have investigated 
a certain number of leaks. 
 
When you say that about half of the several hundred tanks that 
you suspect were dug up that there would have been spillage 
occur there, but would that spillage have occurred at those 200 
tanks that you suspect were dug up, or would they have 
occurred at the other 7,300 tanks, half of which are in 
compliance with your regulations.  You haven't explained any 
of that, Mr. Minister.  You talk about perhaps several hundred.  
But surely, Mr. Minister, your department has some real 
numbers on these issues.  If you do have, I'd like to hear what 
they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if I'd thought this was 
going to be a four-hour session on the finer points of 
underground storage tank management in Saskatchewan, I 
would have had those numbers and many more for the member 
opposite readily at hand. 
 
I want to congratulate my officials on having as much 
information available for this discussion as they have because it 
was their belief that we would be dealing with the broader 
budget of the department which includes all other aspects of 
environmental management, fisheries, forestries, parks, and 
wildlife as well.  And to have brought this kind of detail on all 
those subjects would have required several semi-loads to bring 
the paper in here and the whole process of doing that wouldn't 
have been a very sustainable process. 
 
But I can assure you that they will access the information 
you're seeking from their files, and forward it to you so that the 
information which you have every reason to have, will be 
available to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, with an attitude like 
you just presented, I'm sure that we can carry on for four hours 
on every part of your department.  So, I hope that you have . . . 
don't drink a lot of fluids before you enter here because you 
will be here for a while. 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

Mr. Minister, your claims on the spills.  You talk about five 
major spills.  Well, Mr. Minister, in my mind there is a 
difference between spills and there is a difference between 
leaks.  Spills can occur without containment.  A leak is in a 
container of some sort and you have something escaping.  If 
you have a fuel line hose laying on the ground with the end 
open and fluid runs out of it, that's a spill, but it certainly isn't a 
leak.  So when you talk of five major spills, Mr. Minister, what 
are you talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I didn't answer the 
question with enough specificity before, there have been about 
three hundred spills in the province in the last year.  If I 
incorrectly used the word spill by referring to the serious 
leakages that occurred in five cases, I would correct that now to 
say that what I was referring to was five cases where 
underground storage tanks leaked and caused serious damage 
as a result of its escape of the fluid that was contained in tanks. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What caused 
those leaks?  Was it corrosion, was it a breakage, or what was 
the cause of it?  Internal, external corrosion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just so that I don't get into 
giving answers without enough specific detail on the question 
of how many, because I am responding in part from the 
memory of my officials, I will send the member a list of all of 
those leaks that occurred that were reported, in addition to 
those leaks that would have been identified through the process 
of replacing tanks. 
 
I will send the member the file on the tanks which have been 
removed in the last year and the leaks associated with them and 
provide as much detail to the member opposite as is available, 
so that he knows the full width and breadth and height of what 
has escaped from tanks. 
 
But in general there are a number of causes for spills that occur 
in installed facilities.  They include corrosion and physical 
failure of pipes, and overfilling, and many other causes.  But so 
as not to speculate about what might have been the cause in the 
five cases I mentioned, and to make sure that I haven't left out 
any, I will send the member that detailed information. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 
appreciate that.  With all the various leaks and spills in the past 
year, what has been your department's assessment of the 
environmental damage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to say that again we 
could provide much more detailed information to the member 
opposite if we had our spill control centre and our 
environmental assessment field staff here to provide the 
answers, but believing this was a session on the budget, we 
didn't bring those particular people with us. 

But the extent of damage from spills can be very, very 
extensive.  One of the particular spills in the city here affected 
one of SaskTel's major fibre optic communications networks 
which becomes very expensive to replace.  Another one 
affected the SaskEnergy natural gas supply lines and in the 
process causes another risk if that line is to break down. 
 
Any time that leaked material finds its way to a water system, 
it's a very, very serious concern.  First, if it affects a drinking 
water supply because it takes . . . I think a litre of water will 
contaminate a million gallons of drinking water and whole 
water systems have to be replaced once contamination occurs 
in them. 
 
So I can say to the member opposite that just from the 
examples you had used earlier with respect to the minor spills 
that occur, minor leakages that occur in some of the examples 
you've described where it's very easy for the cost of a clean-up 
to go from 50 or 60 or $70,000 to several hundreds of 
thousands of dollars simply by having a very much deeper 
migration of the substance and needing to remove much more 
material. 
 
I don't have costs on the spills, on the leaks which I have talked 
about here but we will, to the extent that that information is 
available, since it is not the department's responsibility to 
determine the cost of the clean-up, only to ensure that the 
clean-up is done to the extent necessary to protect the public 
. . .  That information may not be available in many cases, but 
it's clear from the questions the member asked earlier that he's 
aware of the order of magnitude of some of the even lower 
quantity leakages. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there is indeed a cost 
associated with any spill that someone will bear the 
responsibility for.  When you try to assess the damage to the 
environment, you have to think in terms of replacement.  If 
somebody's well is damaged that they can no longer use it, then 
you have to look at the cost of either providing a new well or 
transporting water.  And I think that would be something that is 
assessable to find out what . . . how much value that had. 
 
How much property damage has been caused by this leakage?  
I don't mean environmental damage, but damage to real 
property. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, we would 
have no direct way of knowing the cost of a number of these 
clean-ups, but certainly in some of the extreme cases, clean-up 
costs involving into the millions of dollars is quite conceivable.  
The department has been more directly involved in the case 
where the SaskTel and the SaskEnergy lines have been 
affected, and those costs are major, major, major costs. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One of the 
issues that you brought forward was that 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

individuals could be harmed by leakage of gasoline or other 
hydrocarbons.  How many people, Mr. Minister, have been 
harmed in the last few years -- make it longer than in the past 
year, but in the last few years -- because I think that it's 
important that the public have some awareness of what the 
personal injury side of this could also be.  We contemplate in 
our own minds, we envision the damage to the environment.  
But what are the personal injuries that have resulted from spills 
or leakage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The question the member asks, I think 
we're fortunate in Saskatchewan that we know of no one who 
has been killed directly as the result of an explosion from 
leakage.  We hope that water systems have been protected so 
that people have not contracted serious illnesses like cancer or 
other illnesses from contamination in water supplies.  I say that 
we hope, because at the end of the day we are aware that when 
spills into the environment occur we don't always see the end 
result of where the contaminants go, and we don't always know 
whether somebody is unknowingly consuming contaminated 
water or put at risk by air which has fumes in it from leakages.  
So at the end of the day, all we can do is, as I said at the 
beginning of this discussion, recognize that it is not desirable 
either economically or environmentally to have leaks into the 
environment. 
 
It doesn't make sense to lose the product.  It doesn't make sense 
to put the environment at risk.  Therefore whatever guidelines, 
education, support we can give to making sure that people 
operate their facilities in such a fashion that leaks do not occur 
and that they replace their equipment before the environment is 
put at risk, that's objective no. 1.  Objective no. 2 is to identify 
when leakages have occurred, to try to access the hazard from 
that circumstance so that we do not have migration of the 
leakages into a place where we have no control over it. 
 
So as best as we can, we will try to determine that leakages are 
contained and if they're serious that they be cleaned up so that 
we do not have unknown migration of hazardous materials 
which would put people at risk.  I surely hope we do not ever 
have anybody seriously injured.  I sincerely hope that 
somebody hasn't been injured in a way that we have not known.  
At the end of the day, it's our responsibility to make sure that 
our regulations are such that we prevent the leakage of the 
contaminants and that once they have leaked to the extent that 
they are a hazard that those substances are cleaned up.  And I 
would hope to work with your cooperation to achieve those 
objectives. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure that 
no one in this province wants to encourage pollution, that we 
all want to prevent it. 
 
But when you talk about the long-term effects that pollution 
might have on us as individuals or us as a society, I think there 
is a lot more things involved than simply hydrocarbon 
pollution.  Some figures would indicate that one in four persons 
in Saskatchewan will at some time be a victim of cancer. 

Now I don't think those numbers can be strictly related to 
hydrocarbons.  There are a lot of factors within society that 
take place that need to be considered, and we don't have the 
information that says this is the culprit or that is the culprit. 
 
We have studies that would indicate that coffee is a major 
potential carcinogen and yet I would suspect that the majority 
of the people in this room consume a fair amount of coffee in a 
day, and the later the evening the more we consume. 
 
So when you're looking at the long-term effects that leakage of 
hydrocarbons can have, it's not the only item which will have 
an effect on the health of our society. 
 
One of the issues . . . you talked that you thought we were 
going to come in here and discuss the dollar signs on the 
budget.  Well the underground storage tanks is of major 
concern to a great number of people around this province, not 
only businesses but farmers, municipalities, either urban or 
rural.  They all are very concerned about this. 
 
You talk of 7,500 underground tanks, Mr. Minister.  You talk 
of potentially a few hundred that were removed last year.  How 
many businesses, Mr. Minister, are affected by these 
regulations?  How many businesses have these 7,500 
underground tanks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly we're aware 
that many of these tank locations are multiple tank locations.  I 
don't have the exact numbers here but we will provide that 
information to you.  And again, let me say that as you speak 
about the concern raised by urban and rural municipalities and 
by communities, it is exactly for that reason that in the action 
plan we have involved them in the process of approval, because 
we have heard those concerns, and we believe that they have a 
legitimate interest in helping to evaluate the circumstance in 
their community.  And I believe when they help make that 
decision, they will also help us with the information they gather 
from their activities locally in making sure that the work we do 
in environmental management continues to be sensitive to the 
local community concerns. 
 
It's absolutely critical that that discussion continue to take 
place, and we continue to involve SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and other 
community representatives in the full discussion of these issues 
in our hazardous substances advisory group. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You talked of 
cathodic protection.  Do you have any studies that would 
indicate that cathodic protection provides better protection than 
does a bare tank, depending on the soil type? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Clearly such evidence exists and we will 
forward the appropriately referenced material 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I think 
it's very important that when you're considering cathodic 
protection or bare tanks that you take a serious look at the soil 
types.  I've seen pipes in the ground that have been there for a 
good many years -- 30 years or better -- that are not corroded.  
I've seen locations with cathodic protection that was improperly 
installed in which a leak occurred in less than a month.  These 
pipes were both the same quality -- quarter-inch pipe. 
 
It's a matter of the soil types as well as the installation.  If 
cathodic protection is installed improperly, you have a much 
greater risk than if you just simply have a bare tank because 
your corrosion on a bare tank is going to occur throughout the 
whole tank, over the whole exterior of it.  In improperly 
installed cathodic protection, that corrosion is concentrated in 
those spots that are not proper.  So do you have the studies that 
would relate to the different soil types for cathodic protection 
and bare tanks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure if the studies that have guided 
our actions to this point include that kind of specific reference.  
But if they are in our available list of references, we'll refer 
them to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We've been 
restricting our discussion basically to underground fuel storage 
tanks.  But, Mr. Minister, they are not the only hydrocarbon 
storage facilities in the ground.  How do these regulations 
impact on other storage facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not sure exactly what the question is, 
but let me rephrase it for the member, and if it isn't correctly 
rephrased, correct me. 
 
I believe the question that the member intended to ask is what 
other facilities do the hazardous substance regulations affect.  
And if that is the question, they also affect the chemical 
fertilizer storage facilities that are parts of the agricultural 
infrastructure across the province. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There's also 
one other type of storage facility that we have a large amount 
of in Saskatchewan, and that's oil and gas pipelines, which 
carry hydrocarbons which are potentially as polluting as 
gasoline and diesel fuel.  How do these regulations impact on 
those storage facilities?  If you have 1,000 feet of 4-inch pipe, 
you have 16 barrels of oil in that.  That's larger than most fuel 
storage tanks are.  What kind of an impact does this regulation 
have on those kinds of facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the interprovincial facilities 
that operate in Saskatchewan are regulated by the National 
Energy Board.  The small facilities that operate internally have 
to meet our guidelines. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, not all pipes in this 
province are controlled by federal authority.  Most of them are 
controlled provincially.  If you're 

talking the major transportation systems, TransCanada 
Pipelines and Interprovincial, certainly those are federally 
controlled.  But there are major pipelines in this province that 
carry a large volume.  My question is, how do these regulations 
impact on the provincially regulated pipelines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- They have to comply. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, if they have to comply, 
will they have to be removed from the ground at a 15- to 
25-year period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The regulations, as we've spoken about 
with respect to underground storage tanks as far as I'm familiar 
with them, do not apply in directly the same way, but the 
general principles do that those facilities have to be 
cathodically protected and have to meet requirements for leak 
protection, the details of which I will again forward to you. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because 
there are a number of pipelines around this province that do not 
have cathodic protection in place because they were put in the 
ground 15, 25, 35 years ago.  And even those with cathodic 
protection, there is potential problems there.  And I'm sure that 
the people who own them are going to be concerned about 
these regulations.  They are part of that business group that is 
concerned, same as the fuel storage people who own the 
underground storage tanks. 
 
Mr. Minister, how do you assess or assign ownership of a 
pollutant if there is no immediate point that you can designate 
as being the source of the pollutant?  If you find gasoline 
running down the sewer in Regina, without finding a leaking 
tank, how do you assess the ownership?  Who pays? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the object of the spill 
control and management in our department is to in fact 
determine what the source of the leak, spill, is and to assess the 
area because an owner for the source for the contamination 
must be found in order to stop it.  And the costs will then be 
applied to the source in a sense that the owner will be 
responsible for remediating the damage that's occurred as a 
result. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Does your department pick up the cost in 
the meantime for the clean-up and the containment of the 
pollutant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Our department ensures that control is 
exercised quickly and that appropriate actions are taken.  And if 
an owner if not found, identified immediately, yes we do in the 
interim look after those costs and then bill the source when the 
source is found. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- In all cases, do you find the owner, or do 
you assign responsibility to someone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not aware of any cases where the 
owner has not been located in these cases. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in the cases of fuel 
storage sites that no longer have someone with title to them, 
how do you assess and assign responsibility in those cases 
where the individual may have passed on and there's no 
immediate heirs, or how do you assign ownership in those 
particular cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- All the property in Saskatchewan that I 
know of is owned by someone, and the owners are responsible. 
 
I want to come back to a point the member opposite raised a 
few minutes ago, and I neglected to respond to it.  And that was 
the question of what the owners of these facilities who would 
be interested in the impact that our regulations had on them, 
what their concern would be in that regard. 
 
I want to reiterate that all the regulations do is attempt 
sensitively to offer protection to the public against risks from 
leakage or spills.  I think, and it's my experience with business 
in this province, that they recognize the risk of not managing 
their environmental risks properly.  Whether they are mining 
companies or fuel companies or chemical companies or 
fertilizer companies, they recognize that there is a cost 
associated with not dealing with the environmental hazards that 
their business . . . that result from their business. 
 
This has nothing to do with government regulation.  It has 
everything to do with the fact that they know that if there is a 
leak or a spill that causes damage, they are responsible.  Their 
financiers don't want to carry that risk.  Their owners do not 
want to carry that risk.  Therefore the most prudent strategy for 
any and every business is to manage the business in such a way 
that environmental contamination does not occur. 
 
This is a simple fact of business life.  If what I'm doing as a 
business places someone else at risk, I'm going to be 
responsible to pay.  And if I don't want to add another expense 
to reduce my bottom line at the end of the day, I'll manage that 
risk in such a way that there is no risk to someone else.  We 
need to continually remind ourselves that it is good business to 
manage one's business environmentally. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I agree with you that 
risk management is indeed the question here.  But it's the 
question of also fairness on who is responsible and time frames.  
Most of the small service stations around this province have not 
had the time to get their businesses in order to be able to afford 
a major change in their underground storage tanks.  They've 
had five years in which this legislation has been coming 
forward, in which the regulation has been coming forward.  
They are particularly concerned when their tanks are not 
leaking. 
 
Mr. Minister, businesses with tanks that are leaking will not be 
in business very long because they are losing the profit off of 
that fuel.  It's in their own personal interests to see to it that 
their tanks do not 

leak because that's their money that is disappearing if it does 
leak.  And most of those that have a leaking tank have no 
problem in removing it from the ground and doing what is not 
only right for their business but what is right for the 
environment. 
 
But the serious problem is removing those tanks from the 
ground when there is no leak.  That is where the majority of 
these small businesses find a problem, what they find 
unacceptable.  They say why can't something else be done.  
Why can my system not be tested?  Why cannot test holes be 
put in the ground to monitor my tanks for a leak?  You say you 
have meters that will do this.  Fine.  Put them in the ground and 
test.  But their major concern is the removal of a tank that is not 
leaking.  They would like to have a time, a longer time frame in 
which to build up a reserve so that they can afford to remove 
that tank. 
 
The government, society as a whole, in dealing with the 
environment, is saying that for society's best interest we need to 
protect ourselves, we need to protect the soil, the air, and the 
water.  But it's a benefit to society.  While if your fuel storage 
tank is leaking, it's a benefit to that individual business man to 
prevent it from happening or to stop it from happening. 
 
It's in the benefit of society as a whole that these regulations are 
in place that say after 25 years you will replace your tank -- not 
if it's leaking, but you will replace the tank.  Since it's of benefit 
to society, Mr. Minister, perhaps society then should be bearing 
some of the costs.  If those tanks are to be replaced on the near 
term, then I would suggest that society, along with the business 
involved, should bear some of the responsibility.  If the 
businesses involved are given a longer time frame in which to 
build up a reserve, sort of an environmental depreciation to pay 
for the replacement of that tank, then I believe it would be 
possible for them to do so. 
 
But it's those that will be affected on the near term, that are not 
in the financial position to replace these tanks when they're not 
leaking.  If they're leaking, I haven't heard of a single person 
who is concerned about not replacing it.  They understand their 
own financial losses when they leak.  They understand the cost 
to the environment.  But it's when there is not a problem today 
and they have to come out of the ground tomorrow that there is 
a concern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well if I could find an official from my 
department who could determine the day before the tank began 
to leak so that it could be removed that day as opposed to the 
day after it began to leak, this would be a marvellous asset.  But 
the . . . I think, while the basic premiss the member opposite is 
suggesting, that more time should be made available so that 
people can plan for those changes, this is exactly what we have 
done. 
 
The regulations as passed by your government, were passed in 
1989 to come into effect in 1994.  We have . . . so since 1989 
there have been now five years passed.  We have provided a 
one year extension for all service stations; that's six years.  For 
service stations 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

who can demonstrate that their tanks are not leaking and who 
get community approval, they can extend them until 1998.  So 
there's another three years . So this is already a nine-year 
compliance window during which this can take place. 
 
The probability of tanks leaking after they've been in the 
ground for 25 years is extremely high and it is clearly not in the 
interests of the public or the business owner to stretch these 
limits to the point where leaks occur.  Because at the early 
point, all one has to do is replace the tanks.  At the later point 
one has to both replace the tanks and do an environmental 
clean-up which becomes very costly.  It would not make sense 
to wait till that very last moment until we have to do 
environmental clean-ups.  It would not make sense to allow 
semi-trailers to drive down the highway when their brakes are 
faulty without requiring them to inspect them from time to 
time.  It would not make sense for us to allow airplanes to fly 
till they crashed.  This kind of management is not good 
management. 
 
So it makes good business sense and good public safety sense 
to have some guidelines according to the best information we 
have, so that we can encourage people to make their upgrading 
before there is a public risk that puts people's health or lives at 
risk.  And I will continue to work with the affected business 
owners and with the community at large to be as sensitive as 
we can with those issues while insuring that the risk to the 
public is minimized. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, my colleagues have been 
raising with you tonight the cost of doing business in this 
province, the cost that ultimately, I guess, our environment will 
suffer if things aren't managed properly.  And I agree with you; 
you say that we've got to do this in an orderly way. 
 
But I think, attending the last SUMA convention last month 
and listening very carefully to some of the arguments that were 
made there, and I suspect, when SARM meets next week or 
two weeks, whatever it is, that a lot of the same arguments are 
going to be made to you and your government, that the cost of 
doing business is simply not associated singularly with digging 
up contaminated soil around a gasoline tank or some other 
storage facility that has held hydrocarbons. 
 
As you know, service stations and things associated with the 
petrochemical industry are a big part of everyday life in 
Saskatchewan, particularly in rural Saskatchewan because of 
the distances involved, their agricultural land base.  What I 
heard at SUMA was that they are very concerned about not 
only the cost should they happen to be the owner at the end of 
the day but the pressure that this puts on their tax base. 
 
When you think of the business tax, the property tax, paid by 
people in this industry and a lot of our small towns, your bulk 
service people with the local co-op, I know in a lot of my 
towns, those are some of the largest taxpayers that we have left, 
particular our small urban areas.  They are very concerned.  
And when they talk about hundreds and indeed thousands of 
people 

being affected as far as the tax base, I think they have some 
pretty legitimate concerns if these people no longer have the 
wherewithal to stay in business and pay those taxes and be 
mainstays.  I mean it's often the guy that runs the service 
station or the bulk dealership that buys the hockey sweaters 
these days in small-town Saskatchewan that is a major 
economic contributor. 
 
And I'm wondering if you could tell me in that bigger 
economic sense that SUMA and SARM will address to you, as 
did the discussion that the canola growers in Saskatoon in crop 
production week when some of those issues were raised, I 
wonder if you could bring me up to date, as the Community 
Services critic, exactly where your discussions are going with 
these two groups. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well as I had indicated to your colleagues 
earlier, while the discussions on the hazardous substance 
regulations did not provide for input by some of the small 
service station owners when your government passed them in 
1989, they were consulted at that time with SUMA and SARM. 
 
As we reviewed the regulations with respect to our action plan 
which we announced last year, the upgraded regulations, 
SUMA and SARM were critically involved in those 
discussions, and in the hazardous substances advisory group 
which we now have in place to continue the review of the 
regulations around the hazardous substances regulations, both 
with respect to underground storage tanks and chemical storage 
facilities.  SUMA and SARM are represented on that group and 
we very much appreciate their ongoing advice. 
 
(2145) 
 
One of the challenges of good public consultation is that there 
needs to be opportunity for representatives of the various 
stakeholders that sit at a table to take those initiatives back to 
their own group and make sure that the information flows both 
ways.  My experience with SUMA and SARM in the long haul 
has been that they have a respectable internal communications 
process and I anticipate that the representatives that they have 
that are sitting with us examining these issues are going back 
and forth to their own organization to make sure that the 
information is flowing both ways. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Well that's . . . I'm glad to hear that, Mr. 
Minister, but if I was listening carefully to the responses you 
gave my colleague, was that these regulations are in place, that 
the time lines are defined, and that there simply is not going to 
be any variation.  And what I was hearing at the SUMA 
convention was clearly that they were not satisfied with the 
process, that there were clearly too many economic 
uncertainties out there to fully endorse what you're trying to do.  
And, Mr. Minister, the time lines can be as long as you want.  
The fact is that if those time lines are hard and fast, I suspect 
that neither of those organizations are going to be totally 
pleased with the fallout that potentially could result. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

People are talking here about hundreds of thousands of dollars, 
maybe even millions of dollars, in the way of a tax base being 
knocked out of Saskatchewan.  And with the amount of 
downloading that your government has put on the backs of 
local government, people that have to balance budgets by 
legislation, they don't have anywhere else to go by legislation 
except back to their tax base.  If that tax base is further eroded 
by several million dollars in the near term, I don't think they're 
going to be very pleased with government regulations that 
simply forge ahead and don't allow people more variance. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the message 
you're going to get at SARM is exactly that.  They cannot 
afford to have that tax base, which is already pressured almost 
beyond belief with downloading from both levels of 
government and high taxation levels, to have it further eroded 
when they lose more valuable tax base. 
 
And a lot of towns in this province, all that's left is the service 
station or the bulk dealership.  Now if we're ready to write 
them off, just say you simply are done, you're gone, you don't 
belong as part of our society any more.  Then fair ball. 
 
But I think that's the kind of thing that you're going to have to 
come clean with, because I don't believe their figures are all 
that wrong.  When they look at over 700 independent dealers, 
when they look at nearly a thousand people or more that are 
hooked up with chains, and they talk about losing a large 
percentage of those, then I think they're right on the money.  
And boy, you knock the hospital out, you maybe lose the 
school and you lose your ability to provide fuel and where are 
you?  Now, Mr. Minister, what are you going to say to these 
people when they present this argument as I'm sure they're 
going to at the upcoming convention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'd like to say to the Leader of the 
Opposition that I need to have clarified which argument he or 
his colleagues are making because you're making two and 
they're contradictory.  One is that if regulations are followed 
there will be closure.  The other is that if a business cannot 
afford to function because the cost of contaminated site 
clean-up is so high, that cost will come back to the 
municipality. 
 
The object of encouraging good environmental management by 
the companies is to ensure that you distribute the cost of 
replacing equipment before it's worn out over the life of the 
facility in the best way that can be balanced before the 
additional cost of contamination come into place. 
 
Now I have not heard anybody at the municipal level, urban or 
rural or Bill Albert when I spoke of the Bill who represents the 
Environmental Fairness Association, or anyone else challenge 
the notion that the best thing for everyone is to prevent 
contamination.  So the object of the regulations is to provide 
that protection to the public that no contamination occurs. 

But the object for the business is a completely independent 
business objective which is to say that they, as a business, do 
not want to subject themselves to the cost of the equipment 
wear-out, which is a given with any piece of equipment, 
including underground storage tanks, but to add to that the cost 
of an environmental clean-up which will ensue if it's not 
cleaned up soon enough, if the tanks are not replaced soon 
enough.  And that point of view is universal. 
 
The dilemma, as in so many other areas of life, is that in a tight 
economy when in some of the small service stations the 
turnover is not that great, that this is a tough cost, that the cost 
of replacing the worn-out equipment is hard on him.  I 
acknowledge that.  And our objective in using the advisory 
committee is to make the regulations as sensitive as possible 
for the continuation of those operations, so that they can pay 
their taxes, so they do not become liabilities to the municipal or 
urban municipal tax base and so they can in fact continue to 
provide a service to the community. 
 
But it is in no one's interest to allow a contamination to occur 
which then provides a cost to the business which is sure to put 
some of them down.  So the object of good environmental 
management is to ensure that no spillage occurs, no leaks 
occur, to minimize the cost of upgrading facilities.  Thanks for 
that question. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you're probably right on both 
counts.  But I can tell you there isn't a service station owner out 
there that wants to have a leaking tank.  I mean that's absolutely 
bizarre to think that you would allow a tank to leak, given the 
margins that those people deal with today.  Of course they don't 
want it to leak. 
 
But you know full well, Mr. Minister, that through this whole 
process that people have said to you, let's look at all of the 
alternatives available.  And my colleague pointed out to you 
that there are different ways to monitor rather then issuing 
ultimatums.  And that's what happens when we draw lines in 
the sand as you appear to be doing in implementing a piece of 
legislation that right . . . you are right, it was brought forward in 
1989.  But when you draw these lines in the sand, they simply, 
I believe, Mr. Minister, as was pointed out to you and your 
officials that day at crop production week, are unrealistic in the 
economy that we live in. 
 
I mean you are absolutely right.  You don't want the small 
urbans to end up bearing the cost -- and they will.  If that 
particular business goes down and the guy walks away, 
somebody will have to clean up the site if there has been 
leakage.  In many cases, these small urbans today cannot 
maintain the basics of sewer and water, much less do that.  
They tell me they just did one out at -- I believe it was 
Langenburg -- and it was over $300,000 to clean up a site along 
the railroad track. 
 
Now I can tell you, Mr. Minister, that most towns in 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

this province that have railroad sidings where there was 
fuel -- and there are probably hundreds of them that don't exist 
any more -- could all be in that same category.  Now hopefully 
the railroad will bear responsibility and you will have someone 
there that is participating in the clean-up.  But if you do have 
these situations occur, then clearly that urban jurisdiction -- or 
that rural municipality if the hamlet's been turned back -- are 
going to be responsible. 
 
And I'd like to know from you, what kind of numbers we're 
talking about.  You must have done an assessment on this.  I'd 
like to know from you what your best guess of you and your 
officials is, of what this potential could be over the next, say 
five years' time.  You said that you've got a pretty good handle 
on where everything's at.  What global cost do you associate to 
this particular initiative, because 1998 is basically the end of 
the line.  Can you give us that kind of a number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, no I can't give that kind of 
a number because each facility will vary and because we do not 
know in advance of people excavating their facilities, what 
kind of environmental contamination there is, nor what their 
local circumstance is for clean-up in terms of contractors.  And 
so that the hope is that none would have leaked, and all you 
have to do is replace physically the tanks which is a necessary 
equipment replacement in any event as equipment wears out. 
 
The reality is that we're finding the 50 per cent-plus of these 
have had some contamination and therefore need to clean 
up -- as you have said, some cases where those numbers can 
add up to hundreds of thousands and, in the case of the leak 
here in Regina, possibly millions of dollars as a result of injury 
to equipment, telecommunications equipment and underground 
natural gas lines. 
 
So there is no way of determining without knowing where 
damage and contamination have occurred.  So the object of the 
program is to, as sensitively as we can, proceed with a process 
for replacing tanks as they get older and as they become very 
high risk and hopefully catching them before contamination 
occurs, resulting in public risk to health and safety and the cost 
to the business owner. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 


