




















































Hansard: March 08, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 723 

 March 8, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my great pleasure 

and honour today on behalf of my colleague, the member for 

Regina Churchill Downs, to introduce to you 28 grade 10 

students seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  These 28 students 

are from Thom Collegiate.  The teachers accompanying them are 

Ms. Paulette Hubbs, Mr. Bill Heavisides, and Mr. Dale Wilde, 

whom I will be saying a few words about later in a different 

segment of this. 

 

I look forward to a photo opportunity with them following 

question period and a visit right after the photo.  I ask all hon. 

members to join me in welcoming the grade 10 students from 

Thom Collegiate. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are 

members of six organizations that are visiting the legislature 

today, and I would like to introduce them to you and to other 

members of the legislature. 

 

With the indulgence of the House, I'll mention their name and 

their organization.  Becky Adams, the coordinator of the 

Provincial Partnership Committee on Family Violence; Erica 

Cancino, director of Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan; Mary 

Jane Ellis, the chair of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

Women's Committee; Alma Kytwayhat, representing the 

Saskatchewan Treaty Women's Council; Deanna Elias-Henry, 

director of the Regina Transition House; and three 

representatives of the Aboriginal Women's Council -- Marlene 

Gilmor, Jennifer Cyr, and Lona Hegma. 

 

They were here, Mr. Speaker, to attend a press conference this 

morning in connection with a Bill that I will be introducing later 

this afternoon, and I would like members of the legislature to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the official opposition I too would like to extend our greetings 

to the individuals who are here this afternoon, individuals who 

have taken the time to speak out on issues that are very pertinent 

to them.  And I'm sure that as we . . . the minister presents his 

Bill and we get into the discussion, it will be something that we 

will all be supportive of.  And so we welcome you to the House 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

join with the member from Moosomin and 

the Minister of Justice as well.  One of the members up there is 

from my constituency.  Alma, I would like to welcome you very 

much.  We get very few visitors from as far north as Loon Lake.  

Alma's from the constituency of Makwa Sahgaiehcan, and 

welcome very much to the legislature, Alma.  I hope you have a 

nice time here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also wanted to take 

a moment to welcome the school group from Thom Collegiate, 

and in particular a teacher that is from my home town, Paulette 

Hubbs.  She was a classmate or a schoolmate of mine in 

Milestone and her family is very active in my constituency.  I 

often call them kind of my senate.  So anyways, a warm 

welcome to Paulette and the group from Thom. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, three people 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the third row, on your side.  My 

brother, Dave, and his wife, Margaret, and Tilly Klippenstein, a 

friend of theirs. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 

the aboriginal women, and I'll do it in our own language, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I of course want to join 

all members in observing International Women's Day.  Since 

that day in 1927 when women were officially recognized as 

persons by the Supreme Court of Canada we've made quite a bit 

of progress.  Progress towards what should be a common matter 

of fact, that is, total gender equality both in our Canadian society 

and in the international one. 

 

I congratulate all the strong, purposeful, and focused women's 

advocacy groups for nudging us towards that goal.  Feminists 

have accomplished many positive changes for our sisters.  We 

are making progress towards power, politically and 

economically. 

 

But it is not my nature, Mr. Speaker, to be complacent, nor I 

think should it be the prerogative of society to congratulate itself 

too effusively for a task not yet completed.  We still have much 

to do and this day of commemoration should focus us on those 

tasks.  For instance, we must get at the root of the issue that still 

affects far too many women -- poverty.  The feminization of 

poverty is, I maintain, the biggest blight in our society today.  

Women, especially 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

women who are the sole support of children, have for too long 

been our underclass.  The fact that racial discrimination often 

comes into play here is doubly cause for concern.  Child care 

and closing the wage gap must be moved to the top of our 

agenda. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, the member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf 

of the members of Athabasca, Cumberland House, and 

Battlefords, and myself, I would like all members of this 

Assembly to join with me today in congratulating the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council who successfully hosted the 1994 

Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games. 

 

The four-day event attracted over 2,000 athletes, coaches, and 

volunteers to the communities of Meadow Lake and Beauval.  

The games were an opportunity for first nations from all over 

Saskatchewan to showcase their talented and determined youth. 

 

This year the games made a successful attempt to incorporate the 

theme of youth wellness in sports, culture and recreation into the 

events.  This theme was not only present at the sporting events 

but also at various wellness workshops.  This was helped by the 

presence of the many role models of these young people, 

including cast members from the television program North of 

60, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Other highlights of the 1994 Saskatchewan Indian Winter 

Games included a visit by the well-known artist Allen Sapp, 

many of whose pictures appear here in the legislature.  Also high 

on the list of popularity was Grand Chief Ovide Mercredi 

singing a solo rendition of "Happy Birthday" to Vice-Chief 

Oneill Gladue.  Fun was had by all and fond memories of this 

event will surely last for a long time. 

 

Again I would like to praise the Meadow Lake Tribal Council 

and the many others whose cooperation and dedication resulted 

in such a smooth-running and successful event.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

with my colleague from Saskatoon Wildwood in asking the 

members of the legislature to join me in observing International 

Women's Day.  This important day focuses on the struggles and 

achievements of women throughout the world.  Although in 

Canada we have changed many of the injustices toward women, 

we still toil for equality in the workplace and in society. 

 

Today I would like us to remind ourselves of a few of the many 

important breakthroughs that Canadian women have achieved 

within the last few years. 

 

In 1992 Roberta Bondar became the first Canadian 

woman to explore space. Also in that year Madam Justice 

Catherine Ann Fraser became the first woman to be appointed as 

Chief Justice of a province.  1991 brought us the nomination of 

Canada's first aboriginal woman judge, Terry Vyse.  Finally in 

1989 Audrey McLaughlin became the first woman in the history 

of Canada to lead a federal political party, the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

These are just a handful of examples of the impressive 

accomplishments of the women of Canada, and I have to say 

they are a start.  However, these achievements would not have 

been possible if it were not for the struggle of women 

throughout the years. 

 

I think, for instance, of the early struggles of Nellie McClung 

and Agnes Macphail, and in Saskatchewan of Marjorie Cooper 

and Beatrice Trew.  That is why we commemorate the long, hard 

journey they have travelled.  It is through their courage and 

determination that women today can find strength and 

inspiration.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to thank the 

member from Saskatoon for those kind words about my 

grandmother and many other women. 

 

On this International Women's Day, Mr. Speaker, it's fitting to 

recognize some young women, the Thom Trojans basketball 

team and their coach, Dale Wilde, who's seated in the Speaker's 

gallery. 

 

The Regina junior girls basketball championship medal went to 

the Thom Trojans on Friday at the University of Regina physical 

education gym, in an exciting game featuring the talents of the 

Leboldus Golden Suns and the Thom Trojans.  Both teams, Mr. 

Speaker, have great talent, and displayed grit and determination.  

Players, coaches and parents have good reason to be justifiably 

proud.  Of course, I may be a little bit biased.  You see, Mr. 

Speaker, my daughter, Ginelle, helped cruise the courts for the 

winning Thom Trojans. 

 

This junior girls' Regina championship, along with the junior 

girls' curling championship and the provincial football 

championship, have made it a great year for the Thom Trojans.  

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, my son, Jay, was part of that Trojan 

football team as well. 

 

So it is with more than a little pride that I stand today to 

recognize the latest in Trojan titles.  Congratulations, Thom 

Trojans, and especially the junior girls' Regina championship 

basketball team. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This is 

Education Week, and one of my very pleasant memories of my 

lifelong education -- which is continuing, the opposition will be 

pleased to hear, I think -- is going to the public library in 

Saskatoon where the excellent staff are very helpful and 

friendly. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

And that is a memory I have and a practice that I share with 

many other people. 

 

It was announced last week that Saskatoon ranked first among 

343 cities in North America in library use.  Saskatoon is the 

reading capital of North America.  Regina, by the way, ranked 

fourth out of 343, which also is not bad.  And I think that this 

announcement is a remarkable commentary on the people of our 

province because I think this type of reading goes on right across 

Saskatchewan.  It suggests, I believe, what we in this Assembly 

all know, and that is the people we represent are intelligent and 

questioning, that they are not satisfied with what they know and 

they want to know more.  They insist on informing themselves 

rather than simply being informed. 

 

That makes it tough for us but it's good for our province.  And I 

want to congratulate the people of Saskatoon and Regina and the 

libraries which serve them so well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like the members 

of this Assembly to join me in recognizing Social Work Week, 

March 7 to 11.  Social work is an important profession with a 

long history of commitment to improving the well-being of 

people in society, particularly the disadvantaged. 

 

Today's social workers are involved with individuals, groups, 

and communities or on their behalf through research, social 

policy, planning, and teaching.  Social workers have a huge 

responsibility to the communities in which they work because 

they see directly the concerns and desires of each community 

and they must act and advocate accordingly to benefit them.  I 

think they will be an important voice in the federal-provincial 

income security review that's taking place. 

 

Women have also played an important role in social work both 

officially and more often unofficially and are an essential part of 

its future.  These women are often the neglected professionals 

who need to be listened to. 

 

So we wish all social workers every success in the celebration of 

Social Work Week and more recognition in the future.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Livestock Program Proposal 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, last week 

we discovered that some NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) were threatening their 

local papers and businesses in order to get their support for their 

kind of health care reform.  And yesterday we saw the Minister 

of Finance launch what amounted to a personal and bitter attack 

against the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

association because they disagreed with the government taxation 

policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that this autocratic form of government is 

the style that is rampant within the NDP.  And unfortunately I 

must bring another example of this to the legislature this 

afternoon. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. 

Minister, on Friday you confirmed that it is your intention to roll 

the horned check-off fund and the cattle deduction fund into one 

and change the make-up of the industry's board such that you 

will be appointing two of your own members, one member from 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and one member from the 

National Farmers Union.  And contrary to your statements in 

this House, neither the Saskatchewan Livestock Association nor 

the stock growers want anything to do with this arrangement. 

 

Mr. Minister, what kind of presentation did you give to those 

groups when they met with you, at your request I might add?  

What did you indicate you would do if they failed to support 

your initiative? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

of course has these facts wrong again.  I did not confirm on 

Friday that that was the . . . that we were going to continue with 

that course.  That was a course we set out based on 

recommendations made to me by LPAC, which is Livestock 

Policy Advisory Committee, of which the stock growers are a 

member.  We were moving in that direction. 

 

And since then we've had discussions with these groups and I 

am not going to get involved in disputes between different farm 

organizations as to who sits on a check-off board.  And we will 

move if we have to, if it's their desire, to do elections which will 

be the ultimate way of putting it to a test as to who represents 

producers.  We're prepared to move in that direction.  If 

producers agree on who can sit on the board, then we obviously 

have a solution; if not, probably the ultimate solution is elections 

and producers can decide in this province who and who does not 

sit on the check-off board to decide how to spend check-off 

money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I will 

agree that they agreed to make some changes but never, ever did 

they agree to the changes that you're forcing upon them.  You 

full well know, Mr. Minister, the livestock check-off is a 

producer-initiated, voluntary fund and it's administered by the 

industry and 97 per cent of that money is going into market 

research and development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Wheat Pool is a marketer of cattle; it's not a 

producer.  And the NFU (National Farmers Union) is simply a 

national political lobby organization which has repeatedly, I 

might add, 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

opposed any kind of check-off.  So why on earth would you 

want to take this fund over?  What possible motive would you 

have, Mr. Minister, to pass legislation forcing the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool and the National Farmers Union and two of your 

own appointees onto that board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is 

absolutely correct.  This is a voluntary check-off; it is producer 

funds. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are producers in my 

riding who belong to the stock growers -- not very many in my 

riding, but a few.  There are people in my riding who belong to 

pure-bred association and hence are associated with the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association.  There are also members 

in my riding who raise cattle who are NFU members.  And there 

are members in my riding who raise cattle who sit on Wheat 

Pool committees and they believe that they speak for those . . . 

that the Wheat Pool speaks for them. 

 

I also have many producers in my riding who do not belong to 

any organization.  And it is of no particular interest to me who 

represents those producers on the board as long as we get 

reasonable people on there that can make reasonable decisions.  

And if the organizations themselves cannot agree on who should 

be on the board, then I think the rational alternative is to have 

elections and let producers decide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, do I 

have to remind you that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool is a 

multinational marketing conglomerate.  That's what it is.  It's not 

a producer.  And that's wherein lies this problem.  As an 

organization it is not a producer. 

 

And they are telling me now, these producers, that your 

intentions are not honourable in this, nor are your actions in the 

way in which you're trying to get your way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me show you what kind of consultative 

approach the government opposite takes when someone 

disagrees with their policies.  The Saskatchewan Livestock 

Association met with the Minister of Agriculture on February 10 

to express their opposition to what clearly amounts to a power 

grab. 

 

I have a letter from the livestock association which sums up 

what happened at that meeting.  And I must say, Mr. Minister, I 

concur with their extreme displeasure with that meeting. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm that, as is outlined in that letter, 

that you threatened to take away $1.8 million of producer funds 

which is left in the beef stabilization if the association did not 

cave into your wishes, Mr. Minister?  Did you threaten the 

livestock 

association with that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the Livestock Policy 

Advisory Committee, and in fact the stock growers themselves, 

and other organizations have been meeting with me over the past 

couple of years asking for increases in the check-off, asking for 

the $1.8 million which is left over in the beef stabilization fund, 

which we agreed to pay into the check-off fund last year. 

 

The legislation as it's now structured does not allow us to pay 

that money into the fund and therefore we need to make 

legislative changes.  And that was one of the reasons for 

bringing this Bill into the House, is to make those changes to 

allow the $1.8 million to be paid into the fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you are 

not answering the question.  The Saskatchewan Livestock 

Association says you perpetrated political blackmail.  That's 

their terminology, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  I think the 

member knows full well that unparliamentary language, whether 

he uses it himself or read from an article, is simply not 

acceptable.  And I'd ask him to refrain from that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that is 

how strong they feel.  That is how strong they feel, Mr. Minister.  

And I believe the association. 

 

The minister of Community Services threatened SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) over The 

Hospital Revenue Act.  The Minister of Health threatened 

unilateral legislation if the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 

Association) refused to go along with her contract demands.  

Last week we discovered the NDP MLAs will even threaten 

small-town bank managers and newspapers. 

 

Mr. Minister, this letter, this letter says that the members of the 

association were, and I quote: appalled by the profanity you saw 

fit to use, unquote.  Mr. Minister, they list some of the things 

that you said, in this letter.  I'm not going to repeat them. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this the reception that interest groups get when 

they meet with you to discuss issues?  Is this the same Minister 

of Agriculture and the provincial government that promised to 

be more open and more consultative?  Is this the same person? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this is the Minister of 

Agriculture and the government that found $1.3 million for a 

beef development fund which will be matched by the federal 

government to help the 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

beef industry.  This is the Minister of Agriculture and the 

provincial government that's got $1.8 million that we want to 

give to the beef industry.  This is the Minister of Agriculture and 

the government that is reacting on recommendation from the 

Livestock Policy Advisory Committee that says that these two 

bodies should be coordinated into one group; that the horned 

check-off should be increased and that the check-off should be 

increased, and that we should try to move towards a national 

check-off, which we have also done. 

 

And if the livestock groups are quarrelling about who should be 

on a board, then we will have to work that out within the 

industry and get a board that represents all the producers.  And if 

that requires elections, then we'll move in that direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

apparently you don't get the message.  They're not quarrelling 

amongst themselves; they're quarrelling with you.  They don't 

want you involved in their organization and these other 

non-producer organizations.  They don't want that.  But you 

seem to get your kicks by throwing your weight around.  And 

that's what they find so appalling, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I must agree with the Saskatchewan Livestock Association 

when they say in the letter, and I quote: This type of policy 

development is totally unacceptable and we feel it smacks of 

politics of the worse kind.  Unquote. 

 

I have a letter from the stock growers as well that expresses the 

same kind of sentiment.  And the people are finding out what 

your government does to everybody when it doesn't get its way 

initially, and that is, my way or highway. 

 

Mr. Minister, the minister from The Battlefords last week says to 

the media and to the major energy businesses, if you don't like 

the way that we do things, ship off to Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I now ask you to apologize to the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association for your unacceptable 

behaviour and your political threats, and that you commit today 

that you pull your ill-designed plans of the check-off before 

people take up your suggestion and indeed move off to Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the politics involved 

here are when the member opposite gets up and denigrates a 

reputable company like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a 

livestock group who many livestock producers in this province 

feel represents them, and getting involved in the politics of farm 

groups which I am trying to stay above and to let the industry 

sort out for themselves their problems. 

 

Grey Cup Bid 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier today.  Mr. Premier, as you know on 

last Friday the official opposition joined with the government 

and all other Saskatchewan residents in congratulating you and 

the rest of the Grey Cup bid committee for bringing the 1995 

Grey Cup to Regina. 

 

We also at that time, Mr. Premier, took the opportunity to ask 

the Minister of Economic Development a few questions.  We 

asked relating to funds and the Grey Cup bid, and his answer 

was that there were no funds at all involved in that.  According 

to reports published today, Mr. Premier, it said that the 

Saskatchewan government threw in $500,000 at the last moment 

in order to secure that bid. 

 

And we're just wondering today if all of the money is coming 

from the province or is it a shared concern?  And why did the 

Minister of Economic Development on Friday tell us that no 

provincial tax dollars were in the Grey Cup bid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to share 

the enthusiasm and see the Leader of the Opposition's 

enthusiastic support about the Grey Cup.  This is going to be a 

major event for the people of Saskatchewan.  And I dare say it's 

going to be an experience of Canadians who partake in it will for 

quite some time remember and cherish. 

 

Now specifically speaking to the member's question, tomorrow 

afternoon the bid committee of the Saskatchewan Roughriders 

will be holding a press conference -- I think it's at 4:30 or 3:30; I 

don't know exactly the time in the afternoon -- where the details 

of the bid will be made public and known.  And they've asked 

me, and I've agreed to this suggestion, that the questions be 

directed and answered at that particular time and subsequently in 

question period. 

 

I'm interpreting the remarks of the House Leader with respect to 

the question of financing in the context of no upfront funding, 

and that is in fact the case.  But the details will be delivered 

tomorrow and we can discuss them. 

 

Now if the members opposite have any further comments or 

suggestions in this regard, I think perhaps it would be best 

awaited until tomorrow's answers by the Roughriders and by the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, I don't think anyone in Saskatchewan 

doesn't agree that it is a wonderful day that we host this Grey 

Cup here, because it is a provincial effort.  It's not a Regina 

effort but a provincial effort, and we recognize that as have 

governments over the years in dealing with the Rider football 

team. 

 

But I guess, Mr. Premier, what I'm asking about is the due 

diligence process here.  Because I've heard on a number of 

occasions from you and your ministers that 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

you also consider that to be fundamental to public 

accountability, the due diligence.  And recently we've seen 

where you took a year and a half of due diligence to make sure 

that we didn't get co-generation, and you did a long time on due 

diligence to make sure, and spent a lot of money, that we didn't 

get Piper. 

 

Now I'm hoping that there was some due diligence when Larry 

Ryckman leaned over the table and said, we need a little more 

dough, Roy -- excuse me, Mr. Speaker -- we need a little more 

money, Mr. Premier, to secure this bid.  That there was, in fact, 

some due diligence done that does show that the province as a 

whole would benefit from this type of expenditure. 

 

And it's that question, Mr. Premier, that I pose, not one that in 

any way denigrates the process that you were so successful in 

achieving. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank the Leader of the Opposition for the question. 

 

First of all, I can assure you that it was not a conversation, as 

you portray it, over the table.  I have met Mr. Ryckman just very 

briefly in the course of the submission made in Sacramento.  

And I must say that he was very much a key questioner of the 

various submissions which were made. 

 

But the heart of your question is what is the due diligence, 

namely what is the economic spin-off from getting the Grey Cup 

into Regina.  And the point that I want to say is that tomorrow 

we'll be providing the facts and figures and subsequently to the 

House, to the people of Saskatchewan.  This is going to be a 

multimillion dollar spin-off by virtue of getting the Grey Cup 

and 45,000 people attracted to the city of Regina, and the 

national and international publicity associated with this venture. 

 

The Grey Cups that have been conducted in the West the last 

several years have not lost money, they've made money. 

 

And the other fact of the matter is that we were in a competition; 

we were in a competition with Winnipeg.  We either had to be 

competitive to get the bid or withdraw and not get the bid.  And 

as the Leader of the Opposition himself says, he would not want 

us to withdraw, he would want us to be competitive, which we 

were.  And I think everything else being equal, Regina obtained 

the site location for a whole number of good, solid reasons. 

 

I think the details of that again can be relayed tomorrow, will be 

relayed tomorrow, and I think that the member will be assured 

that this in fact is a very wise investment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A very, very quick question, Mr. Premier.  

Was your House Leader right or wrong on 

Friday?  Would you just straighten that out for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, I 

have not had an opportunity, I'm sorry, to talk to the House 

Leader who is away on government business, and I have not had 

a chance to read the Hansard.  But when I do that and I have a 

chance to discuss it with him, you can ask me tomorrow or the 

day after tomorrow once the announcements are made. 

 

I think, quite frankly, one has to understand that when you're in 

a competition against the city of Winnipeg and the government 

of the province of Manitoba for the location of the Grey Cup, 

with the multimillion dollar benefits for Manitoba and for their 

people, decisions have to be made to keep our bid competitive.  I 

was in Sacramento; the House Leader was not in Sacramento.  

His information and his statements were made based on the 

knowledge which we had prior to the actual competition which 

took place in Sacramento. 

 

But I want to assure the member opposite, and I'm glad to see 

that he still supports us in this regard, this is going to be a great 

event for Saskatchewan -- it is going to be a great event for 

Canada -- all of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know, this province needs a boost like this.  We've had 

some tough years.  I think the people are looking forward to it 

very optimistically.  And I know that the member's questions are 

motivated from good intention and good spirit and I ask him and 

encourage him to continue along on that positive track. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency Costs 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister in charge of Municipal Government. 

 

We understand it is the intention of your government to 

introduce amendments to The Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency Act during the present sitting of the 

legislature.  Current legislation requires municipalities to pay 13 

per cent of the cost of the assessment agency.  Madam Minister, 

if the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 

legislation is passed, it would increase the 1994 municipal share 

to 35 per cent and up to 77 per cent more through 1996. 

 

Madam Minister, isn't that provincial offloading, and can you 

give assurance to these local governments that you will not 

proceed with this offloading and not proceed with the 

amendments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for that question.  

We will be introducing amendments to The Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency Act within the next couple 

weeks and we'll debate the recommendations at that time. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

In our budget this year, if you will look in the Estimates book, 

you'll see that there has been some change in funding in our 

allocation to SAMA from last year.  This year we are paying 44 

per cent of the cost of SAMA; last year we paid somewhere 

around 80 per cent of the cost of SAMA.  So there has been a 

decrease and there will be a decrease. 

 

I want to, though, put this in the light of what's happening in 

other western provinces, because I think it's important to 

understand where we stand relative to Manitoba and Alberta and 

B.C. (British Columbia).  B.C. for many years has recovered 75 

per cent of the cost of doing assessment from municipalities.  

They provided the assessment but they have recovered 75 per 

cent of the cost.  Alberta, this year, is moving to recover 100 per 

cent of the cost of doing assessments or the assessment costs for 

municipalities.  And in B.C. they have always recovered 100 per 

cent of the cost by virtue of a levy on the property. 

 

So Saskatchewan, in historical terms, has paid a larger 

percentage of assessment costs than the neighbouring provinces, 

and by virtue of the fact that we have to balance our budget and 

we have to reduce our expenditures, we have to do it in a fair 

and reasonable way.  And what we have done this year with 

SAMA, I believe, is fair and reasonable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As you've 

admitted, you've had dramatic cut-backs to these funds to local 

government.  And my questions are not to other provinces but to 

you, Madam Minister.  You're the minister in charge of the RMs 

(rural municipalities) and local governments in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rural municipality of Saskatchewan Landing 

tells us that for 1994 the proposed extra assessment would 

increase its bill by 167 per cent from 1993.  The RM of 

Arlington would face an increase of 163 per cent.  The RM of 

Benson, an increase of 165 per cent.  The village of Marshall, an 

increase of 258 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, I have dozens of letters here, and I'm sure that 

you have the same ones, from local governments who are fearful 

of what will happen once this legislation is passed.  Has your 

government undertaken an impact study on how these horrific 

increases will affect rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, and thank you for that question.  We 

have done some analysis of what these costs will relate to in 

terms of a municipal budget.  I can tell you that the average 

share of the provincial transfer to the total rural budget is about 

7.6 per cent.  That means the money that we allocate to any one 

individual rural municipality is about 7.6 per cent of their total 

budget. 

 

And when we take into account the decreases that we have 

instituted this year, the 8 per cent from the revenue sharing and 

the extra 2.3 per cent that comes 

by virtue of the change in funding to SAMA, that relates to 

about 1.4 per cent of their general operating revenues.  So again, 

relative to their total budget and the impact on their total budget, 

it comes down to about 1.4 per cent.  In some cases it may come 

to about a little over 1 per cent of a mill rate increase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do want to raise 

one point, Mr. Speaker.  As we speak during question period, the 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention is dealing with an emergency resolution on this 

matter.  And I hope you have better answers for them than you 

do for us, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of officials say that if communities have 

to absorb these increased costs, they are going to demand the 

option of opting out of SAMA services.  Madam Minister, have 

you determined how many communities you could lose before 

SAMA could no longer deliver these services? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all I want to make it clear that no 

one can opt out of SAMA.  The Assessment Agency of 

Saskatchewan is comprehensive and it applies to all 

Saskatchewan.  What you're talking about are the field services.  

And when SAMA became an agency in 1986, Saskatoon and 

Regina and Prince Albert and Moose Jaw had the opportunity to 

engage their own employees to do field services. 

 

What we are talking about at this point in time is whether there 

should be an option for other municipalities to engage their own 

field service workers.  In other words, there are two separate 

functions of SAMA: one is a core function that controls the 

integrity of the assessment system and develops the manuals and 

the procedures; and the other is the field workers who do the 

inspection at the local level and develop the assessment rules. 

 

In the four largest cities, those workers have always been 

employees of the municipal government.  What we're talking 

now to the municipalities about is whether that should be an 

option provided to them as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister.  

If communities drop out -- and from what I hear you say, 

whether they utilize the services or not is the same as opting out 

as I read in their letters to me and to you, Madam Minister -- if 

all these communities drop out of SAMA, or not use the 

services, someone will have to shoulder the cost of the agency.  

Madam Minister, who will be responsible for picking up the 

cost, and will it be the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have been for a long time responsible for a major 

cost of the agency.  What we're trying to do is find a reasonable 

and practical approach to allow 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

municipalities to have more authority and more control over 

their own assessment services.  Assessment services primarily 

benefit municipal governments.  And there is I think a logical 

reason and a rationale behind the approach that we have taken. 

 

It does mean that there will be to some extent, increased costs, 

and that cannot be avoided in the fact that we're trying to come 

to a balanced budget.  And there are going to be times when 

municipalities will have to look and scrutinize their own budgets 

and develop their own budget plans; and it's simply part of living 

in Saskatchewan when you have $843 million interest payment 

to pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Appointments to the Saskatchewan Women's Advisory 

Council 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, today is International 

Women's Day.  In commemorating this day, I am pleased to rise 

to inform the Assembly that I have recently appointed new 

members to the Saskatchewan Women's Advisory Council. 

 

The Saskatchewan Women's Advisory Council examines issues 

of concern to women and presents their findings and 

recommendations to government.  It is appropriate that the 

Women's Advisory Council be appointed on International 

Women's Day as the council symbolizes all the rights women 

have fought for over the years.  Rights that ensure women's 

voices are heard and that their perspective is considered as 

governments develop policy that affects the lives of women. 

 

Also the appointment recognizes that there are still barriers that 

prevent or impede women's progress in attaining equality.  The 

council symbolizes our commitment to continue to work toward 

the ultimate right of women -- full equality in the home, in the 

workplace, in the community, and in society as a whole. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has a long history of working 

to advance the status of women.  Three decades ago a women's 

bureau in the Department of Labour was established.  Today, the 

Women's Secretariat ensures women's interests and concerns are 

represented in provincial government policy, programs, and 

services.  In addition, the Women's Secretariat develops and 

delivers public information and education on issues of concern 

to women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Women's Advisory Council will 

provide another valuable resource in gathering information and 

bringing ideas and suggestions to the attention of government. 

 

I am pleased to recognize the following people who have been 

recently appointed to the council:  Janet McMurtry, chairperson, 

from Regina; Laura Boyer, Meadow Lake; Lillian Sanderson, La 

Ronge; Marilyn 

Johannsen from Saskatoon; Svetla Dolaptchiev from Regina; Pat 

Trask from Harris; Teresa Joki, Maidstone; Valerie Schmidt, 

Saskatoon; Isabelle George, Arcola. 

 

This government recognizes that women have worked for many 

changes over the years.  They have raised their voices in favour 

of better working conditions, minimum wages, paid maternity 

leave, adequate child care, improved health care, employment 

equity, sufficient incomes, pay equity, and an end to child 

poverty. 

 

(1415) 

 

Today we see signs of change all around us. Changes in family 

structure, more women in the workforce, increased lone-parent 

families in poverty, an ageing population, and more households 

that require child care services.  All the changes that have 

occurred or are now occurring affect women, affect children, 

and indeed affect all of society. 

 

I look forward to working with the newly appointed advisory 

council and to examining their findings and recommendations 

regarding policy, programs, and services that will serve the 

women of this province. 

 

I know all members will join me in wishing the council well in 

this and future undertakings as they work to promote justice and 

equality for women.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is very 

appropriate that the advisory board be appointed on International 

Women's Day.  We on this side of the House support that 

concept.  We also realize that this appointment recognizes that 

there are still barriers out there impeding women to be able to 

participate equally on the business front. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House will be having words 

to say later on this day about this so I would just say to you that 

we on this side certainly agree with what the minister has done 

and we will support it later this day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Liberal Party 

and the Liberal caucus as well wishes the newly appointed 

Women's Advisory Council well in its deliberations.  The joint 

talent, energy, and commitment of the members who are 

appointed today should contribute significantly to raising issues 

and bringing them forward that affect society in general and 

women in particular. 

 

We look forward to what the government does in fact with the 

recommendations that come forward. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting Victims of Domestic Violence 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

Victims of Domestic Violence be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day.  Mr. 

Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege under rule 17 of the Rules 

and Procedures handbook in regard to what is a clear violation 

of the rules and orders of a committee of this Assembly by a 

member of this Assembly. 

 

It involves a matter which has recently come to my attention and 

deals specifically with section 50(3)(f) of The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Board of Internal Economy under directive no. 

4 allows each member to receive reimbursement or payment by 

the Government of Saskatchewan for amounts incurred by the 

member in respect of duties as a member for postal advertising 

and other communication expenses. 

 

The committee has further determined and directed that while 

postage and letterhead are acceptable items for reimbursement, 

material of a blatantly partisan nature and material which solicits 

donations to a political party or attendance at political functions 

are not acceptable items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a concealed order.  This directive is 

contained in the members' handbook which is distributed to all 

members.  The handbook states very clearly that it is essential 

that the above items, acceptable items, not be blatantly partisan 

in nature.  Members must be aware that allowances available to 

them are public funds and they receive these funds to enable 

them to fulfil their role as representatives of all constituents and 

not as members of political parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on February 15, 1993, the member from Yorkton 

sent a letter using Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 

letterhead and presumably legislative postage, not to all 

members of his constituency but exclusively to members of the 

New Democratic Party.  The letter itself is rife with inflamed 

political rhetoric and partisan references. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Yorkton also distributed in the 

same envelope a document which is entitled Constituency 

News, which is generated by the Yorkton NDP president and 

secretary in what is a clear and rather flagrant admission of 

violation of the Board of Internal Economy's directive.  The 

document starts with this sentence: 

 

 Here we are again, stuffed in with your M.L.A.'s letter, 

saving money and getting some constituency information 

to you! 

Mr. Speaker, this statement brags about the fact that this entire 

partisan mail-out was paid for by taxpayers through the 

communication allowance and saved money for the New 

Democratic Party. 

 

And what is constituency information for that member?  There 

are five items detailed, each referring to either a fund-raising 

event for the NDP or a meeting of the NDP political executive.  

For instance, there is an item entitled HELP: which requests 

assistance in selling tickets for a raffle to pay off the debt for the 

1991 election campaign.  It says: 

 

 . . . tickets are moving slowly . . . To help us, we have 

enclosed a blank ticket and a self addressed envelope.  Simply 

fill in the ticket, along with a cheque for $20.00 . . . and send it 

to us. 

 

Another item advertises the NDP curling bonspiel; another 

makes reference to an NDP spring or summer barbecue; another 

advertises the NDP executive meeting.  I might add, Mr. 

Speaker, that the item that advertises the NDP executive meeting 

says: 

 

 Our executive will meet next . . . Monday, March 15th, at 

7:30 p.m. at the M.L.A. office to conduct our regular meeting 

and make our 400 Club ticket draw.  (Please plan on joining 

us.) 

 

The last item is a pitch to support the 1993 NDP membership 

and donation drive.  The document is over the names of the 

Yorkton NDP president and the party secretary names and phone 

numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say again that this is a blatant violation of a 

directive from a legislative committee by the member from 

Yorkton.  There can be no doubt.  As such, Mr. Speaker, the 

question of privilege arises from the disobedience to rules or 

order of the House or a committee and contempt for this 

Assembly. 

 

In the 1982 edition of Parliamentary Privilege in Canada by 

Joseph Maingot, the affirmation of this claim is very clear.  He 

states: 

 

 Disobedience of rules or orders represents an affront to the 

dignity of the House and accordingly the House could take 

action, not simply for satisfaction, but to ensure that the House 

of Commons is held in the respect necessary for its authority 

to be vindicated.  Without proper respect, the House of 

Commons could not function.  Thus disobedience may well be 

considered contempt . . . 

 

 Disobedience of rules or orders is an obvious contempt . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, being in violation of the rules of a committee of 

this Assembly and that violation being in contempt of this 

Assembly, we believe a prima facie case of privilege has been 

established. 

 

Upon your favourable ruling, Mr. Speaker, I will be 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

moving the following motion.  Moved by the member from 

Moosomin, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

 That there be an immediate public convening of the 

Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections, and that 

the committee consider, but not limit itself to determining, 

the following: 

 

 (1) The amount of money expended on postage, letterhead, 

and sundry expenses involving the February 15, 1993 letter 

to New Democrats from the member from Yorkton; 

 

 (2) Immediate restitution of the above expenses from the 

member personally or the NDP constituency association; 

and 

 

 (3) Immediate and unequivocal apology from the member 

to the public of Saskatchewan and the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to thank the member for delivering his 

privilege, question of privilege, to my office this morning at 

11:28 which was pursuant to rule 6.  I would at this time, 

however, like to hear the views of other members on this 

question of privilege.  And if there are views, I will hear them at 

this particular time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how 

one could be expected to comment with absolutely no advance 

warning.  I have not seen the document, and it is extremely 

difficult to comment.  Perhaps you may want to reserve your 

ruling to give some of us a chance to review the matter.  It 

doesn't strike me offhand as a violation of privilege, but it's a 

hard comment to make without seeing the document. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have reviewed the matter that has been 

presented by the member from Moosomin, and without knowing 

any further evidence, I have some difficulty in coming to the 

conclusive conclusion that the member does in his first 

paragraph, where he indicates that: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point 

of privilege in regard to what is a clear violation of the rules and 

orders of the committee of this Assembly, by a member of the 

Assembly. 

 

In reading through, and the member himself states on page 2: 

presumably using legislative postage.  That has not been 

established. And if it has not been legislative postage, then of 

course we must look at this in another light.  It may not be 

contempt or privilege at all.  I don't know that. 

 

I do want to also remind members that in the Rules and 

Procedures manual, under rule 27: 

 

 If anything shall come in question touching the conduct or 

election of any member or his right to hold a seat, he may 

make a statement . . . 

 

And then it goes on that he shall withdraw as we discuss it.  The 

member is in the House at the present time, and I really, without 

any further clarification, I 

think it is very difficult for the Speaker to rule at this particular 

time whether or not there has been established a prima facie case 

of privilege or contempt of this legislature. 

 

And it puts the Speaker in a very, very difficult situation.  And I 

think what I will do at this time is to reserve my judgement and 

ask the member for Yorkton, who has been accused at this 

particular time, either to make a statement in the House in the 

very near future or to provide evidence to the Speaker in his 

office on which the Speaker can make a decision.  If that is not 

forthcoming then in the very near future, possibly tomorrow, I 

will rule on your case of a prima facie case of privilege.  I thank 

the member for bringing it to my attention. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No 01 -- An Act Respecting The Saskatoon Foundation 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  At the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, I will be moving second reading of Bill 01, An Act 

Respecting the Saskatoon Foundation.  And I hope in my 

remarks I can do something to lower the tension level in this 

House. 

 

I want to talk very briefly about the Saskatoon Foundation which 

was established in 1970 by an Act of this legislature.  Many 

people across Saskatchewan are very familiar with charitable 

giving through their local United Way.  Saskatoon, as befits a 

very unique community in this prairie province, also has a 

unique foundation which operates in tandem doing similar 

philanthropic work to the United Way.  I refer of course to the 

Saskatoon Foundation. 

 

The Saskatoon Foundation benefits the people of Saskatoon and 

area now and for future generations by attracting, managing, and 

distributing contributions which shape the well-being of the 

community of Saskatoon.  The foundation provides a flexible 

vehicle for donors with very philanthropic interests and 

effectively responds to changing community needs through 

support to registered charitable organizations. 

 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, the foundation was originally created 

through an Act of the legislature in 1970.  The board of directors 

wants to replace the existing Act with a more modern piece of 

legislation. 

 

(1430) 

 

The new Act, Bill 01, keeps the spirit and intent of the old Act 

but effects changes which are more appropriate for 1994.  For 

example, at present the board's size is limited to eight members.  

This does not in the hurry-up, rush-a-day modern work world 

provide sufficient flexibility for the board to be able to meet it's 

workload. 

 

Currently they have engaged the services of five 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

volunteers they are calling consultants who are attending board 

of directors' meetings.  And if Bill 01 is passed, those people 

will then be able to take their place as full-fledged board of 

directors for the Saskatoon Foundation.  One other thing that 

will happen with Bill 01, Mr. Speaker, is that the language of the 

Act will be simplified. 

 

I think it is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, on International Women's 

Day, to draw your attention to some of the good works done by 

the Saskatoon Foundation, and I'm going to very briefly tell you 

about some of those things that focus specifically on the needs 

and concerns of women, and women and children in the 

Saskatoon community. 

 

For instance in 1992, the latest year for which I have their 

annual statement, they provided a grant for the upgrading of 

emergency lighting and smoke detectors to the Saskatoon 

Society for the Protection of Children.  They assisted children 

with special needs at the parents' day cooperative.  And for the 

Luther child care association, a child's care in the riding of 

Saskatoon Wildwood, they provided equipment for a new infant 

care room, a very modern, very caring and sensitive facility -- a 

definite addition to the city of Saskatoon. 

 

With respect to family and community ventures, Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatoon Foundation has provided a grant to the YWCA of 

Saskatoon for counselling services for the residents.  For the 

Saskatoon Interval House, a shelter for women who are victims 

of domestic violence, they have given money to help for 

renovations to the new home to make it more accessible for the 

disabled. 

 

Also, they have assisted the Saskatoon Habitat for Humanity, a 

very unique venture whereby parents of older children who face 

mental disabilities can still have semi-sheltered living.  They 

have assisted them with their building program. 

 

Drawing to a close on this, with respect to arts and culture, they 

assist the Saskatoon Music Festival in annual sponsorships, and 

they have assisted the Saskatoon Native Theatre. 

 

And finally with respect to specifically women's issues, they 

have provided a scholarship.  The Margaret Rouse bursary, 

College of Nursing bursary is provided annually. 

 

In total, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Foundation provides well in 

excess of $125,000 to various charitable organizations in 

Saskatoon to allow them to continue to ensure that Saskatoon is 

the vibrant and wonderful community that it is. 

 

I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move that Bill 01, An Act respecting 

the Saskatoon Foundation be now read a second time and 

referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, following 

my remarks I'll be moving an amendment to the Full Gospel 

Bible Institute Bill.  And I just have a few remarks on the Bill 

prior to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Full Gospel Bible Institute is located in Eston, 

Saskatchewan, the community that I'm from myself, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's an important Bible-teaching college located at 

Eston.  Later this year, Mr. Speaker, the Full Gospel Bible 

Institute of Eston, Saskatchewan, will be holding their 50th 

anniversary.  And I think it's testimony to the length of time that 

they've been in the province of Saskatchewan and the very good 

work that they do on behalf of the Christian movement in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

People from all over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Canada, and 

indeed the world, attend that college at Eston and receive an 

education based on Christian teachings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's my understanding that the Bill will allow for an expansion of 

their facilities to accommodate more students, Mr. Speaker.  

Speaking with the people in charge out there at the Bible 

college, it's my understanding that over a course of the next few 

years the expansion will be something in the magnitude of $1 

million expansion to this facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Eston and surrounding area are 

extremely proud of this facility and extremely proud of the 

record that they have of teaching from that Bible college.  They 

have the very, very full support of the community of Eston.  The 

town of Eston passed a resolution outlining that very distinctly, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I believe that the people of Saskatchewan 

should be supportive of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I anticipate 

that support. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move An Act to amend An Act to 

incorporate Full Gospel Bible Institute be now read a second 

time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 

Members' Bills.  So moved. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 27 -- International Women's Day 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the conclusion of 

my remarks I will be moving this motion that on this 

International Women's Day, this Assembly commit itself to 

furthering the equality and well-being of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am honoured in moving this private members' 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

motion on this International Women's Day, March 8.  This is a 

day for us to reflect on women's struggles for equality and to 

celebrate their many achievements.  It is also a day for us to 

recognize that there are many barriers that still prevent or 

impede women's progress in obtaining what is rightfully ours -- 

full equality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to reflect on the government's 

progress to date, and then to also relate some ways in which we 

can move to eventually reach our goal of full equality. 

 

Our first priority has been to maintain current levels of crisis 

counselling, support services, and treatment programs relating to 

family violence and violence against women.  Mr. Speaker, we 

also recognize that there is much work to be done in the justice 

system to make it more responsive to the needs of women and 

children who have experienced violence. 

 

There is no longer a limit on the period for bringing civic action 

for damages resulting from sexual assault.  As a result of 

changes in legislation, victims of sexual assault are no longer 

faced with a strict time frame for making application to the 

victims' fund.  And in addition, as we saw today, the Minister of 

Justice introduced The Victims of Domestic Violence Act today 

in this legislature and we are proud of that accomplishment. 

 

I have to tell you that in my constituency of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster we have people voluntarily working very 

hard in this area.  The Interval Home in Lloydminster is chaired 

by a women called Val Shockey who is working extensively 

hard.  They have just done some renovations to their facility.  

And all this was done by volunteer funds and volunteer work. 

 

But also the government is supporting a number of initiatives 

designed to prevent violence.  And here's the theme of 

prevention again.  Just as I mentioned yesterday when I spoke 

about the child's advocate, our objective is to prevent some of 

the things that are going on. 

 

Here is some of our services.  Victims' services in the 

Department of Justice and the Department of Education, 

Training and Employment are planning to set up peer 

counselling groups in high schools across the province to deal 

with dating violence.  This is a very important initiative because 

patterns in relationships between men and women are formed 

very early in life.  And I think that if this kind of counselling 

occurs, we can prevent some of the things that make our life 

unbearable as women. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Broadcasters in consultation 

with government and community agencies is developing a series 

of public service announcements. 

 

School-age children need the opportunity to discuss issues 

related to violence in the home.  The Department of Education 

has developed optional units for the provincial health curriculum 

for grades 7 to 9 which deal with family violence.  Being a 

former 

teacher, I know how important awareness and education is early 

in life. 

 

Saskatchewan's action plan for children outlines a process that 

will include government, non-government agencies, 

communities, families, and individuals in ensuring that our 

children will grow up in environments that support their 

well-being and enable them to reach their potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to work towards 

policies which will foster economic independence and provide a 

strong foundation for equal participation of women in the 

economic life of the province.  The new Occupational Health 

and Safety Act which was passed in the last session is one of its 

kind to deal with harassment and violence in the workplace. 

 

Operating grants to child care centres were increased for the first 

time since 1986.  The number of licensed child care spaces was 

increased by 700 since 1991.  There are 10 teen-infant centres 

providing a total of 114 child care spaces. 

 

There are mandatory employment equity plans in all government 

departments.  In September of 1993 employment equity 

programs were extended to all provincial Crown corporations 

and government agencies. 

 

Our NDP caucus office boasts a clause in their collective 

agreement that covers sexual, racial, and personal harassment -- 

the only such clause written into a contract in Saskatchewan. 

 

Minimum wage has been increased to 5.35 an hour.  Labour 

Standards Act is under review and specific consultations have 

been with members of the women's community.  This Act is 

especially important to women since they are trapped in the pink 

collar ghetto, the jobs which are included in service, clerical, and 

sales jobs. 

 

A number of enhancements to the social assistance plan and the 

Family Income Plan have been introduced. 

 

New Careers Corporation provides social assistance recipients 

with opportunities to upgrade their education through the 

Saskatchewan skills development program. 

 

Northern food allowance has been increased for all recipients 

living north of the 54th parallel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes to The Family Maintenance Act ensures 

that the government cannot refuse social assistance to disabled 

adults on the basis that their parents are able to support them. 

 

We are committed to improving the health of Saskatchewan 

women.  A minister's advisory committee on family planning 

has been exploring approaches to reduce unwanted pregnancies 

among teens.  A toll free line on reproductive health is being 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

established.  Committees will be established in 1994 to review 

whether and how midwifery should be registered and regulated. 

 

Women's specific needs are being reflected in needs assessments 

made to district health boards.  Greater funding has been 

provided to the breast cancer screening program to expand 

accessibility. 

 

And the Human Rights Code now protects people from 

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, family status, 

and receipt of public assistance. 

 

But even though much has been done, the struggle continues.  

And while much has changed for women since the turn of the 

century, women today continue to work for fair wages and 

working conditions, as well as for a better quality of life. 

 

(1445) 

 

To give you an example.  In Saskatchewan in 1992, women 

working full time for a full year earned an average of 71 cents 

for every dollar earned by a man.  Women's jobs are clustered in 

the pink collar ghetto -- sales, service, and clerical work.  

Women continue to suffer sexual harassment in the workplace.  

Most part-time workers are women.  The majority of 

minimum-wage earners are women. 

 

Many parents, especially women, are forced to balance the 

competing demands of work and family responsibilities.  I don't 

think there's a woman in this Assembly that can't identify with 

that.  I know my years of being a teacher for 23 years and 

balancing the act of raising a family and being mother, being a 

teacher, and being a community worker was stressful to say the 

least. 

 

Many NGOs (non-governmental organizations) in my 

constituency are also concerned with women's issues as they 

apply to their clients.  The Libbie Young Centre under direction 

of Margo Hines, CEO (chief executive officer), deals with 

persons with mental illness.  I raise the concern that often 

persons with mental illness, and these are women, need 

part-time work.  Funding today is only available to full-time 

workers.  I think we can see why we would want funding for 

part 

_time work as these folks struggle to become part of our 

workforce. 

 

Currently the Libbie Young Centre has a residential and an 

apartment living program.  In the future we need a 

semi-independent living program to round out the facilities 

available.  We hope we can move to this future step soon. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, salaries and staff for this facility are low, and 

of course most of the staff are women.  I'm told by Margo Hines, 

but also by folks at the Twin Rivers Health District, that there 

still remains a stigma on mental illness and especially as it 

relates to women. 

 

More needs to be done in education and awareness to encourage 

people in the need of help, to get it, and to 

make people aware of the fact that people with mental illness 

need respect and support. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our goal is to build a province of strong and 

supportive communities which value women's work, which 

respect women's choices, and celebrate women's diversity.  A 

province in which there is economic and social justice for all. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move this motion: 

 

 That on this International Women's Day, this Assembly 

commit itself to furthering the equality and well-being of 

women in Saskatchewan. 

 

Seconded by the member from Regina Wascana Plains.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege to rise 

and second the motion before us, that on this International 

Women's Day, we commit ourselves to furthering the equality 

and the well-being of women in Saskatchewan. 

 

I begin my comments with a quote that was used on the title 

page of the task force on women's issues.  It was a task force that 

I chaired when I began my work as a member of Regina City 

Council.  A quote from Gustav Geiger: "The position of women 

in a society provides an exact measure of the development of 

that society." 

 

Since the 1970 Royal Commission Report on the Status of 

Women and the 1975 declaration of the international year of the 

woman, there has been an increasing emphasis on women's 

issues throughout the country.  These issues have remained the 

same over the last number of years and we continue to further 

our work on those issues. 

 

It's widely recognized that these issues are not only women's 

issues but family issues and community issues, as the quote 

suggests.  It also brings a new light and meaning to the phrase 

from J.S. Woodsworth:  "What we desire for ourselves we wish 

for all." 

 

Today we move beyond this statement to commit ourselves to 

work for changes that can make this a reality.  Over the years the 

issues have remained the same. They remain constant in our 

lives to work for a betterment of the quality of life and basic 

living standards for all women in our province. 

 

When many of us take for granted housing, the provision of 

water and sewer services, we remember others who were in 

search of shelter or who have to haul their water to and from 

their homes to provide the daily living chores of their work life 

and their workplace.  Over the past few years we've begun to 

dedicate our work to those issues and have spent about $80 

million in the provision of social housing and housing to address 

the needs of shelter for women.  And we've looked to the North 

to try and 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

provide about $6.2 million for water and sewer services. 

 

When many of us live in safe and loving environments, we 

remember our sisters who live in violent situations or who in 

escaping those violent situations must also leave their homes, 

their belongings, and sometimes their children.  We can only but 

try to understand the fear and the emotional upheaval that these 

women and children live with on a daily basis. 

 

We put first priority on maintaining current levels of crisis 

counselling, support services, and treatment programs; recognize 

that there is much work to be done to make the justice system 

more responsive to their needs, and put our full support behind a 

number of initiatives designed to break the cycle of violence and 

develop long-term preventative strategies that will improve the 

lives of our citizens. 

 

In an era when many women are free to follow an educational 

and career path of their choice, we acknowledge the feminine 

face of economic marginalization and of poverty. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not just today, but every day we recommit our 

lives to service that will work toward policies which foster 

economic independence and provide a strong foundation for 

equal participation of women in the economic life of our 

province. 

 

Legislation dealing with harassment and violence in the 

workplace, increasing operating grants to child care centres, 

adding to the number of licensed child care spaces available to 

parents, mandatory employment equity plans in government 

departments and Crowns are a few steps to further us along the 

path to economic equality and justice. 

 

In our health lives when we enjoy access to quality health care 

and preventative health care initiatives, we think of those that 

are working hard in our health care reforms to provide quality 

access to health care services. 

 

We must now move further down the road of health care reform, 

down the road of Labour Standards and Trade Union Act reform 

and continue our struggle to lobby for pay equity.  The best 

preventative and curative health care, the ability to make the best 

life choices for our circumstances, the improvement of quality of 

life and attainment of economic justice for all women is our 

goal. 

 

The first step is to focus on this for today and pledge our work 

every day to achieve this goal.  The strong support of the motion 

before us is the beginning.  I am pleased and proud to stand with 

my colleague, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and 

second the motion before this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure also for me also to stand in my place and 

speak on this motion, asking that the Assembly commit itself to 

further the equality and the well-being of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

International Women's Day has been so designated as an 

opportunity for people to reflect on the struggles that women 

have endured and the goals that women have achieved 

throughout the world.  Saskatchewan is home to many 

successful women, Mr. Speaker, including I would say, the 

Lieutenant Governor and physicist, Sylvia Fedoruk; two 

Canadian . . . two-time Canadian curling champions, the Sandra 

Peterson team; former Governor General, Jeanne Sauv; author, 

Maggie Siggins; and singer, Joni Mitchell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all Saskatchewanians but . . . well not a 

Saskatchewanian, we also saw the first woman prime minister in 

the history of Canada in Kim Campbell, which indicates, Mr. 

Speaker, the long, hard road that the women have fought does 

seem to be bearing fruit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is but a small example of the highly 

accomplished women who came from Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not stand here and claim to be an expert on 

equality issues.  In fact at times the efforts of equal rights groups 

actually confound me at times, Mr. Speaker.  It seems that 

everyone is in search of equality.  Keep in mind that I fully 

endorse the concept of equality.  What I am not so sure of is the 

game of catch-up that various groups are in search of.  And 

while I agree that many have been oppressed for all too many 

years, I do not think that we should restrict some in the favour of 

others. 

 

And let me be more specific, Mr. Speaker.  In the past, women 

were shut out of many careers and professions.  Some women 

could not get ahead in their chosen career because of sexist 

attitudes and discrimination, and we men have to accept our full 

responsibility for some of that blame, Mr. Speaker.  Those who 

did succeed managed to do so through hard, hard work.  It was a 

struggle and no one denies this. 

 

However today, Mr. Speaker, women are given priority for some 

jobs because of employment equity programs, and the question I 

would say, is this right?  Is this what the women want and is this 

what women call equality?  Well I'm not so sure that it is.  I 

think that women want to compete for those jobs equally.  They 

want equal time and recognition for their accomplishments.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we must allow them to have that.  We must 

allow equality in their pursuit of equal opportunity for the 

positions that are there. 

 

The other question I would ask: are quotas what women want?  I 

don't think so, Mr. Speaker.  Women have come too far to be 

given a job just based on their sex.  They want the job because 

they deserve it.  And they want it because they are a candidate 

with the proper qualifications to ask for that job.  And I agree 

with that concept. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

Mr. Speaker, we must be careful that we, in the quest of 

equality, do not engage in reverse discrimination.  Mr. Speaker, I 

believe in equality and have always had an equal relationship 

with my wife and my three daughters. 

 

As a government back-bencher, I was particularly proud of one 

particular program that was designed with women in mind -- all 

women, and not just career women.  I'm referring, Mr. Speaker, 

to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, a plan that the NDP 

essentially destroyed.  The majority of people enrolled in the 

program were women who had no other retirement option.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest that out of the women enrolled, the 

majority were home-makers, residing on the farm, or wives of 

small-business men. 

 

The NDP defence of eliminating this program was that it was 

too expensive.  Well, Mr. Speaker, pension experts have since 

stated that the NDP government could have easily cut the cost of 

this Saskatchewan Pension Plan with just some administrative 

changes.  Essentially the minister of Finance could have 

eliminated the expense but he could have saved the plan. 

 

And I find it strange that this same government is now bringing 

a motion forward on furthering the equality and well-being of 

women in Saskatchewan -- the same government that set the 

women of the province back when they destroyed the pension 

plan.  Mr. Speaker, maybe now is the time to reinstate the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan using the windfall dollars that the 

province will enjoy due to the federal cancellation of the $600 

cash credit for seniors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to recognize the efforts and 

achievements of women across Canada and indeed the world.  

Our caucus, Mr. Speaker, joins with the government and the 

women across the world in celebrating this day.  And I thank 

you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to step out on a 

limb here.  I think International Women's Day is a good day to 

send a message to our brothers in the legislature. 

 

Even when women achieve this level that we have by being 

elected to this legislature, we are not always taken seriously.  

Our perspectives are different, and therefore they are not always 

valued. 

 

To loosely quote Einstein, we can't solve problems at the same 

level we created them. So I urge my fellow legislators to 

rededicate ourselves to creating justice for 52 per cent of our 

population. 

 

And I ask you to remember that when women are oppressed, 

sexually harassed, beaten, raped, and left in poverty, that these 

are your mothers, your sisters, 

your children, your neighbours, and your partners. 

 

We all need to rededicate ourselves in order to create a more 

caring and equal community, and the place to start is here today. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to members of 

the Assembly.  There are occasions on which to rise and speak 

about issues of importance in our society, and while all are 

important, some are more personally significant than others.  

Today being International Women's Day is a time of 

considerable significance for us all, both male and female, in this 

place of democracy.  And it is a pleasure for me to speak in 

favour of this motion. 

 

There are times in this Assembly when I was engaging in 

dialogues such as I was last evening with the Minister of 

Education, or when I met with the Minister of Health recently, 

or exchanged debate with the Minister of Finance, times when 

the cogency of women in leadership roles is illuminated.  And it 

is at those moments when the progress of women, and women in 

politics, comes alive.  And the character that has come to our 

democracy as a result of women being in the midst, becomes 

more clear and more distinct than usual. 

 

What is important to me is not simply the statistical evidence 

that women are more involved in the political process.  Certainly 

it is significant that 18 per cent of politicians in Ottawa are 

women, the highest percentage of any G-7 country. It is 

important that those numbers are twice what they were five 

years ago, and it is critical that we continue to strive -- in fact 

very, very critical that we continue to strive to achieve a greater 

balance in representation. 

 

In Saskatchewan, women comprise 19 per cent of our 

legislature.  But statistics are equally valuable for what they do 

not say.  We must work to ensure that all parties reflect women's 

importance to the process, to facilitate easier entry for women 

into the political arena.  And we must examine the workings of 

our Legislative Assembly so articulately addressed by the 

member before me, to ensure that the structure itself is not 

prohibitive to having women involved. 

 

Greater predictability in the sessional calendar for example, Mr. 

Speaker.  Sitting hours more sensitive to women with family 

obligations.  Such things are critical to being able to have 

women, particularly those with small children, participate.  The 

measure of commitment to having women involved will be 

reflected by the reform that takes place to facilitate that 

involvement. 

 

Women have struggled before us to pave the way for our 

participation at the level we now engage in in Saskatchewan 

politics, but the political arena is perhaps the last frontier on 

which the struggle is taking place. 

 

What all of us must recognize today are the struggles 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

taking place around the world by our sisters -- struggles for 

equality, struggles for safety, for dignity, and for opportunity.  

And when we in Canada think of women's issues, we correctly 

focus on issues of child care, violence against women, pay 

equity, and equal opportunity for employment.  What we tend to 

forget is the distance we have put between ourselves and women 

in other parts of the world, women whose daily struggles still 

involve the search for food and a safe shelter for their families. 

 

Today we must join together, all of us, men and women, as one 

to salute the courage being shown by women who stand in ration 

lines in Russia, who pick up the pieces of their war-torn lives in 

Bosnia and Somalia and the Middle East.  It is women who have 

traditionally tended to the sick and provided the emotional 

strength upon which families have rallied and relied for their 

survival, and these are the strengths we must salute and revere in 

our global society. 

 

In Canada we have the opportunity as women to take our places 

in the roles of leadership which can have an impact on the 

policies of our communities, our provinces, our nation, and 

indeed the global society.  And every step forward, Mr. Speaker, 

is not just a step taken here at home; it is a step into the future, a 

footstep in which our sons and daughters will follow to shape 

the world as a place of equal opportunity for all. 

 

As we progress, we must experience an evolution in assessing 

our own value.  Women have always attached a different set of 

values to their work than men have and that has been part of our 

problem.  Too much of what we have done as makers of homes 

and nurturers of children have been simply considered duty by 

many, for which there has been no recognition and no monetary 

support.  All of what men have done in the name of providing 

resources to those homes from the outside has been considered 

worthy of monetary reward.  This is what we must continue to 

work to change. 

 

According to United Nations, women make up more than 50 per 

cent of the world's population, but we put in more than 

two-thirds of the working hours.  Women grow half of the food 

but receive one-tenth of the wages and own just 1 per cent of the 

world's property.  One study has estimated the value of work 

done worldwide by women but for which they received no 

money, and this was valued at some $4 trillion. 

 

In Canada, estimates show that working women put in between 

25 and 35 hours per week on caring for their families, doing 

housework, child care, running errands, and volunteer work.  

Those are hours which prevent many women from committing 

more time to jobs and careers and have, to some extent, kept 

them on the lower rungs of corporate structures, away from 

increased educational opportunities. 

 

And in Saskatchewan, women play a very significant role in our 

agricultural economy for which they do not receive sufficient 

credit.  In fact the latest breakdown in the 1991 census wipes out 

some long-held myths 

about Saskatchewan agriculture.  While farming has been 

regarded as a male-dominated industry, the figure tells a very 

different story.  One in five Saskatchewan farms is operated by a 

woman.  On a national basis, women make up 26 per cent of all 

farm operations, numbering 100,000 of the country's 390,000 

farmers. 

 

Today is a time to celebrate the enormous contribution farm 

women have made to saving so many farm families and family 

farms through their hard work on and off farm, their ingenuity in 

starting so many of the diversification projects that supported 

operations during tough times, and for being such dedicated 

advocates for rural Saskatchewan when its institutions have 

come under siege. 

 

It is important to acknowledge the significance of the 

contribution of women as well to the world of small business.  

Our future economic success as a province and a nation will be 

tremendously enhanced by the increasing level of involvement 

by women as entrepreneurs.  What often goes unnoticed is the 

partnership efforts by so many women who contribute long 

hours for little pay to their family business which is owned and 

operated by the male head of the family, particularly where 

many Canadian immigrants are involved. 

 

There have been many victories claimed by women's 

movements over the past few years, and each of those victories 

is shared by our whole community because of the impact it has 

on how we view one another as human beings, how we value the 

potential of the individual regardless of sex or race or other 

factors which were once considered cause of prejudice. 

 

The members of women's movements throughout the world have 

strived to offer all people -- not just women -- safer, more 

productive, and more fulfilling roles in society.  The spin-offs of 

their crusades have provided increased protection for children, 

for the elderly, for disabled, and for other minorities whose 

voices needed to be heard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have only begun the battles.  One in six 

Canadian women live below the poverty line; about a quarter of 

single mothers who work full time live in poverty; and the 

poverty rate climbs to 75 per cent for single moms who work 

part time.  We must work together to form policies which 

encompass long-term vision to address these inequities, which 

provide access to increased education and quality jobs for those 

women raising children on their own.  And men of course are 

raising children on their own as well, but today we're paying 

tribute to women. 

 

Forty to sixty per cent of women worldwide experience violence 

in the home, and we must move to take action that will eradicate 

this threat to women wherever they may be.  And I commend 

this government for taking initiative to address many of the 

problems which went unattended for far too long in 

Saskatchewan.  And I hope that this, our legislature, can leave its 

mark on history as one that moved to add to the security of 

women through legislation which 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

will curb and ultimately end violence in their lives. 

 

Fellow members, Canada and Saskatchewan have the capacity to 

set world standards for the way in which women are treated in 

our society.  It is not simply a question of resources but an issue 

of commitment to change, to reform, and to evolution.  It is not 

simply enough to be better at recognizing, better at developing 

and promoting the potential of women in our society; what is 

important is that when we leave this Assembly at the end of each 

day and ultimately at the end of our terms in office, that we 

know that we have done everything within our power to promote 

the safe, peaceful, and fulfilled existence of every individual in 

our society. 

 

Today as we acknowledge International Women's Day, let us 

renew our pledge each to one another, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and in particular to the women of today and the 

children of tomorrow, to advance, promote, and protect the 

rights of all women throughout the world. 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my privilege, 

Mr. Speaker, to support this motion moved and seconded by my 

colleagues from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and Regina Wascana 

Plains.  Since our attitudes towards other members of our society 

are shaped by our own experiences, on this International 

Women's Day I'd like to ask the indulgence of the members of 

the Assembly as I reflect on the background which has 

contributed to the viewpoints that I bring to this debate. 

 

More than 100 years ago, when my grandparents and 

great-grandparents came to this province and up until the 

beginning of the Second World War, they worked as families -- 

farming, trapping, working in the forest, saw mills, commercial 

fishing in northern Saskatchewan.  And these were all family 

enterprises where the men, women and children worked 

together. 

 

Then at the end of the '30s and during the war my father was 

serving in the militia and was in Europe for six years.  So my 

mother retrained herself and made sure that she made plans to be 

self-sufficient in the event that he didn't return.  And this was not 

really a socially acceptable thing for women to do in those days, 

particularly when he did, fortunately, return, that she didn't 

return to the kitchen immediately. 

 

So I grew up in my formative years with that as part of my 

background.  Then we farmed and it was again a family 

endeavour.  And we worked by the adage that many hands make 

light work and everyone pitched in according to their ability and 

availability without respect to age or gender.  There wasn't a 

gender bias in the workload; whoever was there, on hand and 

able, did what needed to be done. 

 

(1515) 

 

And in terms of the development of the organized women's 

movement, it seems that it's more a matter of timing that I was 

always rowing upstream.  In the '50s 

and '60s, I worked out of the home and then -- when it wasn't 

particularly acceptable to do that -- and then post Betty Friedan 

and Germaine Greer, when women were engaged all over North 

America in particular burning various articles of their clothing in 

bonfires, I was staying at home with a young family and baking 

bread. 

 

When my children were more mature and I became more active 

in community work and public life, I had the benefit of support 

and wise counsel from many mentors, men and women included.  

But I do recall in 1975, it was then the United Nations Year of 

the Woman, if you recall, and there was a saying around, why 

not a woman.  That was my first nomination to public office, 

which took place at a public meeting, and I was nominated and 

somebody . . . It was the first time a woman had been nominated 

to the position and somebody of course from the back row sung 

out, why not. 

 

So that was the beginning of my public career.  I'd like to just 

tell you another contribution that a man made to my political 

career.  And the reason that I'm standing here today is in 1976 

we had an annual meeting of an organization that I was the 

chairman of for the province scheduled, and in the morning of 

the meeting I woke up for . . . this is a story for another day -- 

but I was unable to see.  People were coming from all over the 

province for this meeting and I didn't want to let people down so 

I asked the secretary of the meeting to identify any speakers 

throughout the day because I wouldn't be able to see who they 

were and we'd get through it somehow. 

 

At the end of the meeting one of the participants of the meeting, 

an older farmer, came up to me and said: you have trouble with 

your eyes, don't you?  And I thought I had covered it up and 

pulled it off so well.  I said, well I do have a little problem, and 

he said, I've got some advice for you.  I said yes, what's that?  

He said: well blind in one eye, can't see out of the other, you 

should go into politics.  So here I am. 

 

First there were a number of years in farm politics and in 

municipal politics in roles where there are increasingly more 

women but have traditionally been posts that were held by men. 

 

But there are those who say that we as women have not made 

enough advances since 1927 in Canada, when women were 

officially recognized as persons.  Those people would say that 

while the achievements of the women whom I named in my 

earlier statement are noteworthy, that is not enough. 

 

Enough is a relative term, Mr. Speaker.  Personally I'm not a 

supporter of percentages or quotas or tokens.  What I do believe 

in is a kinder and gentler society and workplace, one which 

provides support and flexibility for young women and men as 

they educate and train themselves and take their places in the 

world of work.  A society where time for quality family life and 

child nurturing is compatible with other goals, because I do 

believe that the quality of our society can only be as high as the 

quality of our homes. 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

So what is enough progress?  In the Canadian context we need to 

continue to work towards equal pay for work of equal value; 

access to quality child care; and freedom from poverty and 

violence.  Much has been accomplished but we need to do more.  

But it does behove us to remember that what we commemorate 

today is International Women's Day.  We need to look beyond 

our own perspective and think of the women of Bosnia and 

Somalia, fearing for the safety of their families amid the 

violence of war.  We need to think of the millions of women in 

underdeveloped countries where over a third of families are 

headed by women, who will spend every waking hour of this 

day carrying water, foraging for fuel for heat and cooking, if 

indeed they have anything to cook; spending their day, Mr. 

Speaker, on surviving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have five grandchildren, four of whom are girls.  

When I reflect on where I've been, this is what I wish for them:  

freedom from violence and the threat of violence in a peaceful 

world; tolerance, compassion, understanding in personal and 

community relationships; the opportunity for them to develop 

their God-given talents through access to lifelong learning; an 

opportunity for their contributions to private or public life to be 

accepted with respect and without discrimination. 

 

These are the hopes I have for my own family, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would wish no less for all the women of the world, all the 

daughters of the universe on this International Women's Day.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I'd like to introduce some guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I'd like to introduce to you and through you to 

this Assembly, two very important people in my life.  On this 

special day I welcome Dawn Stanger, my daughter, and Sonya 

Stanger, my granddaughter.  And they have come to listen to the 

speeches made in the legislature.  And I'd like all of you to 

welcome them as they . . . And there's Sonya waving. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 27 -- International Women's Day 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

privilege for me to say a few words to honour women and their 

achievements on this International Women's Day. 

This is a day to celebrate all women and their accomplishments.  

Women who, as my aboriginal friends say, do hold up half the 

sky. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to briefly acknowledge 

the contributions of just a few women in Canada and 

Saskatchewan; women who I think are excellent role models for 

Canada's youth.  Some of these women are famous, their names 

known to us all. But the qualities that made them so well known 

to us are those we recognize and admire in all people, women 

and men. 

 

I'd like to begin on a personal note by recognizing my women 

colleagues in this Assembly.  Their particular contribution to the 

quality of debate, their commitment to consensus making, and 

their fulfilment of their responsibilities to their constituents and 

the people of Saskatchewan is admirable. 

 

There are four women I'd like to make special mention of, one 

an athlete, one an intellectual, one an environmentalist, and one 

a care giver.  As others have done before me in this House, I too 

must pay my tribute to Sandra Peterson and her rink for their 

marvellous achievement in winning for a second time, the 

Canadian women's curling championship.  What I admire 

particularly in Ms. Peterson is her ability to perform supremely 

well under great pressure.  She brings credit to Regina and 

Saskatchewan, and we wish her and her team every success in 

the world championships in Germany next month. 

 

Speaking of Canadian women on the world scene, among 

readers there can be no better-known talent than Margaret 

Atwood.  Highly intelligent, quite independent, witty and 

articulate, this author of many best-selling novels is renowned 

for her humour and her ability to describe the world as it really 

is. 

 

Preserving that world, preserving our environment, is the life 

commitment of another impressive woman, Elizabeth May.  

Working inside and outside of government in Ottawa, she has 

fought tenaciously for the protection of our environment and 

continues to do so with consistency and courage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, here in Fort Qu'Appelle is 

another remarkable woman I greatly admire, Jean Goodwill.  

Jean is a woman of tremendous energy and integrity and her 

work in the area of health care, particularly with aboriginal 

women, is widely admired as her many awards will attest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this day has been chosen to commemorate women, 

and I have very briefly mentioned a few.  Think of what we 

could say about such women as Mother Teresa, Indira Gandhi, 

Eleanor Roosevelt, Gro Brundtlund, or Roberta Bondar. 

 

As I said, this day has been chosen to celebrate women, but 

women do not restrict their achievements or their struggles to 

one day a year any more than men 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

do.  But rather, women follow their goals and dreams day and 

night through all the seasons. 

 

The qualities I celebrate in the women I've mentioned -- 

courage, integrity, energy, intelligence, commitment, humour, 

and compassion -- are also evident in women who are not as 

well known: the woman who teaches your children, the woman 

who pioneers her place in a non-traditional work role, the 

woman who provides your health care, or the woman who is 

your partner. 

 

We celebrate and recognize all such women today by supporting 

the motion before us.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 47 

years old and I have seen tremendous changes with respect to 

the advancement of women in our society.  And I want to start 

out my remarks today by remembering a slogan from my 20's 

and 30's, perhaps an old slogan but an important slogan, and that 

is: the personal is political. 

 

We tend, I think, as we have advanced or as we think we have 

advanced with respect to women's issues, we tend to forget that 

very important thing.  And I want to start out my remarks by 

first of all making a few personal comments. 

 

The first comment I want to make is that I do wish that the rules 

of this Assembly allowed one to be able to use the actual names 

of the representatives when one is referring to those 

representatives in speeches.  Since I can't, but since I do strongly 

believe that the personal is political, I want to start out by 

reading into the record the names of the constituencies of the 13 

very strong, very fine women from two political parties who 

represent women in this legislature. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Broadway; 

Regina North West; the member from Bengough-Milestone; 

Melfort; Regina Lake Centre; Regina Wascana Plains; 

Saskatoon Greystone, the Leader of the Third Party; Saskatoon 

Wildwood, Saskatoon Westmount, Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, 

Regina Hillsdale, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and Saskatoon River 

Heights. 

 

Thirteen women, Mr. Speaker, the most women this legislature 

has ever seen.  We have, I think, definitely changed the tone of 

the business suit and tie attire in this House and it is my hope 

that we will change the tone with respect to the advancement of 

women, and women and their children in this province during 

our tenure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- The second bit of, personal is political, statement 

that I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is to acknowledge the very 

major contributions by my mother.  My mother right now is in 

Moose Jaw dying of Alzheimer's disease.  During her life, 

though, she was a strong person.  She raised six children on her 

own 

having to rely on the public dole, having to rely on welfare, 

because she was a widow.  But nevertheless she was able to 

bring up six children with a sense of pride and dignity, and to 

convince them that they had a right to stand tall and proud in this 

society.  And to convince them that they had a duty to carry on 

the values and concerns that she shared with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- As I said, Mr. Speaker, the personal is political.  

We are slowly but surely gaining power in this country, in this 

world, politically and economically.  I think we have to take a 

look, though, at the whole situation as indeed my sisters who 

have spoken before me have said very eloquently.  We need to 

look at the whole international situation.  We need to look at the 

national situation and the provincial situation. 

 

We have been fortunate, through a series of social democratic 

governments in this province, to be able to introduce some fairly 

strong, fairly progressive measures that have advanced the cause 

of women's rights.  In that venture, the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP have been aided 

mightily by very strong, very active women's advocacy groups.  

And I wish to thank them now, Mr. Speaker, for the work that 

they have done in terms of keeping governments of this country 

on track and focused and concerned about women's issues. 

 

Although we have managed over the years to introduce some 

legislative and program changes to improve the situation for 

women, in fact, unfortunately, right now the situation for all too 

many women is getting worse, not getting better. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that is because we're seeing an 

incredible amount of economic restructuring all across the 

world, over which we have little or no control.  We are seeing 

the forces of globalization and continentalism continuing to chip 

away at our base in this country.  We have to acknowledge that 

economic restructuring, though, and not simply engage in 

hand-wringing.  And we have to decide what we can do about it 

because despite the financial difficulties in this province and in 

this country, despite the growing concentration of economic 

power in the hands of fewer and fewer people, we have to -- we 

must -- do something. 

 

The issue for most women today, Mr. Speaker, is very clear and 

very simple -- it's the lack of power that is directly associated 

with the economic realities of this world.  And that lack of 

power, those economic realities, lead to poverty in this world 

and most particularly in this country, since I wish to focus my 

remarks on the Canadian scene today. 

 

As the member from Saskatoon River Heights pointed out, it is 

67 years since the original person's case that said: yes indeed, 

women are persons before the law.  It is 50 years since the first 

CCF-NDP government was 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

elected on this continent. 

 

During that time, we've seen many changes, we've been able to 

have many advances.  We've seen, for instance, the creation of a 

great deal of strong, universal social programs.  We have also 

seen the creation of the solid, state-supported means of funding 

them.  But now we are seeing that those advances are being 

eroded, and we realize that we have to move beyond 

universality; we have to start honing in on our programs, 

targeting them, and making sure that the people who have the 

real needs can be the beneficiaries of those programs.  We can 

no longer afford the luxury of universal social programs that 

merely maintain the status quo of poverty for too many women 

and children in this province. 

 

As I have said earlier, Mr. Speaker, with respect to dealing with 

the real issue, the feminization of poverty in many ways, while 

we've implemented some changes, all we've done is kissed the 

wounds.  We have not really dealt with the basic issue.  

Forty-one per cent of the case-load of our social assistance in 

this province is people in single-parent families -- that's women 

and children.  In this country one in six children grow up poor.  

We have to find some way of dealing with that. 

 

I do not ascribe to the view that the only good social program is 

and must necessarily be a universal one.  In many ways, 

universality was a useful thing and a necessary thing.  Certainly 

when the people of our province were much poorer, when the 

middle class of our province was much poorer, we needed those 

broad, universal programs. 

 

But now, as a way of maintaining the support for our programs, 

as a way of co-opting people into the universal programs, it's a 

very expensive notion.  In Canada right now -- and I find this a 

shameful statistic, and I hope that all members of this House on 

all sides will take account of it and will even listen to the fact 

that I'm quoting from a very right-wing institute, the Fraser 

Institute; even the Fraser Institute recognizes and acknowledges 

this reality, and so must we -- in Canada well over $22 billion of 

transfer payments from the federal government to individuals 

last year, from the federal government to Canadian families, 

over 22 billion went to Canadian families whose incomes are 

above the national average.  That's one of the problems and the 

dark side of universality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Obviously we need certain basic universal programs.  Public 

education, access to hospital services, medicare, certain 

recreation services, policing services, and so forth -- these things 

need to be universal.  We need to have them to be universal in 

order to sustain public support for them.  We need them to be 

universal as part of the contract that we as legislators have, our 

social contract with the people of this province to provide good 

governance, and also as recognition of basic human needs.  

Regardless of income, we know that certain basic universal 

programs must not and cannot be compromised by fate or 

whimsy. 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the statistics for 

too many women and children in this province today, I have to 

say that the time has come that all programs, all social programs, 

do not need to be nor should they be universal.  We need to 

consider the very special needs of limited groups of people in 

this province. 

 

I think it is time for us to get back, in this party, to our basic 

socialist roots -- not our social democratic roots but our socialist 

roots -- and remind ourselves that one of our basic mottos is: 

from each according to his or her ability, to each according to 

his or her need.  And we have women and children in this 

province who have a great need to be able to be given the means 

to get out of the poverty trap, to be able to hold their heads up 

high with respect and dignity in this province. 

 

As our affluence has grown in this province, it seems to me 

unfortunately our neighbourliness has shrunk.  The personal acts 

of kindness, the cooperatives, the early government ventures that 

meant so much to this province -- these things have been 

changing, most particularly in the '80s and early '90s.  We no 

longer see at a personal level or at a political level such a great 

desire by Saskatchewan people to help each other through 

adversity.  And we need to figure out a way to get back to that 

kinder and gentler time. 

 

I grew up in a Saskatchewan where the legend was that the 

towns were established at exactly the distance you could drive a 

team of horses, the notion being that the light would always 

shine through and guide you in a blizzard.  I grew up in a 

Saskatchewan where people took great pride in being 

neighbours, in helping the poor widow lady down the block, and 

so forth.  That Saskatchewan has changed. 

 

We see now unfortunately it picked up steam in the '80s when 

we saw the forces of Reaganism and Thatcherism, and to my 

great shame Thatcher was a woman but still that did not prevent 

her from endorsing a philosophy that caused a great deal of 

damage to women in this country and her own country. 

 

We see unfortunately a tendency for too many people to give 

personal attribution to their success, to focus only on their own 

greed, to have the attitude that, I'm all right, Jack, now shove off 

the boat for the rest of them.  We need to reverse that.  We need 

to start to deal with the basic women's issues that are surely, I 

would suggest, the most important issues if we are to have a 

strong future in this province. 

 

You know, in Canada we spend an incredible amount on our 

income transfer programs.  Six million people, one-quarter of 

the population, depends on cheques from the government to live.  

As I said, unfortunately far too much of that is going perhaps to 

people whose family incomes are already above average.  We 

see far too many workers in the poverty industry.  We have, for 

instance, over 85,000 people working on government transfer 

programs at all different levels. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

That's more people than we have defending this country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Every two workers in Canada are supporting another potential 

worker with some kind of income support.  We have to change 

that.  And we're only going to do that if we start to focus on the 

real issues and start to focus on properly stopping poverty. 

 

My suggestions for that, Mr. Speaker, on International Women's 

Day, are relatively straightforward and simple, though perhaps 

not everyone would agree with them.  I think, for instance, that 

we need to be moving into a universal child care program in this 

country.  One in six children in Canada grow up poor.  Single 

mothers are unable to work if they do not have adequate and 

appropriate child care. 

 

For the majority of single mothers, they do not have a strong 

family support system where they can take their children.  That 

means that they are going to have to rely either on private day 

care spaces or state-sponsored child care spaces.  Obviously my 

option would be that we would have a strong, state-sponsored, 

universal child care program. 

 

I would like to remind some of the members opposite that in 10 

years, while they were in power, they put in absolutely no new 

money into day care.  And you can't argue that women should 

get out and work and support themselves and get off welfare, 

and at the same time not provide the means to have adequate and 

appropriate care for their children while they are working in the 

paid labour force. 

 

I think another thing we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is move 

towards greater equality in the job market.  Sixty per cent of the 

poor in this country are women.  Two-thirds of Canadian women 

work but they face a tremendous wage gap, and we have to 

come to grips with that and we have to resolve that.  We need to 

make our fight against unemployment a top priority.  We need to 

have a fairer tax system. 

 

You know, I noted that in the last federal budget there were 

some measures that did limit some tax loopholes, but I still find 

it passingly curious that a business lunch is considered an 

appropriate expenditure, but funding child care is not. 

 

We need, Mr. Speaker, to have real and adequate social program 

reforms.  In this sense, I would like to point out to all members 

of the House, with a sense of pride, that this government in this 

past budget was unique and alone amongst Canadian 

governments.  With the budget, we brought in a 9.3 per cent 

increase in the Social Services budget.  We were the only 

government in all of Canada to bring in an increase in Social 

Services.  We didn't do that just so that we could encourage 

more people to be on welfare.  We did that so that we could have 

strong and solid measures to fight poverty. 

 

The Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Education 

have announced the children's action plan and those measures 

will go a long way towards 

providing decent supports for children and ending the 

feminization of poverty. 

 

Seems to me another thing we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is give 

some incentive to the women who are now on welfare.  In this 

sense, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that as we're having our 

discussions with the federal minister, Minister Axworthy, 

regarding the reform of the social safety net, that one of the 

things we need to strongly consider is the whole question of a 

guaranteed annual income; a guaranteed annual income for 

women that will encourage their effort and initiative and allow 

them to be able to get out and find the kinds of jobs that we all 

hope that they will be able to get that will provide them with 

dignity. 

 

(1545) 

 

I think another thing we need to do is focus on the training and 

education of young women.  We have to do something to change 

young women's early socialization.  I would like at this point 

also, with respect to training and education, to comment on 

something that one of our Crown corporations has done that is a 

solid and practical thing in terms of assisting women. 

 

You know, in 1989, at Ecole Polytechnique in Montreal many 

young women engineering students were massacred in what has 

now been called the Montreal massacre.  Marc Lepine took a 

gun and shot them down simply because he disagreed with 

women who he thought were nothing but feminists trying to take 

away his jobs. 

 

Well in response, engineers all across this country started to 

focus on the kinds of things they could do to make the 

engineering profession a bit more attractive to women and a bit 

more humane.  I would like to at this time note that it is in this 

country, National Engineering Week. And one of our Crown 

corporations, SaskPower, over the past number of years has been 

developing numerous programs to empower young women, in 

particular in the math and science programs, through school 

partnerships, scholarship programs, and indeed through their 

hiring policies. 

 

I'd like to congratulate them because in 1993 they were the 

recipient of the Canadian Engineering Memorial Foundation 

Corporate Award.  This is a very prestigious award, Mr. 

Speaker, and recognizes corporations across Canada which make 

significant contribution to promoting and advancing women in 

engineering positions.  And I congratulate SaskPower for their 

initiatives and their leadership in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've sort of given a fairly wide-ranging point of 

view with respect to International Women's Day.  I want to close 

off by simply saying, the thing we need to do is to focus on 

where we're going to be, not today but 20 years from now.  We 

need to take a look at the disenfranchised women in our 

province, the aboriginal women, women with disabilities, 

refugee women who come to this country with skills, with 

talents, but with no opportunities to use them.  We 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

need to figure out how we can develop innovative and dynamic 

plans to use the potential of all those disenfranchised women. 

 

On this day of affirmation of International Women's Day, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope we can vow not to be too pleased with 

ourselves, to recognize that we have made some progress.  

We've done some progressive steps, but we need, Mr. Speaker, 

to renew our commitment to carrying on with the journey 

towards true and meaningful gender equality.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

support the motion by my colleague and my friend, Ms. Stanger 

-- I mean the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster -- that on 

this International Women's Day this Assembly commit itself to 

furthering the equality and well-being of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when confronted with the question, what are 

women's issues, I recall the song, "Bread and Roses", which has 

become associated with International Women's Day -- bread 

symbolizing economic justice and roses representing quality of 

life. 

 

Women's issues are people and societal issues whereby women's 

efforts over the years have been able to attain justice, equality, 

and quality of life for themselves and their families. 

 

It has sometimes frustrated me that we need to speak of women's 

issues separate and apart from people's issues.  But even though 

as women we've come a long way, we still have a lot to achieve, 

a long way to go. 

 

In reflecting personally, I want to pay tribute to the many 

women who have come before me who have made significant 

contributions of benefit to the women of Saskatchewan, our 

country, and internationally.  These women I will not name 

individually, but these women each of us can identify in our own 

lives.  They may have been our mother, our grandmother, our 

friend, our neighbour, a colleague.  But they were women who 

believed in their value and their convictions to be part of a fair, 

equitable, and just society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence of progress for women is in this 

House today with 13 elected women MLAs -- the most in 

Saskatchewan's history.  Is it enough?  No, probably not, but we 

are making progress. 

 

I can remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not so long ago, not being 

allowed to take part in a political process in this province.  I 

refer to youth parliament.  At the time I graduated from high 

school in 1970, girls were still not allowed to take part in what 

they called then older boys' parliament. 

 

As girls, we were allowed to go to mini-parliaments across the 

province but not older boys' parliament, which was held right 

here in the legislature over 

Christmas holidays.  Our views and our resolutions would have 

to be sent with boys in order to be debated. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to say that girls are now able to 

attend youth parliament.  And maybe it was the result of being 

excluded before that partially influenced me to seek political 

office. 

 

And for a brief moment I want to pay tribute to my own family.  

I had a grandmother who was an activist way ahead of her time.  

When I spoke to her just before she died about deciding whether 

or not I would seek political office, she quickly said to me, why 

not; you're not afraid of hard work, are you?  A grandfather who 

recognized girls need to have spunk to get ahead in life; and my 

parents who raised three daughters who were never limited in 

opportunity to seek and achieve our own goals; and to my own 

husband and children who have encouraged and been there for 

me in whatever decisions I have made. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recognize not all women have had the 

good fortune of the support systems I have had.  But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, women should not have to overcome barriers of 

sexism, inequity, in order to achieve their goals.  The value of 

women and the family unit is essential for a society that we all 

want to be part of. 

 

Women have a valuable role to play in decision making.  Every 

issue area that we can name affects women.  Women do know 

the issues and we do bring our own set of perspectives and 

priorities to the issues.  We want to be involved because we 

know that all issues affect us or our families.  We want to be 

active participants in decision making.  We do not want to stand 

idly by while others make decisions for us or on our behalf.  We 

want the opportunity to make decisions for ourselves. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more women than ever are involved 

in top level decision making within our government.  The 

appointments that our government has made to boards, 

commissions, and agencies have included close to 40 per cent 

women.  While this may not be perfect, it is certainly a 

significant improvement.  Many more women are in key 

decision-making positions due to the direct action of our 

government.  There is no doubt in my mind that these women 

are already making important and needed contributions to our 

province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of my messages to the women in this 

province is to stay involved, stay active.  And I encourage 

women to take leadership roles in all aspects of our 

communities.  Women have always been involved doing the 

work for our community organizations.  They often provide the 

glue that holds families and communities together. 

 

Often women have taken on the roles that do not put them in the 

limelight, but that does not make our work any less important.  

Lack of recognition for the value of women's contributions to 

society has resulted in considerable unfairness in many areas. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

When we ask, why is it that so many women are living in 

poverty?  Women are four times more likely to be poor than 

men.  We find that of course women earn much less money than 

men.  This is true right from a young woman's summer job 

during university while she is working, and right into her old age 

collecting a pension. 

 

The work that women typically do consists of caring for other 

people and children, cleaning, working, serving, typing letters, 

attending to the details to make sure offices, organizations, and 

homes keep running smoothly.  We will all say that this is 

important work and our society would come to a screeching halt 

if women stopped doing these things, but the reality is that in 

most cases the monetary compensation for that work is low and 

keeps women poor. 

 

For many reasons, many women are often the sole breadwinner 

in their families.  When talking about the value placed on 

women's work, or rather the lack of it, I know that farm women 

have faced many challenges.  It has been a long, hard battle for 

women to be acknowledged as farmers even when they are the 

ones who are driving the tractors or the trucks or getting up in 

the middle of the night in calving season. 

 

A man can have hired help and the value of the farm work is 

acknowledged by Statistics Canada, but as soon as that same 

farm work is performed by the man's wife, then it becomes 

insignificant and not worth recording.  Or ask any women that 

farms with her husband whether or not she can get a bank loan 

based on her contribution to the farming operation. 

 

Many of these antiquated ideas are changing, but slowly.  Given 

the situation with agriculture today, it is critical that women be 

acknowledged by our institutions as the partner that they are in 

farming operations.  Farm women make significant contributions 

to the running of farms, and I'm proud that our government has 

recognized women's organizations in our ag vision 2000, as well 

as on various agriculture policy committees. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have made progress in several key 

areas that affect Saskatchewan women.  With initiatives, many 

mentioned already here today, such as the Saskatchewan action 

plan for children, ensuring that our children will grow up in 

environments that support their well-being and enable them to 

reach their potential. 

 

The minimum wage has been increased; increased money for 

child care centres; the child advocate protecting the rights of 

children; expansion of breast cancer screening program that now 

serves the entire province; promoting economic independence 

with more infant care services for teen parents attending high 

school; combining resources with communities to support 

victims of family violence. 

 

And an example of the process that has happened in my area of 

the province in the Weyburn-Estevan area, in consultation with 

the communities, is in that area on domestic violence. 

And we've responded to their needs and listened to their 

concerns.  And I'm pleased that we've been able to hire two 

family violence counsellors, one in Weyburn and area, one in 

Estevan and area, plus a sexual assault worker to work within 

those communities. 

 

The unified family court has now been expanded right across our 

province.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, these initiatives are significant. 

 

But we must not stop there.  There are many challenges ahead 

which still need to be addressed.  As a government, as individual 

citizens, we must strive for employment and education equity; a 

fair valuing of women's work; affordable and accessible child 

care; support for single-parent women; more well-paying, 

full-time jobs; and freedom from violence and abuse. 

 

As we move towards the year 2000 it is my hope members of 

government and citizens of this province will be able to say, 

remember when there was a wage gap for women?  Remember 

when women's jobs were undervalued and the greatest 

percentage were part time?  Remember when workplaces did not 

practice family friendly policies, such as flex-time and job 

sharing and care support programs? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, International Women's Day is a time for all 

of us to renew our efforts to work towards economic, social, and 

political equality for all women.  I am honoured to support the 

motion before us today as we celebrate and promote the equality 

and well-being of women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'm delighted to enter into this debate to support this 

motion to celebrate International Women's Day and to recognize 

the gains that have been made through the years that I have had 

the opportunity to be present on this universe. 

 

And I think with respect to the changes that have come in my 

lifetime as it relates to the role between men and between 

women and as it relates to the role of women. It's really quite 

fantastic.  And actually as I sat here and listened to other 

members expound, I thought how fortunate I am to be living at 

this time when through the changes, we are actually adding 50 

per cent more brains to the endeavours of the human race -- 50 

per cent more brainpower, Mr. Speaker, when we get men and 

women involved on committees.  In any social aspect, 50 per 

cent more brainpower. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now is there any other endeavour where the human race has 

changed that has resulted in such a tremendous efficiency, so 

easily.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, of my own family and my 

daughters -- my wife and I have two daughters -- and how things 

would have been different for them if these changes 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

hadn't occurred. 

 

And I speak from very practical, very sort of at home kind of an 

experience.  When my sister and I were growing up, I had the . . 

. the role that I was programed into was that I was to become a 

professional, I was to get off the farm.  But my sister was 

programed that she had to be a secretary or a nurse or a teacher 

in order to get off the farm. 

 

How much different it is now.  And think of the opportunities 

that our daughters had compared to what my sister and I had as a 

basis of comparison.  The opportunities have not come easily; 

the changes have not come easily.  There are many people who 

have had to sacrifice and have had to stick their necks out on 

this.  And there are people who continue to do that.  And I feel 

privileged to congratulate those who have done so.  And it's 

been done very eloquently by the members who spoke before 

me. 

 

But I'm particularly delighted to be able to point out to my 

children and those people who I used to teach in school that it is 

in our lifetime, indeed in the last decade that we had our first 

female leader of a major political party here in Canada, Audrey 

McLaughlin.  That we had in this last decade our first female 

prime minister, Kim Campbell.  That we had in Saskatchewan 

our first female Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Sylvia Fedoruk.  

That in Great Britain, it was within the last 15 years Great 

Britain experienced its first female prime minister, Maggie 

Thatcher.  And in Canada our first two female premiers, Premier 

Johnson and Premier Callbeck. 

 

These really are quite fantastic, fantastic changes.  And when I 

speak about increasing our brainpower by 50 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, it's not only because of the women who have added a 

new dimension, but it's also because it has changed and is 

changing the thinking of men. 

 

You know, there's a large portion of our brain that has not been 

used for years and centuries and aeons that is being awakened, 

and there are opportunities now that men have that never even . . 

. that my father or grandfather never even dreamed of, that they 

might have. 

 

And I want to talk about that very briefly.  Take for example, 

Mr. Speaker, the role traditionally played by women in rearing 

children.  Men were always, as a general rule in the society that I 

came from and my cultural background, were generally removed 

from that.  Quite often they had the authoritarian role or were 

called in to do something real tough.  But they were not . . . they 

really didn't have the opportunity because they weren't 

programed to involve themselves in parenting. 

 

Think of the new opportunities for men now, who will be able to 

say that if it wasn't for my father, I would never have been able 

to do A or B or C, just in the same way as I am able to say, as I 

recognize now my mother who was very influential in my life -- 

and I think there are other men that could identify with that -- 

who was 

the person that had the time and spent the time in discussion 

while the father was doing the breadwinning.  So the opportunity 

here is not just for women, it's also for men to get out of the trap 

of being in the position of only having to do the breadwinning 

and the disciplining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to address one other issue related to this, 

and that is the threat that I think almost every man has to deal 

with in this generation, and that is the threat posed by the word 

feminism. Because at some stage you get the feeling that 

perhaps you are losing something, or somebody is blaming you.  

And the man has, in reaction to that threat, quite often will feel 

he is a victim.  And you know what happens when we feel that 

we're victims?  Well we either start to say, oh, poor me, or we 

try to lay the blame on somebody else, for what we feel that we 

are victimized over. 

 

It takes a while, Mr. Speaker, to overcome this feeling of being a 

victim of feminism.  And I'm sure almost every man of my 

generation has had to face it.  But there's a real release when you 

can turn that word victim to victory and realize that by turning 

that word victim to victory, you are gaining 50 per cent more 

brainpower.  And we can do things 50 per cent better again. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we've come a long way.  And I want 

to, at this time, recognize some of the groups in my own home 

town, Prince Albert, who have been instrumental in the cause of 

expanding the role and changing the role of women.  And there 

are some organizations that are very, very, active now. 

 

The YWCA, of which my wife is now a director, has done 

generations of work in this field, and currently they are 

operating a women's shelter in Prince Albert.  And they also 

have sponsored an event through the years called, the Women of 

Distinction, a very successful event which they use as a 

fund-raiser and which they also use to mark and recognize those 

women who have done a lot in the community. 

 

I think also the Prince Albert cooperative health centre which, 

although it is run partly by men in teamwork with women, the 

work was done there largely by women who have done a 

tremendous amount to influence our health system and work in 

the direction of wellness, from which we've all benefited. 

 

And I think also of the organization called Iskwew, the unique 

organization which originated around the friendship centre in 

Prince Albert.  Iskwew -- it's a Cree word meaning women 

helping women.  Again, a network which has been very 

influential and helpful to women who have been victims of 

violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of those things . . . some of these things that 

have been done, and my colleagues have identified a lot of them, 

I do believe that there still are quite a few things that we should 

be doing.  And I just want to itemize a couple of them because I 

think they are rather of significance and this would be a good 

time to bring this out. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Number one, I think we have to rededicate ourselves to the 

concept of zero tolerance to sexual harassment and violence 

against women.  Zero tolerance, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps if we can 

do so, we will be able to at some day avoid those tragic cases 

which keep coming up to the courts and before the courts now. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we must continue to do those things we 

can as legislators which will improve the quality of life for our 

daughters, our sisters, our wives, women across the nation.  We 

must do those things that we can to work towards eliminating 

poverty.  Most of the people who suffer from poverty are young 

women with children and we have to do something. 

 

I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the government and the 

members on both sides of the House are working towards the 

concept of doing something for part-time workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Those people are mostly women, mostly 

young women.  They are the people who go to work every day 

or want to go to work every day, who aren't able to collect the 

full benefits of full-time work.  They're the ones that have to sit 

beside the telephone and wait for it to call because if they're not 

there, they won't be able to have enough to support themselves 

or their families.  They're the ones that have very little hope of 

increasing their wage levels or to progress into the regular 

workforce.  I think we have to continue to work to support them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will close by saying that if we continue to do that, 

continue to support that, we will not only be helping the women, 

our wives, our daughters, our sisters here in Saskatchewan or 

Canada, but we will also be helping those across other nations 

and across the world plus across the globe. 

 

Anybody who's done any travelling, Mr. Speaker, will recognize 

what I say when I bring to mind two examples that I've 

experienced personally.  In West Africa the custom still is -- was 

in the '80s and still is -- that the roles of men and women are 

very defined.  There are parts of West Africa where women are, 

I could use the word bought.  I don't think that that's exactly the 

phrase that they would use, but the objective of a young man is 

to go out and get a little bit of cash so that he can pay a dowry to 

buy a wife.  And later on, as soon as possible, he wants to work 

more so that he can buy a second or a third wife. 

 

Now that custom is disappearing, but it's still there.  The whole 

idea of this is that after he can get two or three or four wives, 

then he will be able to produce the sons or daughters so that the 

man can sit under the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The banyan tree. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- The banyan tree I believe is what it's called -- 

my colleague helps me out -- under the banyan tree and discuss 

the issues of the day. 

 

Now that may seem like great fun from one point of 

view, but really they are missing something.  And the women in 

that area, and a lot of the men, are looking to nations of the 

West, looking to North America, looking to Europe, to see how 

things are done so that they can change their customs to create 

more equality. 

 

And another place where I saw a very similar change that was 

coming about but still . . . and really reminded me of my roots, 

as when I was in Ukraine a few years ago and I noticed when I 

went to meetings there that it was the rare meeting of 

government officials or of committees that women were 

involved.  And it reminded me a little bit of our own RMs in 

days past, and perhaps in some cases still, where the women sort 

of sit off to the side and do the work and the men discuss the 

issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I close by saying that if those kind of things are 

continued, we're only working on 50 per cent.  And we should 

be doing the other thing -- we should be increasing our 

productivity, our relationships, our ability to communicate by 50 

per cent by working together.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it's an honour 

for me to enter into this important debate.  I want to reassure the 

members that not on every occasion am I of the view that 

quantity and quality are immeasurably intertwined in that I don't 

intend to be long in my remarks.  I think a lot of good -- hold the 

applause there -- I think a lot of very important points have been 

made in the debate so far. 

 

But I would like to just offer on the record some of my own 

views about this very important resolution that on this 

International Women's Day this Assembly commit itself to 

furthering -- the equality and well-being of women in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to reiterate the message that was just stated a few 

moments ago by my good friend and colleague, the member for 

Prince Albert, who pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that in this session, 

within a few weeks if not within a few days, there will be an 

opportunity for every member of this Assembly to demonstrate 

whether or not we truly believe this statement; whether when we 

make this statement it's a statement only of intention or if we are 

committed to doing something to, as a matter of fact, further the 

equality and well-being of women in Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague pointed 

out so accurately, in the province of Saskatchewan the 

substantial majority of people who are the lowest paid and the 

least secure in employment in our province, are as a matter of 

fact women. 

 

And we will all have an opportunity to put our feet to the fire 

and to determine whether we stand behind our convictions or 

not, or whether we have chosen to 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

express flowery words and let it stand at that, when the Minister 

of Labour brings to this House amendments to The Labour 

Standards Act which will improve the protections and the 

securities of working people, predominantly those who are 

working in part-time and in the lowest rewarded employment 

positions in Saskatchewan, predominantly for women. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I am committed to this 

resolution not only today, but I will be committed to this 

resolution and I will be standing to vote in favour of 

improvements to the labour standards in the province of 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And I expect and I hope that all members of the 

Assembly from all sides of the Assembly will express their 

determination to carry out that commitment that we've expressed 

here in the Assembly today, at that time too. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize as well that there is a task 

that faces Saskatchewan -- and it has been referred to by some of 

my colleagues earlier -- to simply say on the record, as I've said 

before, that there is the issue of pay equity that faces 

Saskatchewan, to be dealt with in a meaningful way. 

 

And I'm not sure that that will be dealt with in as meaningful a 

way as we would like to see as early as we would like to see, but 

I simply want to say, on this important day with this important 

resolution, Mr. Speaker, that that is a principle to which I also 

stand committed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge in my remarks here 

today the role of women that have been played in my political 

life.  The fact of the matter is the first person to encourage me to 

seek public office was a woman, my mother, who was of the 

view, and I recall as a young lad, who was of the view that the 

mark of a good life is that when you come to the end of it you 

can look back and you can determine that your presence here has 

helped to make a difference for the people with whom you've 

come in contact. 

 

I want to say as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I want to 

acknowledge the important role of my grandmother who, in her 

younger days, in fact, babysat Woodrow Lloyd; who in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, was never a CCF or NDP supporter but who was one of 

my strongest encouragers and who I referred to in my very first 

speech I made in this Legislative Assembly some seven years 

ago; and who when faced with difficult political decisions, Mr. 

Speaker, her commitment to principle and the belief that she had 

until her dying day, a year and a half ago, that to serve in this 

Assembly, to serve in the public interest for the people of 

Saskatchewan -- she was a Saskatchewan girl in her heart until 

her dying day, although she didn't live her entire life in 

Saskatchewan -- her belief that to serve in this Assembly is a 

noble calling.  Mr. Speaker, that is something that I found 

motivational and inspirational. 

And I wanted to get down to the nitty-gritty, Mr. Speaker.  I've 

sought public office to serve in this Assembly three times.  Once 

I got thumped and twice I was successful.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to note on this day, the once I got thumped my campaign 

manager was a man.  The two times I got elected, my campaign 

manager was a woman.  And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, if I'm 

running again in the next election, there is no question in my 

mind what gender I'm looking for to manage my campaign. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge as well the 

importance of role models.  Role models in our society, as we 

undertake change, role models are important.  To have been a 

pioneer is significant, not just because you broke new ground 

but because you made the path a little easier for others to follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge today that there are some 

important role models in Saskatchewan today and many of them 

are in this room, Mr. Speaker, who are important role models for 

my two daughters.  I want to acknowledge the importance in the 

life of Saskatchewan today of Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, Sylvia Fedoruk, the first woman to serve as 

Lieutenant Governor, as my colleague earlier pointed out. 

 

She has, in my view, Mr. Speaker, served that office with 

distinction and has brought a new sensitivity to matching the 

blend between the fears and the aspirations of the young people 

in Saskatchewan with political life in a way that no one has ever 

done before as they've served in that office, and we've had some 

fine people. 

 

I think people like Sylvia Fedoruk, Mr. Speaker, have served as 

important -- and will continue to serve -- as important role 

models for many women in our province. 

 

I want to acknowledge as well . . . I think it's kind of significant 

that when I talk to my daughters and they think about their 

career choices, to choose the same career choice that I have 

chosen and that the people of Moose Jaw Palliser have allowed 

me to choose for the last couple of times -- although they didn't 

the first time when I had that man for a campaign manager, Mr. 

Speaker -- the fact of the matter is that it is without any special 

consideration that they are open to thinking that they could come 

and serve in this Legislative Assembly, and there's no big deal 

about that, Mr. Speaker.  Because they know that this day -- not 

only could they, they have -- they have talked to the Minister of 

Education and they have met the Minister of Health and they 

have met the minister responsible for Municipal Government 

and they have met and talked to the Minister of Finance.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, when they did that, every time they met a woman. 

 

One of them has also met the leader of a political party in our 

province and talked to a woman.  And they've talked in our 

home and here in Saskatchewan and in other places around the 

province to colleagues of mine -- 13 in this Assembly -- when 

they've talked to 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

people who have come to serve the people of Saskatchewan, 

they've talked to a woman.  The largest number ever, and what a 

thing that we should celebrate and be proud of today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm not so caught up in the enthusiasm of the 

moment of this motion that I want to say that I look forward in 

the next sitting of the Assembly to see all 13 return.  But I'll tell 

you, there's 11 in my heart, Mr. Speaker, that I am confident will 

be returned to serve the people of Saskatchewan in this 

Assembly after the next election again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by sharing with the 

Assembly something . . . I guess we all choose our own ways.  

Sometimes they're big things, and sometimes they're things we 

stand in public and we fight for because that's how it feels, and 

sometimes there's subtle little things that we can do to reinforce 

the importance of this resolution. 

 

One of the most enjoyable parts about this job is meeting with 

young people when they come to visit.  And they come, and 

they're introduced to the Assembly -- for many young people, it's 

a memorable experience -- and will meet with their member of 

the Legislative Assembly and take their picture and all of that 

kind of good stuff that helps to reinforce the importance of this 

place and the role it plays in people's lives. 

 

And one of the things that I've tried to do, Mr. Speaker, ever 

since it's been my privilege to serve as chair of the government 

caucus, when school groups come, I always ask that our visit 

will take place in the government caucus meeting room.  And I 

take along my gavel, Mr. Speaker, and there's two things that I 

do.  I want them to sit and feel what it feels like to sit in an 

MLA's chair where decisions about the future of Saskatchewan 

and government are actually made.  And whoever happens to sit 

in the chairman's chair, I hand the gavel and ask them to bang 

the table and call the meeting to order.  And that's kind of an 

exciting sort of thing. 

 

But there's something else, Mr. Speaker, that I do as well.  I 

always try to make a point, when the young people are coming 

in and they're deciding where to sit, to make sure that the chair 

occupied just to the right of the chairman's chair is occupied by 

one of the young woman.  Because, after pointing it out that if 

this was a real government caucus meeting and we'd be making 

decisions about what's going to happen in the Legislative 

Assembly today, I point out that if this was a real caucus 

meeting that the person sitting in this chair would be the 

Premier.  And I do that, Mr. Speaker, because I'm convinced in 

my heart that in my time that chair over there -- the Premier's 

chair -- will come to be occupied by a woman in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Not because she's a woman, but because she 

happens to be the best person for the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with that kind of sentiment and support for this 

resolution that I am proud to say that I will vote that on this 

International Women's Day this Assembly commit itself to 

furthering the equality and 

the well-being of women in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 28 -- Accountability of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to rise today to speak to this very important government 

reform issue and at the end of my remarks, I'll be moving that 

motion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue of public accountability is one 

that is of great concern to the Liberal Party.  Accountability is a 

fundamental principle of democratic societies.  We believe that 

through full public disclosure of the spending plans and 

activities that take place within our Crown corporations, our 

accountability to the people of the province is strengthened and 

reinforced. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Assembly is currently engaged in the 

exercise of examining, in great detail, the expenditures for 

government departments.  Yet our Crown corporations spend 

more than all of those government departments combined with 

none of the public examination of the detail of those 

expenditures. 

 

In hindsight we can only speculate, but I cannot help but 

wonder, if SaskPower expenditures had been subjected to the 

scrutiny of a process such as the Committee of Finance, would 

we today be burdened with the financial boondoggles such as the 

Rafferty-Alameda dam?  I would like to think that we would 

not; that we as fiscally responsible legislators would have 

determined very early on that this project was a non-starter, a 

drain on us all, instead of the basin it was supposed to be. 

 

My colleagues and I realize that there may be some Crowns 

where this arrangement would compromise their competitive 

edge.  I think that when their case is presented and warrants this 

exemption, there would be room for such an allowance.  But on 

the whole, we believe this reform would be a great improvement 

over the present system. 

 

Having sat on the Crown Corporations Committee, I know how 

valuable this process has become compared to what it was only a 

decade or so ago when these meetings took place behind closed 

doors.  And even in that secret environment, answers were 

seldom given to the questions asked. 

 

However this process is still lacking in some respects.  Firstly, 

only the annual reports of some -- and I repeat some -- Crown 

corporations are referred to the legislature's Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations.  Secondly, the timeliness of this 

information is often so out of date that this exercise has little 

relevance. 

 

In December of last year, for example, the committee 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

reviewed expenditures of some Crown corporations for the 

calendar year of 1992, expenditures which were planned in 1991 

and begun in early 1992.  By the time the Crown Corporations 

Committee had the opportunity to do its review of these 

expenditures, almost two full years had elapsed since the actual 

expenditures had started. 

 

(1630) 

 

The third flaw in the current system of reviewing these Crown 

expenditures after the fact is that the only documentation that 

members have to rely on is the annual report for the corporation 

under review. 

 

As has been pointed out by the Gass Commission, these annual 

reports have become promotional pieces and reveal very little 

information about the manner in which these entities are 

achieving their mandate or about the risks and opportunities that 

they face.  I believe that if we were to correct these 

inefficiencies and the way that information is brought to and 

examined by the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, 

we would still be off the mark in attaining a fully accountable 

and responsive system to expenditure review and control; our 

goal of accountability would still not be fully achieved.  To 

achieve that accountability, I believe we need a system such as 

that I have proposed in my motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to leave plenty of time before the end of the 

day for government members to speak on this resolution since 

this was one of the democratic reforms proposed on page 7 of 

the NDP Democratic Reform for the 1990's published in 

January of 1991, and I want to allow their members to address 

this important issue. 

 

I hereby move the motion as follows: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the government to improve the 

accountability of Crown corporations by allowing a detailed 

investigation of their spending plans in advance. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Greystone. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I didn't stand up 

right when the member from Shaunavon completed his remarks 

because I was waiting to see if the seconder of his motion, the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, perhaps wanted to speak 

first.  Since it appears that she does not, I would like to, as chair 

of the Crown Corporations, address a few remarks to the 

Assembly. 

 

I'd like to start out at the point where the member from 

Shaunavon ended, referring to the democratic reform paper of 

the NDP.  And I want to state that this government and this party 

are very strongly committed to democratic reform.  There is no 

doubt about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Having said that, I also want to acknowledge that sometimes 

tactics change over time, as you look at 

certain things and as you're able to implement certain practical 

solutions for certain problems. 

 

And with respect to the question of Crown corporations, I want 

say that we have implemented a great many reforms to ensure 

greater public accountability and transparency in the Crown 

corporations.  So I am pleased with the measures that we have 

taken; I am pleased with our plans for further measures.  And so 

consequently I will not be supporting the resolution from the 

members from Shaunavon and Saskatoon Greystone.  Instead I 

will be, when I take my seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, moving an 

amendment: 

 

 That we delete everything after the word "government" and 

substitute the following words therefor: 

 

 to continue to improve the accountability of Crown 

corporations, as has occurred through such initiatives as the 

passage of The Crown Corporations Act; more timely and 

extensive disclosure in the tabling of Crown corporations 

annual reports; and timely meetings of the Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

I will be moving that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I believe 

that we have made major changes with respect to both the 

functioning of the Crown corporations and the Crown 

Corporations Committee.  And because we've made those 

changes, I believe that the motion that the member from 

Shaunavon wants to put is no longer the kind of relevant or 

necessary motion that he may think it is. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I'm a member of the New Democratic 

Party, and we're supposed to be goofy socialists who don't 

understand anything about how to operate business.  But I can 

tell you that even this goofy socialist knows that you don't run 

around and tell your competitor all your business plans in 

advance because you then lose your major competitive edge. 

 

Since Crown corporations were set up in the 1940s, it seems to 

me in this province we've had a realization that those 

corporations operated in a commercial setting that was quite 

different from the setting the government departments operated 

in.  Crown corporations don't levy taxes and so axiomatically 

they are not subject to the principle of advanced approval of 

taxation and expenditure by the legislature. 

 

Nevertheless the people of Saskatchewan have demanded, 

legitimately and quite rightly, that they have to be held 

accountable.  So what we have done over the last 50 years, in 

this legislature, through administrations of the CCF, the 

Liberals, the NDP, and the Conservatives, what we have done is 

delegate the authority to run the Crown corporations in a 

commercially viable -- and I repeat that -- commercially viable 

manner to the boards of directors of the corporations.  They 

report on an annual basis and they have a minister responsible.  

We have, as 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

government, made many changes to ensure that they will report 

on a much more timely basis and to ensure that the minister is 

much more responsible. 

 

But we have also, I believe, recognized that those Crown 

corporations do operate in a commercial and a competitive 

environment.  It seems to me that advance disclosure and 

detailed investigations of Crown expenditures, such as the 

member from Shaunavon is calling for, would cause great harm 

to the commercial competitive position of the Crowns.  And we 

do need those Crowns and we need them to be in a strong and 

viable position. 

 

I want to give you a couple of examples of where the kinds of 

detailed investigations that the member from Shaunavon is 

calling for might cause great negative effects to the Crown 

corporations.  Let's take a look, for instance, at SaskTel.  If we 

had these detailed investigations of the spending plans in 

advance disclosed by SaskTel, what would happen to plans to 

expand our cellular telephone network?  Why should SaskTel 

run out and tell Cantel, their competitor, just exactly what their 

business plan is? 

 

And another example, with SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Why should we tell other insurance companies in 

advance what types of general insurance policies SGI is 

planning to offer so that they can then develop something that 

can undercut the market that we were hoping to have? 

 

Another point that the member from Shaunavon needs to keep in 

mind is that many of the spending activities of the Crowns are 

customer driven.  SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy spend a 

considerable amount of money each year doing customer 

hook-ups.  Now the amount that they spend is determined by 

customer demand and not by any set budget line.  If we 

budgeted SaskPower, for instance, in the same way that we do a 

government department and there was a higher than expected 

economic growth, we certainly would not want to be in the 

invidious position of having to tell our customers, I'm sorry, you 

can't get your power hook-up until the next budget year. 

 

Now the member from Shaunavon said that there were three 

main problems with the current system of referring the annual 

reports to the Crown Corporations Committee.  He said that only 

some are referred.  I would like the member from Shaunavon, 

who is also a member of the Crown Corporations Committee, to 

meet with me later and to let me know just exactly which ones 

aren't referred.  Because I have to tell you, as chair of the Crown 

Corporations Committee, I thought that all those reports were 

being referred.  And if there is an oversight, I certainly would 

like to correct that. 

 

He also says that the review of the annual reports are hopelessly 

out of date.  Now I have to acknowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that that has unfortunately been the case in the past.  During the 

10 years when the Progressive Conservatives formed 

government in this province, they treated the Crown 

Corporations Committee with major disdain.  They did not call 

committee meetings regularly, they obfuscated, and they tried to 

denigrate the whole committee of the legislature called the 

Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Since we have formed government, we have tried to bring a 

greater sense of timeliness into the affairs of the Crown 

Corporations Committee, and I am very proud that we will be 

meeting this Thursday to complete our review, with the 

exception of one Crown corporation, for all of the 1992 annual 

reports.  And we will then be scheduling another meeting, with 

the concurrence of all the committee members because we do 

believe in the democratic process, but probably within the next 

week or so, to begin our review of the 1993 annual reports of the 

Crown corporations subject to CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). 

 

Now I'm very proud that we have managed to get those reviews 

a bit back more on schedule.  And I look forward, as the years 

go by, to the Crown Corporations Committee being extremely 

punctual and efficient in its review of the annual reports.  And 

there is no reason why they won't be able to, unless the 

individual legislators are lazy or slack or malevolent.  Because 

we have brought in a Bill, Bill 42, that provides for the timely 

tabling of the annual reports and provides major provisions to 

ensure accountability in the Crown corporations. 

 

The other point that the member from Shaunavon made was that 

the only document that he gets to see is the annual report.  As he 

knows very well, we have been allowing a very broad, 

wide-ranging set of questions in the Crown Corporations 

Committee and when members have asked for additional 

information, almost without exception, that information has been 

provided to them. 

 

Now obviously the ministers responsible will continue to reserve 

the right not to reveal commercially sensitive information, but 

there is really no reason why the member from Shaunavon 

cannot do a legitimate and proper job as a member of the Crown 

Corporations Committee and review the operations of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

I would just like to close by saying that I do feel we have 

increased the accountability of the Crown sector side in this 

province.  We did set up a Gass Commission, a Financial 

Management Review Commission, to look at the government 

expenditures with respect to Crowns, and almost all of the 

recommendations of the Gass Commission have been 

implemented.  We do have a much more open and transparent 

system. 

 

The Crown Investments Corporation's annual reports, I would 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, are a model of how annual reports ought 

to be written.  They provide a detailed description of each 

project and the involvement in them . . . the Crown corporation's 

involvement in them, and they also provide a description of the 

solutions we are taking to resolve some of the problems that 

were created by the former government showing such disdain 

toward the Crown 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

sector. 

 

Bill 42, as I have said, has major provisions to ensure 

accountability, and indeed, even the auditor of this provincial 

government has commented very favourably on the measures 

that we have taken. 

 

And I would like to close by quoting from his 1991-92 annual 

report.  He said: 

 

 The Government moved from providing what the Financial 

Management Review Commission viewed as the weakest and 

least useful financial statements in Canada to providing one of 

the most useful financial statements issued by a senior 

government in Canada. 

 

(1645) 

 

Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I will not be able to support the 

resolution from the member of Shaunavon, and I do move my 

amendment, seconded by the member from Turtleford. 

 

The amendment again is: 

 

 that we would delete everything after the word "government" 

and substitute the following words therefor: 

 

 To continue to improve the accountability of Crown 

corporations, as has occurred through such initiatives as the 

passage of The Crown Corporations Act; more timely and 

extensive disclosure in the tabling of Crown corporation 

annual reports; and timely meetings of the Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

I do so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, let me start by saying that it is 

refreshing to be discussing this issue with this government.  As 

we all well know, the prominence of Crown corporations in this 

province is due largely to the efforts of past NDP governments.  

For this we, the ordinary people of Saskatchewan, I suppose then 

owe them some thanks.  I don't think any of us can deny some of 

the benefits that have accrued to this province through use of the 

Crowns. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the use of Crown corporations through 

this province's history has also had many pitfalls for which the 

government and the NDP Party must assume responsibility.  The 

hon. mover of this resolution has apparently come to this 

conclusion in perhaps a more personal way than we can know, 

although we perhaps would have preferred him to take his 

conclusions a little further than he has.  Through our 

deliberations today, we can perhaps start to deal with these 

pitfalls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think it would be an exaggeration to say that 

this province has the most extensive Crown corporation sector of 

any province in Canada.  While we are -- I dare say fortunately, 

but no thanks to the 

members opposite -- far from the days when Crowns made 

everything from shoes to bricks, Crowns still are a dominant 

force in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look back over the years at listings of the top 

Saskatchewan companies in terms of both sales and value of 

assets, year in and year out, six or seven of the top ten 

companies are Crowns.  Now that says a lot about this province.  

I suppose whether you think that's a bad thing or a good thing 

depends on which side of the House you happen to be sitting on. 

 

But no matter what position you take, it is undeniable that this is 

indicative of the tremendous hold, some might even say the 

stranglehold that Crowns have over the economic life of this 

province.  No aspect of society that has that kind of influence on 

our economy can expect to hold itself above the scrutiny and 

regulation of the people's duly elected representatives, and not 

just a select, self-appointed view of a few of these 

representatives but all of them. 

 

You can be quite sure that if this province had a single private 

industry or a single private investor who held the kind of sway 

over business life in this province that the Crowns do, the 

members opposite, for all their fine words of late about 

promoting private investment and encouraging industry, would 

be falling over themselves to find new and ever more clever 

ways to regulate, license, tax, and harass that owner.  

Commissions would be struck, inquiries held, cartel laws would 

be pondered and envoked.  If the members opposite applied a 

tenth of the suspicion that they have about private business 

towards Crowns, the resolution that we are considering today 

would be redundant and unnecessary. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, however is not the case at all.  Instead we 

have a situation where a number of economic giants -- SaskTel, 

SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SGI, STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) and on and on -- roam at large with 

virtually nothing to keep them from trampling over the citizens 

of the province who supposedly own and control them.  They set 

their own budgets, charge whatever fees they please, and the 

only recourse we, the ordinary people of Saskatchewan, have 

over them in advance is a relatively small group of men and 

women who sit on cabinet, who meet in a closed session, and 

whose thoughts, deliberations, and reasoning are guarded as 

state secrets from, again, the people who supposedly own these 

companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I held shares in a private company that treated its 

shareholders this way, I would be selling my shares fast.  In a 

way, that is exactly what happens every day when this 

government drives people out of this province. 

 

However this situation goes far beyond the economic aspects of 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker.  Increasingly, the Crowns have become 

part and parcel of government policy other than in the provision 

of services.  As we all well know, SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation) has been an important part 

of successive governments' economic policy. 



March 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

And we can expect the new SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation) to be much the same. 

 

Virtually the entire list of Treasury Board Crowns is composed 

of Crowns that serve a policy function, whether it be in 

agriculture with the Agricultural Credit Corporation and the Ag 

Development Fund, municipal government, as with the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, or scientific research and 

development with the Saskatchewan Research Council. 

 

Recently the Minister of Economic Development announced the 

formation of a new corporation to take over the functions of the 

department of trade.  So here we have these vast policy areas of 

government mirroring many if not all government departments, 

composing almost a shadow government, Mr. Speaker, and all of 

them are almost totally beyond the scrutiny of control of the 

ordinary citizens of this province or their representatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government claims that there are already 

enough mechanisms in place to regulate the Crowns.  But what 

exactly are these mechanisms?  Do they measure up to the 

standards of accountability and effectiveness under which 

governments in the '90s must operate?  As I've already 

mentioned, we have the cabinet review, a process that is 

shrouded in secrecy.  Does this give the public a feeling of 

confidence that their money is being well spent and that the fees 

they are being charged are fair?  I don't think so. 

 

How about the Crown corporations review committee, a body 

that reviews the actions of the Crowns after the money has been 

spent.  The policies have been implemented and the damage has 

been done.  I don't think the general public would possibly feel 

that this gives them any real control.  Maybe it allows them to 

give the heads of the Crowns a slap on the wrist after the fact, 

but no real control. 

 

How about the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, an office whose 

integrity, honesty, and lack of bias are widely respected by the 

public.  Well of course he doesn't even get to see the books of 

the Crown corporations.  That is really quite a statement, Mr. 

Speaker.  The person holding possibly the most trusted position 

in the public eye, and the government does not want him to see 

the books. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, something has to be done about this 

situation, and we are in full agreement with this resolution and 

its mover.  However we feel that the situation has been such a 

gross miscarriage of democracy that strong, urgent action must 

be taken soon to correct it. 

 

We have suggested previously that the government, if it is 

serious about democracy and accountability, make use of the 

resources available to it in this House, on both sides of the 

House, and form a legislative review utility committee.  This 

would at least bring most of the CIC Crowns into the public 

spotlight.  This however can only be a first step, Mr. Speaker, to 

correct the abuses, the duplicity, and the public mistrust the 

people of Saskatchewan have come to associate with the Crown 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day in question period, we had raised the 

issue again of the legislative review committee, and the Premier 

of the province stood in this Assembly and said that if the 

members would take the time to attend Crown Corporations 

Committee meetings, they could address those issues. 

 

And at the time, Mr. Speaker, we had raised the question, but the 

fact that when we're discussing Crown corporations, we're 

actually discussing Crown corporation decisions that have been 

made one, two, three -- actually two and a half years past, Mr. 

Speaker, long past the time when the public have already been 

gouged through rate increases either through SaskTel, 

SaskPower, SGI; these rate increases that we do not have the 

ability of . . . And the member from Shaunavon indicated that 

today, that when the rate increases are coming into play, we 

really don't have much of an opportunity to address those issues. 

 

And yet the other day the Premier of this province let us believe 

and led the public to believe that yes, we do have that 

opportunity.  We can just . . . if we attend Crown Corporations 

Committee meetings, as the Premier said, we can raise the 

issues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the Premier, if indeed 

he wants to give us that ability to address the issues today, not 

tomorrow after the fact, then allow the process of a legislative 

review committee or allow the discussion on rate increases to 

take place in this Assembly, right on the floor of the Assembly, 

as the increases are coming into play or decisions are being 

made. 

 

And contrary to what the member from Saskatoon had indicated, 

Mr. Speaker, it's not necessary that ministers responsible lay out 

all the information that might interfere with decisions on a 

business level.  But there are many aspects of the Crowns that 

we could deal with that would be very pertinent that the public 

are very concerned about. 

 

I guess there's, of late, Mr. Speaker, one concern that I have in 

Crown Corporations Committee -- and the member from 

Saskatoon Wildwood indicated how open and how forthcoming 

Crown Corporations Committee meetings have been.  As we met 

two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, we were dealing with SEDCO 

which was 1992 -- 1992.  We're already into 1994 business. 

 

What I found very interesting was yes, it's right, the minister can 

decide whether or not they want to address questions outside of 

the year under review.  But I found it very interesting that the 

chairperson kept interfering in the business and suggesting to the 

minister that it wasn't his responsibility to address any questions 

outside of the year under review.  And it would seem to me that 

if the minister felt that maybe some of the questions that were 

being put . . . 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 1994 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows that he 

can't get into the process of the committee's operation and 

discuss that in this legislature.  That's more proper to be 

discussed in the committee itself.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

as I was indicating as we're discussing the motion before us -- 

that this Assembly urge the government to improve the 

accountability of Crown corporations -- I think based on that, 

some of the suggestions I was making were areas that we might, 

should, or maybe ask the government to bring before the 

Assembly if they're going to be really open and accountable to 

allow all members . . . And I must indicate that all members of 

this Assembly, because I'm sure members on the government 

side of the House, MLAs on the government side of the House 

are having some of the real questions, same questions being 

raised that are raised with us on a daily basis.  And that's why I 

was bringing some of that to the forefront so people could 

understand a little bit of how the Crown Corporations 

Committee works. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I will abide by your ruling and say to 

you that we are supportive of the motion that has been brought 

forward.  However we would have encouraged the member from 

Shaunavon to have gone a little further.  We trust that as we 

continue in this present session that basically, as we look at the 

different discussions and the debates that will take place, that at 

the end of the day the government will come to its senses and 

realize that the public in general want a greater accountability 

and a greater access to information prior to, rather than after 

implementation. 

 

With more to say, Mr. Speaker, I think that many other speakers 

would like to speak. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


