


















































Hansard: February 10, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 61 

 February 10, 1994 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to table a number of petitions that were circulated by the 

employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco and signed by hundreds of 

people from the Moose Jaw and area. 

 

This petition calls on the government to resolve the problem that 

the employees of Moose Jaw Woolco are having in holding their 

union decertification vote and to protect the jobs of 150 people 

who work at that store. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are signatures on this petition from Moose 

Jaw, Regina, and many of the small towns in that surrounding 

area as well as across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to table this petition today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have many 

petitions today from people in the community of Moose Jaw and 

surrounding area, employees of the Woolco store and concerned 

citizens in our community. 

 

And I won't . . . my colleague has said it all. It's a very serious 

matter in our community and I would like to table these petitions 

on behalf of those people. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Four Year 

Term). 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall ask the 

government on Monday next a question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Energy and Mines' changes to the 

oil royalty structure: (a) to date, what action has been taken to 

amend the negative effects these changes have imposed on the 

Kindersley area oilfields; (b) what is the reason for the delay in 

announcing the changes, being that the minister publicly 

promised that they would be made prior to the legislative 

sitting; and (c) when will these exemptions for the Kindersley 

area be announced? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 

Monday next I shall ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission's decision to proceed with full-scale casinos in 

Saskatoon and 

Regina: to provide full details of any consultations that occurred 

including the name of each individual or group consulted; why 

this particular individual or group was singled out for 

consultation; the date and location of each meeting; and who 

coordinated and staffed each meeting. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of this 

Assembly a guest who is seated behind the bar, Ms. Sally 

Merchant. Mrs. Merchant was elected to the Saskatchewan 

legislature in 1964 from the Saskatoon City constituency. Mrs. 

Merchant's father represented the constituency of Yorkton in 

1934, and her son represented the constituency of Regina 

Wascana in 1975. As such this is the only family that has had 

three generations of elected representatives who have sat in this 

Chamber. 

 

Please join with me in warmly welcoming Sally Merchant. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great deal 

of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, that I introduce to you and through you 

to the members of this Assembly, Mr. George Bonneville and 15 

of his colleagues who work at the Woolco store over in Moose 

Jaw and who have come to the city today to watch democracy in 

action. They will, I'm sure, want to be meeting with some of you 

folks later on today. 

 

I'd ask you all to please join with me in welcoming those folks up 

in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow and myself, I'd like to join 

together with the member from Maple Creek in welcoming these 

people from Moose Jaw here. I hope that your visit here proves to 

be both informative and instructional for you, and a safe trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is equally 

pleasurable for me to introduce to you and through you to all the 

members of our Assembly another guest who is seated behind the 

bar, and that is John Gardner. Mr. Gardner was the MLA for 

Moosomin from 1965 to 1975, serving in the government of Ross 

Thatcher and the Liberal opposition of Davey Steuart where he 

served as Agriculture critic and Health critic. Of specific note is 

the fact that Mr. Gardner was chairman of the committee which 

chose the wonderful Saskatchewan flag of which we are all so 

proud today. Please warmly welcome Mr. Gardner. 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislative Assembly, a guest who is also seated behind the bar, 

Mr. Lionel Coderre. Mr. Coderre served the constituents of 

Gravelbourg for four consecutive terms from 1956 to 1967. He 

served as minister of Labour and minister of Co-operation and 

Co-operative Development for six years, from 1964 until 1970, at 

which time he assumed the portfolio of Public Works. And I ask 

the Assembly to welcome Mr. Coderre. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to introduce 

a gentleman behind the bar. He was my member of the legislature 

for quite a number of years. He's been a competitor and I've taken 

a lot of lessons from him as methods used in campaigning. His 

name is Mr. Jack Wiebe, and I'd like the Assembly to join with 

me in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce on our behalf as well, to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, a guest who is seated behind the bar, 

Mr. Jack Wiebe. 

 

Mr. Wiebe sat in this House for two terms, beginning with a 

by-election in 1971, representing the Morse constituency. Mr. 

Wiebe served under the leadership of Dave Steuart and Ted 

Malone, with responsibilities as Agriculture critic, caucus 

chairman, and House leader for a portion of that time. Mr. Wiebe 

chaired the legislative committee that brought television to the 

legislature. 

 

Please join me in welcoming him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me further 

pleasure, and of course the members of our caucus, to introduce 

to you and all members, dozens of very good friends and 

supporters who are in your gallery today. They have taken the 

time to come to our legislature today from each and every part of 

Saskatchewan. Would you please warmly welcome all of them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

May I first of all join my colleagues in welcoming the Liberal 

members, the former Liberal members of the Legislative 

Assembly, to the Assembly, and also the Liberals that the Leader 

of the Third Party has introduced in the Speaker's gallery. So far, 

I must say that it's very pleasant to see that the Liberals are still 

on the opposite side of the rail. 

 

But none the less, it's good to see some people like Sally 

Merchant, and Mr. Gardner, and Mr. Wiebe, Mr. 

Coderre. I know it's hard for the members to believe this, but I 

actually served with these people in the Legislature at a time 

when I was elected as a very young person -- or I should put it 

this way: it should be acknowledged that they're so youthful and 

I'm so youthful still, that we served together at the same time. But 

I'm very much pleased to see them here and wish them very much 

continued success. 

 

While I'm on my feet and introducing and making comments in 

this regard, I want to also introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

members of the House, two colleagues of our political party from 

Alberta -- the former leader of the New Democratic Party and the 

leader of the Official Opposition. Ray Martin, member from 

Edmonton-Norwood, who's seated in the gallery opposite, and the 

member from Vegreville -- Derek Fox, who was the Deputy 

House leader and Agriculture critic. They're here on a visit to 

Saskatchewan and as two former parliamentarians, I'd ask the 

members to welcome them, too. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

outset I'd just like to inform the Premier that no, that does not 

surprise me at all. 

 

But anyway I want to continue on the theme of introducing 

political people, Mr. Speaker, since that seems to be the theme. 

But the people that I want to introduce are those kind that I'm sure 

that every member here present today and present in the past -- I 

speak to the members of the bar . . . from behind the bar -- that we 

all have a great deal of empathy with these people that I'm going 

to introduce. 

 

Every spring, Mr. Speaker, we have spring training for those 

people that make us politicians look good and actually do a lot of 

the hard work for us. And seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a group of people that are in . . . they are our MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) constituency secretaries and 

assistants. 

 

And I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce Doreen Eagles -- and if they could stand as I call out 

their names please -- Wanda Stang, Jean Ball, Sharon Jensen, 

Julie Chickowski, Tina Durbin, Cheryl Hanlon, Delores Sogge, 

and a particular person of a great deal of interest to me is Whitney 

Friesen, who is my personal MLA secretary and assistant right 

now. 

 

And we certainly welcome Whitney into the field, coming from 

being a previous Liberal youth president and has joined our team. 

I didn't want to rain on the member from Greystone's parade here, 

but I couldn't resist the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I ask all members to help me welcome these people. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

 

the task is to make the member from Rosthern look good, they do 

indeed have their task cut out for them. 

 

I want to join with the Premier in welcoming also Mr. Martin and 

Mr. Fox. Mr. Fox, by the way, and I shared an employee in 

common, and when my employee returned, she told me that Mr. 

Fox and I had a lot in common. And I can see by his incredible 

good looks and charming wit that I will never again question her 

judgement. So I'd like to join in welcoming Mr. Fox here today. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to also join in 

welcoming our two guests from Alberta, as both of these guests 

have participated in a previous election that I was involved in, 

and we are going to take to heart some of their counsel and what 

is going on in the province of Alberta. And we welcome them 

here, and have a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Moose Jaw Woolco Decertification Application 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, last 

June employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco applied to have their 

union decertified. This decision was delayed for many months, 

and just recently their request for a decertification vote was 

denied. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you please tell us why this vote was denied? 

Why can't the employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco simply have 

a vote to decide whether they want to remain unionized or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

respond to the member on behalf of the Minister of Labour who is 

in Melfort today. 

 

And I'm able to say to the hon. member from Maple Creek that it 

really should not be the function of a government, no matter who 

the government, to decide whether a group of employees wish to 

join a union or wish to be decertified. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, there is and has been in this 

province, and rightfully so, the Labour Relations Board which is 

completely independent of government and in fact is equivalent to 

a court in the matters that it deals with. And its job is to make 

sure that it protects the democratic rights of all workers. The 

Labour Relations Board duly handled and considered the 

applications for decertification. There was also a 

counter-application. All of this obviously takes time, Mr. 

Speaker, but the Labour Relations Board disposed of the matter as 

quickly as it could, and made a decision based on the evidence 

and the submissions that were made before it. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it takes 

eight months in Saskatchewan; it takes one week in British 

Columbia. Is the democratic process so much different here than 

there? 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, since the time of the original 

decertification application, the situation at the Moose Jaw Woolco 

has changed dramatically. The Wal-Mart chain bought the eight 

non-unionized Woolco stores in Saskatchewan but decided not to 

purchase the Moose Jaw store. One of the reasons given initially 

by the Wal-Mart officials was that the Moose Jaw store was 

unionized. 

 

Now this certainly wasn't the reason the Moose Jaw employees 

applied for decertification back in June, but now that this has 

happened it is just that much more important to allow the 

decertification vote to take place. 

 

Mr. Minister, the jobs of 150 Woolco employees in Moose Jaw 

are at stake. Your government is supposed to be concerned about 

this matter, according to your throne speech. Are there any steps, 

Mr. Minister, your government is prepared to take to allow the 

decertification vote to take place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that 

this one point be made very clear: it is neither the role of the 

member opposite, nor the role of the Minister of Labour, or 

myself, here or at any other time, to interfere with a process that 

should be and is independent of influence by any members of this 

House or anybody else -- a completely democratic process, Mr. 

Speaker, which provides members in a bargaining unit to apply 

for either becoming part of a bargaining unit and become 

unionized, or to apply to become decertified, as is the case here. 

 

Certainly one would always like to have the process move as 

quickly as possible; I don't argue with that. But it is certainly not 

the role of any member of this House to make sure that that 

happens. It is the role of the members of this House to provide 

something like a labour relations board which democratically 

exercises its right and duly considers all of the evidence that is 

brought before it. And that's what the Labour Relations Board had 

to do in this case, and it was a very complicated case so they took 

a little time. Took a lot of time, I guess some people would think, 

but it did its job as it should be, independent of interference from 

anybody, and that's the way it has to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish I could say that 

I appreciated your answer, Minister, but I can't. Mr. Minister, 

your government has announced that it will be introducing new 

labour legislation in 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

this session of the legislature. That means that you write the rules. 

 

The employees of the Moose Jaw Woolco wish to hold a 

decertification vote. Yet the Labour Relations Board is using the 

current legislation to block such a vote. They work under the 

rules that you write. Is this an area you will be addressing in the 

new legislation? 
 

There has been speculation that the new legislation will make it 

easier for employees to get into a union with union certification. 

Will the new legislation also then ensure that it is easier to 

decertify as well, so that the rights of the employees at the Moose 

Jaw Woolco, as well as other employees in this province . . . have 

the right to the democratic choice of what they want to do, 

through a secret ballot? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 

member opposite that the rules which are being followed are 

exactly the same rules which was in the legislation when the 

members opposite were on this side of the House in the 

government; nothing has changed. They were appropriate 

then -- and I think they were -- and they are appropriate now. 
 

If there are any changes . . . whatever changes may come in 

amendments to various legislation under the Labour department, 

that will come forward in due course when the legislation is 

introduced to the House. But the rules that are being applied are 

no different than they were prior to the change of government and 

they have worked quite effectively, Mr. Speaker. The policy of 

this government is to make sure that the people in each workplace 

have a right to choose and that they have a right to make an 

appeal. 
 

In a democratic society, Mr. Speaker, that's the way it should be, 

and this group of people in this situation made an application to 

the Labour Relations Board to be decertified. It is not for me to 

comment on the work of the Labour Relations Board, but it has 

been made very clear in the ruling of the Labour Relations Board 

that the reason why it found that there was no room for 

decertification was because in this particular place they found that 

the employer had interfered in the Moose Jaw process, Mr. 

Speaker. That's not our choice -- that is the role of this judicial 

body, which is the Labour Relations Board doing its job. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I'm sorry 

to hear the type of answer we get from the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

What he is saying is that they're going to ignore the rights of 

people in a democracy using any kind of excuse that they can 

come up with. And I'll say simply this, Minister: I really don't 

care who brought the rules in or why they brought them in; if 

they're not serving the people, then they're no good. Let's get rid 

of them and do them over. 
 

I suggest to you, sir, that more realistically it is the 

 interpretation of the rules by the new board that is different than 

the interpretation used by old boards. But if this board is unable to 

square the needs of people in a democracy, sir, what you need to 

do is one of two things: either rewrite the legislation so that 

democracy is served, or else fire the board and get a new board 

that interprets the rules the way that democracy demands that they 

be done. 

 

Will you, sir, rewrite the rules in the legislation for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I must say I'm a little 

shocked by the comment from the member opposite, because that 

is exactly the way a body which has got judicial power, so to 

speak, should not be handled. Just because every time the 

member from Maple Creek may not like what is decided by a 

court, he suggests we should fire the judge. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on my part I reject that notion, 

otherwise the whole process is tainted and influenced. And if it's 

going to work effectively it should not be tainted and influenced 

because of political pressure from anybody. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

same minister because, Mr. Minister, you seem to be missing 

something here. 

 

There are people in the city of Moose Jaw who are saying that 

they have not had the democratic right to vote in secret of 

whether they should be or shouldn't be -- plain and simple. Their 

jobs are at risk. In the city of Moose Jaw today Joyners 

department store is closing, Kresge's is closing, the federal 

Liberals are talking about taking our air base away. 

 

We have 150 employees talking about losing their job, Mr. 

Minister, and they're saying they didn't have the democratic right 

to determine how their workplace is ordered. And you're saying 

. . . you're hiding behind your board. 

 

Mr. Minister, you write the legislation. Your throne speech says 

you are committed to jobs and the welfare of families in 1994. 

What are you going to do for those 150 families? Who have you 

talked to? Tell the legislature and tell the folks what you've done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, let me 

say that we too are very concerned about what the federal 

government might do to the air force base in Moose Jaw. And we 

have made very strong submissions to the Prime Minister to 

indicate our concern. And we would hope that the federal Liberal 

government is very sensitive to these concerns and will take that 

into consideration when it makes these decisions. But I would 

duly hope that Liberal members of the third party will also take 

that under 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

 

consideration as well and try to exercise some influence. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, coming back to the issue that we have been 

discussing here, there is, Mr. Speaker, a process which is 

available, always has been available, and continues to be 

available to any group of employees. I have a lot of sympathy for 

these employees in their circumstance. But that's why there is a 

process that is there, democratically established, to which no one 

should interfere. And it is because of the interference by, I am 

told, the employer in this case, that the Labour Relations Board 

brought about the ruling that it did. 

 

Now the member opposite is saying that even though that's the 

case, somehow the members over there or members over here 

should interfere accordingly. That would not do the process any 

great service, nor would it do these employees or any employees 

in the future any great service if we begin to politicize this 

process. We should be above the politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the folks wouldn't be here today if 

your government had been doing its job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You have stated in your throne speech that jobs, 

jobs, jobs are the priority. If your members from Moose Jaw had 

been doing their job, the people wouldn't be here today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, would you give the folks the assurance 

today that you would at least give them the courtesy of an 

interview to explain, to have explained to you the things that they 

have said to me and my colleagues about the faults that exist in 

the system. Could you at least give them the assurance that maybe 

something fell through the crack and you've got the time to spend 

with them. Would you give them that assurance today, Mr. 

Deputy Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I guess what we're 

seeing here, and I say this with some regret, is the members of the 

official opposition trying to take a situation which has caused 

some difficulty for some people and try to make some politics out 

of it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought we were beyond that in the way 

governments and politicians work these days. At least that is what 

the public would expect of us. There is a legitimate process by 

legislation which was passed by those members opposite, which 

is still in effect. 

 

It was good when those members opposite passed the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. It's good now. And it should not be interfered with 

by politicians on either side of this House. It is a judicial process; 

it's a court-like process. Its integrity has to be protected in order 

that any workers now or in the future in their endeavours 

to bring an application, their rights are protected too. The minute 

the interference begins their rights are interfered with and I will 

not succumb to that kind of pressure from the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Defective Furnaces 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Mr. Minister, a number of 

my Regina North West constituents have raised concerns about a 

serious health risk. Many Regina homes are equipped with 

Flame-Master furnaces identified as having defects that could 

produce carbon monoxide emissions. What steps has SaskEnergy 

taken to alert families about the potential dangers regarding these 

furnaces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. member for the 

first question she asks in the Legislative Assembly. I'm not 

personally aware of the risk with Flame-Master furnaces. We are 

aware of some risk with chimneys that were at one time approved 

by CSA (Canadian Standards Association) approval, and we do 

now find that some of those chimneys are in a condition where 

they can possibly collapse. And unfortunately there've been some 

deaths caused in Saskatchewan by this. 

 

The action taken both by SaskPower and SaskEnergy is to inform 

the public through press releases that they should be inspecting 

their chimneys to make sure that they are in a state of good repair, 

and if they're not, they should be replaced. 

 

There is some problem in terms of SaskEnergy going in and 

actually doing work, because our legislation doesn't allow that. 

Certainly we can inspect for safety and to make sure that the gas 

is flowing properly. But certainly anyone who has some problems 

should be contacting a certified person to come in and check out 

their furnace or their chimney, whichever the case may be. If 

there is a particular problem with Flame-Master furnaces, I'll 

certainly take notice of that part of the question and get back to 

the hon. member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Bus Services 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan this government has foregone its 

responsibility to provide services at a fair and reasonable level. 

With hospitals being closed, rural medical practices disappearing, 

elderly people must travel great distances to receive services such 

as health care. 

 

To the minister in charge of Highways and Transportation: at this 

time of financial and emotional distress, can you ensure the 

people of our rural areas that Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company will not have further cut-backs to their service? 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

member opposite. This year of course you'll notice in the Regina 

Leader-Post that STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 

had a loss of $3.5 million, which is $1.5 million less than last 

year. 

 

And it's good news for the bus company to have a better financial 

picture. The member opposite I guess does not realize what debt 

and deficit causes to a province and/or to a transportation 

company. I'm very happy with the progress that STC has made, 

and they will continue to do so and make this company a very, 

very stable transportation company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. Minister, I 

did notice there was a loss of three and a half million dollars. And 

I also know that STC employees have been telling us the Crown 

corporation has just recently hired an additional eight to ten more 

people to fill upper-management positions. 

 

To the minister: it is obvious that mismanagement exists in 

Saskatchewan's family of Crown corporations. In the face of 

rising Crown debts, you look after those families more than you 

look after the families in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Will you now give the people, the rural people of the province, 

give them an answer why your government is continually 

alienating . . . give them the assurance that you're going to 

provide them service that is more important than enlarging an 

already heavy upper management? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, the efficiencies that STC have completed in this one 

short year, the transformation of some coaches to brucks, with the 

sale of 16 buses -- eight of them Eagle buses -- and route 

rationalization, has saved the corporation a lot of dollars and has 

stabilized the company so that it can provide the appropriate 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, the government's argument for 

everything that affects the lives of the poor people in rural 

Saskatchewan is a financial answer. Mr. Speaker, the community 

of Climax has lost its hospital; the NDP threatened to gravel the 

roads down in that area; it was hard hit with changes to GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) and crop insurance; and now 

the bus service is being completely removed. Mr. Minister of 

Highways, when will this end? What more will you do until 

you're satisfied you've completely killed this community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, Saskatchewan deserves a good transportation system. 

We will continue to be financially responsible so that we can 

provide a high quality of service and a good transportation 

corporation in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the minister 

would like to keep this in the financial ballpark without admitting 

the pain and suffering they're causing in rural Saskatchewan, but 

however he's got to answer to these people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a story carried in the Shaunavon newspaper 

January 18, STC official Greg Beattie doesn't rule out both 

Shaunavon and Eastend could be left without bus service in the 

future. 

 

Will the minister set the record straight and tell us today that bus 

service will not be cut back to these communities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, I can see very clearly that he doesn't understand debt 

and deficit and what it can do to the province or what it can do to 

a bus company. And I say to him that we either lose the 

corporation completely or we have a good corporation, one that 

we can afford. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has many 

traditions, as you well know. STC bus service to rural areas in 

Saskatchewan is also a tradition. It's another rural tradition the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government has killed however. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many more services will you take away from 

the people of rural Saskatchewan before you are satisfied that all 

that's left out there is a wasteland? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. STC will 

continue to plan strategically and consult with the rural 

communities as to how they best can serve those communities. 

And they are doing that now and they will continue to do that. 

 

But I want to stress to the member opposite that debt and deficit 

kills things like bus companies, and we can't afford to have that 

happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, it appears the government 

continues its devastation of rural Saskatchewan. With the 

cut-back in bus service last summer, the agent in Shaunavon lost 

50 per cent of his revenues. His faithful customers have been 

forced to deal with private couriers. 

 

Will the minister admit the government has again turned its back 

on rural Saskatchewan and will he assure the House that full bus 

service will continue in Shaunavon and Eastend? Give us that 

assurance, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

 

wonder if the member opposite didn't move to the wrong party. 

He doesn't seem to have any realization of deficit and what that 

does to the province. So I would say, if he's got a better idea, he 

should certainly advise me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, the government opposite of 

course are known to be the tax kings of Canada. Mr. Speaker, it's 

obvious . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I think members know that they should 

allow the member to ask his question and if a question is directed 

to a certain minister, I'm sure they will get up and answer the 

question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, it's obvious by the Minister of 

Transportation's answers that they're more concerned about the 

debt than the people of rural Saskatchewan, and I ask the minister 

to state in the House, which is it? Which is more important? Is it 

solely a financial issue or do you believe there are people out 

there that have to have a certain level of service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite: that's exactly our concern -- is rural 

Saskatchewan -- and that's why we have to protect the bus 

company from going broke or bankrupt. That's why we make 

these decisions, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the member 

opposite realizes that it if he just would come clear and admit it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Job Situation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Economic Development. Mr. 

Minister, you, as the person who is supposed to be guaranteeing 

jobs in this province, must realize that the city of Moose Jaw is 

feeling a desperate situation. Joyners department store have been 

in our city for 80 years, Kresge's have been there over 60 years. 

The federal government -- possibly -- is going to shut down our 

air base. 

 

Mr. Minister, the question I want you to answer today. In your 

capacity, have you talked to the Wal-Mart department store 

chain? Have you talked to the United Food and Commercial 

Workers Union? Have you talked to the various parties to look at 

the future of that facility and look at the future of that city to 

make sure that you don't have absolute economic devastation 

foisted upon the citizens of Moose Jaw and area? Have you made 

any of those contacts, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I really want to answer 

the member's question about jobs, and jobs particularly in 

Saskatchewan and in the Moose Jaw area. You will note, Mr. 

Minister, that obviously Saskatchewan, having the lowest 

unemployment rate 

in 1993 of any province in Canada, bar none, that there have been 

a great number of jobs created in certain sectors, particularly 

those related to trade. 

 

What I want to say to you, that when it comes to Moose Jaw and 

other areas of Saskatchewan, you and your party led this province 

down a road of disaster with $15 billion in debt which has 

saddled the province and the government and the people of this 

province, as well as supporting the idea of free trade which opens 

us up to all the kinds of companies obviously coming here that 

you are talking about, including Wal-Mart. Now today you say 

we should be doing something about it. 

 

I want to say as well, when we talk about projects that are coming 

forward, rather than being negative, what we'd like to do is hear 

some of the ideas that you have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that the Leader of the Liberal Party 

for example, 100 weeks ago today, promised she would bring one 

idea of economic development every week. She has yet to bring 

one idea to this Assembly. And I would like those members in the 

opposition to be positive about economic development . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 

Committee) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of Economic 

Development Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Department of Economic 

Development Act, 1993. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to draw your 

attention, Mr. Speaker, to a guest we have in the west gallery . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member must ask for leave. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Do I have leave to 

introduce a guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 

members, for leave. It is my pleasure to introduce a guest in the 

west gallery, Mr. Mark Hislop from Prince Albert. Mr. Hislop is a 

businessman in Prince Albert, who has taken on the responsibility 

of being the chairperson of the Prince Albert Regional 

Development Authority -- the first regional economic 

development authority in the province of Saskatchewan. I want 

the members to join with me and extend a welcome to Mr. Mark 

Hislop. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Shaunavon on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, Assembly, a guest who is seated behind the bar, Mr. 

Wilf Gardiner. Mr. Gardiner represented the constituency of 

Melville for three consecutive terms in 1956, 1960, and 1964. He 

served as minister of Public Works for three and a half years. In 

1967 Mr. Gardiner was Saskatchewan's minister responsible for 

the centennial celebrations marking Canada's 100th birthday. 

 

And I ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to welcome 

Mr. Gardiner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I ask leave, please, Mr. Speaker, to make 

comments on Chinese New Year. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Chinese New Year 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity to wish Saskatchewan's 15,000 people of Chinese 

ancestry all the best as they celebrate Chinese New Year today. 

 

Chinese people will be celebrating the Year of the Dog by 

exchanging small gifts -- hung bau -- much the same as is the case 

with our traditional western Christmas. To all people of Chinese 

ancestry and the 1,200 who are expected to mark this occasion 

this Saturday in Regina alone, I would like to say, Kung Hey Fat 

Choy -- Happy New Year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would want to join with 

our hon. member from Greystone in wishing a very special day to 

those people of Chinese 

ancestry who will be celebrating today, and also celebrating as I 

understand on Saturday at Queensbury Downs. I know many of 

us on the government side will be celebrating with them on this 

festive occasion, and obviously if the member opposite intends to 

be there I'm sure that we will see other that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's fair to say that the Chinese people have in 

Canada and Saskatchewan played a very, very integral role in 

many areas. In areas of culture, music, investment in our 

province, their endeavours are legendary. And I just want to say 

on behalf of the members of our caucus and our government, a 

special wish to the Chinese community of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And the 

opposition, the official opposition, wants to join in in recognition 

of the Year of the Dog. And we also want at the same time to 

recognize all of the contributions that the Chinese people in this 

province have made, not only to the province of Saskatchewan 

but indeed I would go so far as to say in the entire nation of 

Canada. And we certainly appreciate that. 

 

Coming from rural Saskatchewan, I think all of us from rural 

Saskatchewan know some people of Chinese ancestry. They are 

spread across the province. Every town has representatives of this 

ethnic group in it, and we want to just pay recognition to the fact 

that indeed Saskatchewan and Canada . . . I don't like the term 

melting pot, Mr. Speaker, but we have a large ethnic community, 

diverse ethnic community, throughout all of Saskatchewan and 

certainly all of Canada. 

 

And as such, this mosaic of ethnic cultures is something that we 

are very, very proud of because they have all contributed 

immensely to the quality of life in Saskatchewan. And certainly at 

this time it is the Chinese turn to be recognized, and we want to 

do that at this time as the official opposition as well. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to questions 

1 to 10 and 12 to 18 put by the members opposite, I would request 

that they be converted to motions for returns (debatable). And, 

Mr. Speaker, further, that as it relates to question no. 11, I would 

hereby provide the response asked for. 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions 1 to 18, with the exception of no. 11, 

are motions for returns (debatable), and no. 11 has been 

answered. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 

Whitmore. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 

reply to the Speech from the Throne today. 

 

I want to begin by welcoming the members of my caucus. When I 

became Leader of the Liberal Party almost five years ago, there 

were no sitting Liberal members in this legislature. For the last 

two sessions I have done my best to speak on behalf of my 

constituents and the 24 per cent of the 1991 electorate who 

supported the Liberal vision for our province. In the last five 

months I have been joined by two committed and caring 

colleagues, and our caucus now constitutes 22 per cent of the 

opposition of this Assembly. 

 

Today I am proud to represent an ever-increasing number of 

Liberal supporters, some of whom are with us today in your 

gallery, and I am very pleased to have the support of two new 

members of the Liberal caucus to share in that responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a member for Saskatoon Greystone, still the 

largest urban constituency in Saskatchewan, I speak for a 

cross-section of individuals with interests in and concerns about a 

broad range of issues. My constituency is close to the University 

of Saskatchewan and I represent more than 1,800 post-secondary 

students and 600 educators. 

 

There are more than 500 health care professionals who work at 

nearby hospitals from whom I hear frequently about changes to 

health care, how those changes are affecting their lives and the 

lives of their patients. The Sherbrooke Centre is home to many 

seniors and residents who rely on the leadership of political 

representatives to ensure that their needs are met. 

 

I am proud as well to represent the parents of so many 

enthusiastic students in public and separate K to 12 schools 

located within the boundaries of Saskatoon Greystone. And I take 

very seriously my obligations to protect their interests to the best 

of my abilities on all issues of concern to them. 

 

Saskatoon Greystone is fortunate with almost 1,000 

small-business people living in the constituency. And I recognize 

the difficulties that government policies and regulations have 

presented to those entrepreneurs over the past two years. Often I 

have brought their genuine concerns to the floor of this Assembly 

only to have them fall on deaf ears. 

 

As well, I am sensitive to the concerns of the hundreds of union 

and non-union labourers who live in my constituency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am most grateful for the social, economic, 

and cultural diversity that comprises Saskatoon Greystone, 

because it keeps me in touch with such a wide variety of issues 

and genuine human concerns as a member of this Legislative 

Assembly. 

Our party, the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan, places extreme 

importance on the individual, and it is my pledge to preserve and 

protect the dignity of my constituents by working to achieve a 

high standard in their quality of life through the influence that we 

can have on public policy. It is that mission statement that drives 

the Liberal Party and it is that philosophy that serves as my guide 

in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 842 days ago Saskatchewan men and women cast 

their votes to rid the province of a Conservative government, a 

government that had destroyed Saskatchewan people's pride, 

caused us embarrassment, and had borrowed its way into political 

and fiscal oblivion. 

 

On October 21, 1991 the people made a statement that said that 

they wanted to protect the province of Saskatchewan from the 

practices of the Conservative administration. Although the public 

has yet to learn of the many examples of ineptitude and they 

weren't at that time fully aware of the wide range of deeds that 

had been carried out against the province, indeed even the 

corruption of that regime, they had clearly decided that the time 

for privilege for some was over and the time of unaccountable 

spending was over. 

 

Today it does matter little what the Conservatives have to say or 

whose suggestions they espouse as their policies, because the 

Progressive Conservative Party's credibility registers near zero. 

And the people have yet to hear their three very important words 

from them that they are still waiting to hear -- we are sorry. 

 

The voters on October 21, 1991, also gave the current 

government a mandate for change, part of which was based on a 

promise to build a better future for our citizens. Promises are an 

integral part of any election campaign. The people cast their votes 

believing that the promises made are based on truth and good 

will. The NDP conducted a campaign, a campaign that not only 

said little, but avoided saying much in order to ensure its election. 

 

For the first year, people were willing to accept the strategy of 

placing blame for everything that was wrong with our province at 

the feet of the tarnished Tories. In the second year of this 

government's mandate, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

became a great deal more critical of the actions of the New 

Democratic Party and they are more than justified. 

 

Nowhere during the 1991 election campaign did the NDP unveil 

its plans for its wellness model. Not once did they have the 

courage to mention possible closures of hospitals or cut-backs in 

health care funding. Nowhere did they mention raising taxes and 

utility rates, licence fees, and a deficit surtax charge. No, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP ran its campaign on the record of the 

Conservatives, managing to say nothing about its ill-thought plans 

until they had the reigns of power. 

 

There were some promises, however -- promises not 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

to increase taxes, broken; promises to create jobs, unfulfilled. 

Promises that $4.5 billion would be enough to run the 

province -- difficult to explain in the face of continual increases in 

tax revenue while government spending is still rampant. This is a 

government, Mr. Speaker, which seemed to give little thought as 

to what it would do when it got elected because its goal was 

power itself -- power, pure and simple. But Saskatchewan people 

expected more, and they are getting impatient. 

 

The most recent throne speech seems as though it were written for 

some other place. If one were to read this speech without 

knowing it was intended for the governing of Saskatchewan, one 

would have trouble finding the evidence in the government's 

actions to give us enough clues. 

 

And why is that, Mr. Speaker? It begins with a statement on page 

2, where the Premier spoke of an economic development strategy 

partnership for renewal which has three goals, three goals that 

seem clearly foreign to the NDP government. One, create a 

positive climate for economic renewal; two, to build on existing 

strengths; and three, to seek full employment. Well this is 

certainly not happening in Saskatchewan, not from the people 

with whom we speak, not from the people who give us calls. 

 

Let's begin with the first, a positive change for economic renewal. 

It would be a difficult challenge indeed to find anyone who would 

argue that continual increases to taxation could possibly 

contribute to a positive climate for economic renewal. And the 

heavy-handed tactics of the government over the NewGrade 

upgrader legislation hardly sent waves of confidence resonating 

throughout the international and national business communities. 

 

Two, to build on existing strengths. I argue that little has been 

done to identify and stake out our economic niches in 

Saskatchewan. After two and a half years of this government's 

economic strategy, I have yet to meet one person in Saskatchewan 

who can clearly articulate where it is this government is taking us. 

 

Three, to seek full employment. The newspapers are full of 

lay-off notices and plant closures. The unemployment-wanted 

section is dismal, and those jobs advertised are not long term; 

they are not secure or high paying. 

 

(1500) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the rhetoric may be there in this throne 

speech, while the rhetoric may indicate goals, there certainly is no 

evidence of a plan, no measurable progress in jobs or economic 

development. 

 

But this has become typical of this particular administration. 

More than halfway through its mandate, the only sector which is 

experiencing real growth in salaries and employment 

opportunities is the political arm of government. We have seen 

the cabinet grow beyond the numbers which were sternly 

criticized by the Premier as being unacceptable. We see a 

government raising taxes and fees at every turn, but continuing to 

spend as much on itself as it ever did. 

 

And let's take a good, hard look at the real facts. Let's look for a 

moment, Mr. Speaker, at what is really going on in our province. 

 

The government says that we have the lowest unemployment rate 

in the country. We heard it today in comments made in question 

period. They failed to mention that we now have more people on 

welfare than ever before. And that is fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We now have 77,000 people in our province of Saskatchewan on 

social assistance -- 21,000 more than in 1991 when the NDP were 

elected. That is what has happened to the unemployed in our 

province of Saskatchewan. Either they moved on to look for work 

elsewhere after getting training and education here, or they 

simply gave up looking for unavailable jobs and are now on 

social assistance. 

 

The message delivered in the throne speech is simply misleading. 

There are 12,000 fewer people working in Saskatchewan today 

than there were in October 1991. Do you have any idea how 

many families that affects, Mr. Speaker? Does the Premier realize 

how many children depended on those 12,000 to be their 

caretakers? People who no longer have the dignity of employment 

and the ability to provide security for their own families. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, there is a real danger in misleading people. 

For the person without a job, all this false analysis serves is to 

undermine the individual's confidence. They find themselves 

asking themselves this question: if things are so good, if things 

are looking up, why can't I find work? What's wrong with me? 

And the truth is there is nothing wrong with the unemployed 

people in Saskatchewan that a sound economic development plan 

couldn't fix. It's a four-letter word spelled j-o-b-s. 

 

So why not level with people, Mr. Speaker? What is the point in 

deception? We have already seen in the last provincial election 

what happens to a government that twists the fiscal truth. Why 

does the NDP government insist that people be given an 

inaccurate picture of where we are? Is that their idea of building 

optimism? 

 

I have come to the conclusion, based on past performance by the 

New Democrats in the 1970s, that the NDP philosophy is 

counter-productive to the economy and discourages employment 

and wealth creation. And it is self-evident. At a time when potash 

and grains and oil and gas prices in the 1970s were at an all-time 

high, the greatest growth in the province of Saskatchewan was 

where? -- the public sector. Not the private sector, the public 

sector. It made absolutely no sense whatsoever. 

 

And I know that the members opposite have spent a great deal of 

time talking about their glorious history. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

 

Well I listened to an outstanding historian last night talk about the 

history of Canada, someone well-known for his roots in the NDP. 

And what he said was as follows. He talked about the war years; 

he talked about the devastation of the entire country in the 1930s 

as a result of the depression; and he talked about the gloriousness 

of this country that put itself billions and billions of dollars into 

debt for the war effort. And he said that there was not one 

province in Canada that had not been decimated by what had 

happened during the depression and what happened as a result of 

our contributions to taking care and taking part in the Second 

World War. 

 

Each and every province went through a recovery from 1945 to 

1962, Mr. Speaker. This is not the direct result of the magnificent 

input of the New Democratic Party  la CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation). This was the result of inflationary 

times of real growth times in our nation, something for which 

they want to take credit as if no other province in Canada did it, 

as if our nation did not do extraordinary things. 

 

And here we are two and a half years after the Premier and his 

cabinet were given the mandate to put into practice the ideas they 

had nine and a half years in opposition, two and one half years 

after they were given a mandate to put an economic plan into 

place, and what do we have? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have are more promises. We have a 

promise to work on economic planning; we have a promise to 

consult with the tourism industry; we have a bureaucracy to 

manage provincial marketing services; we have a promise to 

develop a transportation policy. We have new buzz words in the 

speech such as electronic highway project and an information 

technology and telecommunications strategy committee. But no 

targets, no goals, no commitments other than, and I quote 

directly: "This could mean more high-tech jobs for the future." 

 

But do we actually have any net gains in jobs? Do we have any 

new investment? Can we quantify the energy and the enthusiasm 

and the excitement about the climate this government has created 

for business to take risks and hire real people so they can feed 

their families? No, Mr. Speaker. We can't count the jobs or 

measure the investment because there aren't any. 

 

What we do have is concern. We have concern by the business 

leaders that the government will bend to labour and implement 

yet another round of costly regulations and imperatives that will 

have an enormous impact on those considering expanding a 

business or locating here. 

 

Why should we care about business expansion? Why should we 

care about it? Because, Mr. Speaker, growth equals jobs; jobs 

equal pay cheques; pay cheques equal self-sufficiency and pride; 

self-sufficiency, Mr. Speaker, equals no hungry children. 

It is no idle rumour that this government's decision to introduce 

changes to labour legislation could negatively affect workers' 

jobs. I spoke with officials of a mining company just the other 

day who'll be forced to move their head office to Calgary if 

proposed changes to labour laws take place. I have talked with 

business owners in my own constituency who say, this could well 

be the straw that breaks their backs. Maybe not, but can we take 

the risk? 

 

Obviously we would all like to see everyone with the salaries and 

benefits tossed around so generously in ministers' offices and in 

Executive Council, but the real world works on market forces. 

And the Saskatchewan markets, due to horrific tax burdens which 

have choked off consumer spending and investment activity, the 

Saskatchewan markets are far too fragile to shoulder the cross of 

labour standards legislation at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech devotes seven paragraphs in total 

to agriculture. One paragraph admits that farm families have 

adapted to change more quickly than governments. The next six 

paragraphs outline the problem. While the world is passing by, 

this government is still, after two and a half years, promising to 

work on a plan. 

 

The most insightful statement the government makes is that, and I 

quote: the potential in value-added processing appears limitless. 

Now isn't that a confidence builder. 

 

Biotechnology is one of the most promising areas of growth we 

have on the economic horizon. Does this government articulate a 

plan to direct its development in commercialization? No. Do they 

propose a program that will attract the critical mass of research 

and development dollars to our province to back this up? No. Do 

they take a proactive role by adapting the tax system to attract this 

kind of investment activity to Saskatchewan, to ensure that we are 

leading the parade instead of waving as technology passes us by? 

No. They simply give it honourable mention and move on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could dissect the entire throne speech, but I'm not 

sure that it would have any impact whatsoever on the few 

members of the government interested in hearing honest criticism. 

The fact is that this Assembly is not designed for input. The very 

fact that the public feels excluded from real participation, the very 

fact that there is no mechanism for true inclusion, the very fact 

that decisions are made in the dark, tell us all that this is an elitist 

and exclusionary club. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I will say it again. The people of 

Saskatchewan are the landlords of this building and we in it are 

its temporary tenants. We owe them the right to access, not just to 

the building but to all that goes on here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under different circumstances I could rise in my 

place and put forward a motion for action, propose a concrete 

solution for a problem, and ask the 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

government to vote for or against that proposal. But not in this 

Assembly. For 20 years the Conservatives and the New 

Democrats have carefully guarded their turf by balking at any 

suggestions to significantly changing the rules. For a decade, 

almost 12 years, until a few months ago, all decisions regarding 

the Board of Internal Economy were made in secret. 

 

But Liberals have put our cards on the table from the beginning. 

We put our list of reforms in writing in 1991. We distributed them 

province-wide during the last election campaign in our platform 

booklet. We put reform into action by being the first party to 

adopt a code of ethics for our candidates and our MLAs. 

 

I will be proposing legislation in this session that will put 

government to the test, to see if it isn't sincere about having 

constructive input into the process. And if that initiative is 

welcome, then Liberals will move to have much of our platform 

document put into action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let the Conservatives try to help with government 

reform in spite of their lack of credibility. We will continue to 

lead the fight for change and we will be there in the future to 

ensure that it happens. But the Conservatives were then and this is 

now. 

 

Today we have a government that is out of step, more out of 

touch than it can imagine, out of sync with reality. And it is 

obvious to us as Liberals that the global economies that are 

flourishing today are those that are the least regulated and the 

least taxed. But here we sit in a provincial government whose 

favourite pastimes are taxation and regulation. Liberals want to 

build a Saskatchewan where risk-takers flock to pursue 

opportunities, a province where government assumes a small, 

non-intrusive role in the economy, providing leadership, true 

direction in setting the course, in ensuring justice, and then 

getting out of the way. 

 

This government has not done those things, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has not undertaken change for the wrong reasons . . . 

it has undertaken change for the wrong reasons. They have 

changed health care because it was too expensive; they have not 

made it better. We are not even certain that they have it cheaper. 

As a result of implementing a health care plan that was poorly 

structured, a plan that had never been tested through pilot 

projects, this government has created a great deal of unnecessary 

chaos and ill will throughout our province. Not surprisingly, they 

have escalated feelings of rural alienation by making urban 

centres the health care hubs, without addressing the fears that 

have naturally arisen over the displacement of health care services 

in rural communities. 

 

Liberals agree that health reform was inevitable and necessary. 

Past that, we take serious opposition to the approach of ready, fire 

and then aim. That is what has been used by the government 

planners. The last thing people needed was bureaucrats imposing 

decisions from on high when local community input was 

overlooked, overhauled, and in many cases, outright ignored. We 

are seriously concerned about the 

implications that this will have when it is time to make changes to 

other important institutions. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not too late for this government to backtrack, to 

admit its mistakes, and to listen to the people who are trying to 

steer them in the right direction. Saskatchewan people understand 

the need for change, they understand the fiscal situation; what 

they cannot understand is the government's unwillingness to put 

its own political agenda aside long enough to listen to the genuine 

concerns of people being caught up in such things as the health 

care hurricane. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Liberals want to see positive change and growth in 

our province. We are building a political movement that is based 

on a different foundation from traditional parties. The people who 

are in the inner circle of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan are 

simply ordinary people who have come forward to make a 

difference. They have brought talents and energy and enthusiasm. 

They have been drawn together by philosophy, by idealism, and 

yes, even by anger with the actions of others. But all of us share a 

common goal -- to make Saskatchewan a land of hope and 

opportunity once again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the difference between the Liberals and 

the way in which the current administration is functioning. Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP talk about hope, they talk about plans, and they 

talk about strategy. Mr. Speaker, hope is not a strategy, it is just 

hope. It is necessary for the people of Saskatchewan to have hope, 

but the government must have a plan. They must have a concrete 

strategy and a plan to ensure that people's hopes have a 

foundation, and it must articulate a vision and show real 

leadership. That is what is lacking in this Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

The missing ingredients to the equation are as follows: goals, 

targets, measurability, and accountability, and paving the way for 

people to risk dreaming again. Every government employee, 

every civil servant, and every politician should have a concise 

understanding of what it is to be accomplished, what needs to be 

accomplished in Saskatchewan, and what role they are to play in 

reaching that goal. 

 

Hand in hand with that knowledge should go the responsibility 

for delivering on their component part -- the sense that they are 

crucial to our achieving positive results. Everyone must realize 

how imperative their contribution is. Then, and only then, will we 

be able to direct all available resources to a productive end. Only 

when people have a sense of direction will they be able to 

measure their progress and pass their confidence on to others who 

share their tasks. 

 

Liberals have a different vision for government, a different vision 

for our province. We are prepared to face reality, to assess our 

potential, and to lead the way into the future with new challenges 

and 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

 

accomplishments. This government must soon realize that it 

cannot continue to create false impressions of reality, to deliver 

rhetoric when people need substance, to promote chaos when 

people need order. 

 

The government must commit to developing an economy based 

less, rather than on more, government control -- less taxation and 

more consumer spending. And more incentives to take risks if we 

are to have jobs, economic growth, and meaning for our citizens. 

The government must spend less time twisting statistics and more 

time acknowledging that our gross domestic product is falling and 

will continue to fall if we do not aggressively pursue markets that 

are ours for the taking. 

 

This government must abandon its political alliances in favour of 

sound economic leadership, must not succumb to pressure to 

implement labour laws that will cost the jobs of the very people 

they are intended to protect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier to give serious consideration to 

what is missing from the Speech from the Throne. I urge him to 

explain why aboriginal people were rarely mentioned, hardly 

mentioned at all; to explain the plans to open mega casinos as his 

economic and employment strategy. These were not included in 

his presentation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot accept this as the best work of a 

government that claims to be sensitive to human concerns. I 

cannot accept this as a vision for our economic future. As a 

Liberal, I cannot accept this as a basis for good government in our 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition said that the government 

members were stuck in the criticisms of the past. I concur that 

their choices indicate that they are stuck in the politics and the 

political climate and agenda of the 1970s. 

 

The opposition leader also stated that the Conservatives are here 

in the present but did not expand that comment to indicate that 

they would likely be around here for long; and finally, he said that 

Liberals are stuck in the future, dreaming of the day -- and I 

quote -- we become government. End of quote. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the more visionary things that 

we will hear this session from the official opposition. Liberals are 

stuck on the future. We see things not just as they are but as they 

could be and as they ought to be. Where the NDP spend time 

talking about T.C. Douglas, apparently caught in the need for 

their own time warp, and the Conservatives divide their time 

between defending their indefensible past and trying to catch up 

to the present, Liberals are a step ahead. 

 

Liberals have left government reform on the table for the other 

two parties to catch up to. Liberals were the first to propose health 

care reform, the first to talk about reforming the tax system. And 

Liberals are not 

people in our society who understand that you cannot plan for the 

present. We understand that you cannot plan for the present 

because it is already here. Liberals understand that you cannot 

dwell on the past but can only learn from it. 

 

And by the same token, the Conservatives cannot simply wipe the 

slate clean and expect people to have no memory of their 

government. 

 

Liberals, Mr. Speaker, are above old paradigms that focus on 

politics instead of good governing. We have begun to build a 

movement that will serve people in Saskatchewan from wherever 

they place us in this Assembly, a political party determined to 

contribute to the well-being of people no matter what the odds or 

how long the journey. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I in the Liberal 

caucus will make every effort to support the government when it 

takes positive initiatives, as I have for the last two and a half 

years, to vigorously oppose those actions which we feel will 

detract from our potential as a province, and to seek the counsel 

and the guidance of the Saskatchewan people in setting the 

direction for this legislative session. 

 

I do wish the government well in its undertakings, but caution 

them to be diligent, thorough, and judicious in their work. Should 

they fail to do so, we guarantee that we will be here to hold them 

accountable every step of the way. 

 

Jacques Cousteau said, and I quote: 

 

 If we were simply logical, the future would be bleak indeed. 

But we are more than logical. We are human beings, and we 

have faith, and we can hope and we can work. 

 

Faith is believing in possibilities, Mr. Speaker. It is the ability to 

carry on with our plans or to be true to our work even though we 

feel discouraged or tired. If there were no doubt, there would be 

no need for faith. Faith is temporarily putting our doubts on the 

shelf and working toward our goals. It is looking at a map and 

choosing a new destination, getting on the road to go there, and 

trusting that the marks on the map symbolize a real place that we 

will find. 

 

I and the members of my caucus and the members of my party 

have already determined the marks on the map that we will follow 

to our destination, which we hope will result in having the 

privilege of governing the province of Saskatchewan. Our road 

marks are the same as they have been since 1989 -- openness, 

reform, honesty, decency, and a priority focus on good governing. 

We want the day to arrive again when what is good politics is 

good governing and what is good governing is good politics. 

 

Until we complete our journey toward forming the government of 

this province, we will use every opportunity we have to restore 

faith and hope in the political process and in our great province. 

And as Cousteau said, we can work. As a caucus we are 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

pledged to work as best we can on behalf of all people in 

Saskatchewan. Since this is something that the current 

government is either incapable of doing or has chosen not to do, I 

will not be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm not sure, Mr. 

Speaker, why the Liberal back-benchers didn't applause for their 

leader's speech but I'm sure they have good reason, some of 

which they may share with some people at some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Humboldt, I'm 

pleased to rise in this legislature to congratulate the mover and 

seconder of the throne speech and to partake in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan in the last two years we've had a 

hard time, I would say, as government trying to correct the 

messes of the past. I won't dwell on that because we all know and 

remember too painfully what they are. The unfortunate part, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is some of the messages from the past are now 

coming out of the mouths of the third party, the third party that's 

stuck in the future, so says the leader. I'm not sure how that works 

but it's a little inconsistent. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the throne speech that this government, our 

government, put forward for the people of Saskatchewan is based 

on the commitment that we made from the beginning when we 

were elected. That commitment is restoring sound financial 

management. And some members may say that we're stuck on 

finances. Well there's a bit of a good reason we're stuck on 

finances. I don't know how many businesses in the country don't 

worry about their finances because if they don't worry about the 

finance they don't have a business. 

 

In Saskatchewan it's all about controlling our destiny and 

regaining our financial freedom. Because if you don't do that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you don't have a province. And we don't have to 

guess about these things because when we took over government, 

the difficulty we had with making payroll and the day-to-day 

runnings of government was so frightening. And the people of 

Saskatchewan really didn't know how frightening it was, but we 

found out when we took over. So regaining our financial freedom, 

We've done that, Mr. Speaker. The projected budget of $294 

million is a billion dollars less -- a billion dollars less -- than it 

was when we took over the projection. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Now that has meant many things. That has meant 

hardship on people. That has meant some people losing their jobs. 

That has meant some people having to tighten their belts even 

more when they thought they couldn't tighten them any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am completely impressed by the attitude of most 

people in Saskatchewan. We as government have had to push 

people and ourselves 

almost to the limit to try to regain our financial freedom. 

 

Now I hear the opposition members . . . And the Tories don't 

surprise me; we've seen the history. But for the Liberal members 

who say they're stuck in the future, their comments are asking us 

to repeat the mistakes of history, to again jeopardize our financial 

freedom. The taxes are too high. There's no jobs. 

 

If they'd like us to lower taxes and put more money into jobs, we 

could do that. We could do that and we could drive the deficit up. 

We've chosen the other route -- diversification, partnerships with 

business, slowly regaining the number of people who are working 

in this province. 

 

Jobs and economic development, Mr. Speaker, is parallel but not 

equal to the restraint measures we've had to take in regaining our 

financial freedom. It is difficult to create jobs, a) with government 

when you don't have any money, and b) for small business when 

we as government have asked them to find it within their 

wherewithal to maintain their business and keep going in this 

province and pay their taxes. 

 

(1530) 

 

It's difficult to create jobs. But the partnership process that we're 

going through, Mr. Speaker, the partnership for renewal program, 

working with communities, developing tourism authorities so 

Saskatchewan is a destination, we don't see the results overnight. 

And I'm sure the members opposite, and especially the 

stuck-in-the-future Liberals will understand that. But they 

criticize and criticize. 

 

But what we're doing is laying out the framework for tomorrow, 

and obviously we're not going to jump 10,000 jobs overnight. But 

I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members opposite, and 

especially the Leader of the Third Party, if we don't do the 

homework, you won't pass the test. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- And, Mr. Speaker, exactly what we're 

doing -- laying the groundwork, doing the background work. 

Slowly, steadily the jobs are coming. We've seen increases, we've 

seen stabilization in population. Those are the small signals, the 

light at the end of the tunnel that we're beginning to see. 

 

Trade development corporation, trading with the world, 

emphasizing that again futuristic results don't come overnight. 

But they come in due time when the patterns begin to develop 

with organized trade through a corporation that other countries 

know is the instrument that they can come to Saskatchewan and 

use to trade with us. Single window for them, single window for 

the business people and the manufacturers and traders in our 

province. It's a cooperative approach. Everybody knows the rules. 

 

We're looking at research and technology, another 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

 

important thing to build our future. An opportunity, 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, Mr. Speaker, using the 

government's money wisely. The theory behind it is government 

money in, in cooperation with the community -- the banks, the 

lending institutions, the credit unions, with groups that are 

involved, investment people -- the government in, if necessary, to 

complete or begin a project. But the secret is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we require the government be out as soon as possible so 

that we can again use that money to start another project in 

cooperation in the communities to build jobs and create programs. 

 

Those types of things don't blossom overnight. But the results, if 

you use your imagination, and you think about the logical pattern 

that's developing in the job creation process, you'll see the 

cornerstones being laid in many, many, areas -- technology, trade, 

co-ops, research and technology -- the cornerstones being laid. 

 

In the mean time, we're reducing tax rates to small business to 

make sure that they can keep their employees or maybe hire a few 

more, give them that little edge, a little break. Because we know 

that the small-business community are the backbone of the 

employment community. 

 

And as we set the cornerstones and our trade patterns begin to 

develop because of the insight that we've put in and the work that 

many of the people in the province of Saskatchewan put in, small 

business, we've asked them to hang on. They are. We're giving 

them a little bit of a break. And then they will reap the rewards. 

They and all the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well one of the members says, Liberal 

governments are socking it to them on taxes. I'm going to get to 

that just in a minute here, because it's a great illustration of the 

difference. 

 

High-tech jobs -- good example of Saskatchewan, and often we 

don't brag about ourselves enough. But it was mentioned in the 

throne speech and I have to mention it again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That is that Sask Telecommunications has the contract 

to put in all the electronics into the Chunnel between France and 

England. The biggest, probably one of the . . . maybe one of the 

wonders of the world, if I can get it out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

little old SaskTel, Crown corporation SaskTel gets the contract. 

Ain't too shabby. 

 

World technology produced because in Saskatchewan we have 

the ingenuity, we have the people, the techniques, and we're 

looking into the future and developing to ensure that we can 

contain our jobs, create more jobs in Saskatchewan. That's the 

progress that we're starting to make. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as well in agriculture, we laid the direction 

with Ag 2000. I heard some of the criticisms from the opposition 

benches, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, they said, well it's nothing 

new. Old news. But it wasn't. It laid out the plan. 

It didn't lay out a plan of let's subsidize this industry for 

short-term gain, or a plan that said, we're going to open it up to 

the vultures of the world to come in and rape the province's 

agricultural base. The plan was to have a structured, organized 

system -- the beef industry, the hog industry -- encouraging 

people not to jump into the industries holus-bolus as has 

happened in the past and destroyed the markets, but to look at 

those industries, develop their industry little by little on a plan 

whereby they can continue their business, keep in business, and 

feed a hungry world. 

 

And recently we've seen that. The livestock industry, the numbers 

of cows are up significantly. It's being developed. I talked to the 

cattle producers and they are very optimistic. They're very happy 

about high prices, wondering how long they're going to last. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are optimistic. They're building their 

plans for the future. 

 

Hog industry is the same way. We saw a 1,200 hog 

sow-farrow-to-finish operation being opened just this week out at 

Leroy. That's optimism. Saskatchewan Pork International, there's 

room to build. Saskatchewan Pork International imports about 18 

per cent of the pork it exports to Mexico and Cuba and around the 

world. So we're importing pork because we've already got the 

markets. 

 

Well the obvious thing to do is fill the market yourself in 

Saskatchewan and that's what we're doing. I'm not sure where the 

government was before, but we fill that market from within 

Saskatchewan -- jobs, family farms, large livestock operations, all 

working together to fill an international market. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've also seen the diversification into pulse 

crops increasing dramatically -- very little carry-over in any of the 

crops. Farmers understanding the . . . and this was a slower 

process because we're all cautious about jumping into something 

new. But as we understand the crops that we haven't grown in this 

province traditionally, they are being developed and more and 

more acres are going to those crops. Partly of course, is the reason 

because the cereal prices are down, mainly. But the thing is, the 

result of that is going to be a more solid base of agriculture in this 

province. 

 

The Farm Support Review Committee -- 32 people, I believe, 

putting together their heads to come up with options. They came 

up with three options that the Minister of Agriculture can take to 

Ottawa to negotiate with the nine other provinces and the federal 

government, a farm support program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are the only province in Canada that is ahead of 

everybody because we've already got our committee going and 

we've got the results of that grass roots input to the minister. And 

when he goes to Ottawa he can speak on behalf of the farmers of 

this province who put it together. 

 

No other province is doing that. I think that bodes well for the 

cooperation, the partnership between the people and the 

government. And this must continue. 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Other areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we must continue to work 

on are health and education. We have seen a tremendous lot of 

cooperation with the people of the province in the health area, the 

tough, challenging changes that are coming. But what we're 

doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is providing more service, more 

service that would have been provided had there been no crisis in 

finance, because it had to be done. Douglas set it out, the 

beginning of the plan, and we're completing it. 

 

Those services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the delivery services to 

the people to create a healthy population. And it's not easy, again. 

You just don't do everything right the first time. But I'll tell you, 

it's as right as it could be because we've worked with the people, 

developed the committees through the rural communities, asked 

them to identify their needs, do their need studies for the regions, 

asked them to put together their own regions. They're doing it and 

they're cooperating, with the exception obviously of a couple of 

political pockets which, hey, that's the way the world works. 

 

But for the most part, the majority of the people accept that we 

have to improve the delivery. Because if we don't, what we're 

doing is spending X number of dollars on a system that is 

inefficient, where we could spend as much, maybe more money, 

on a system that's even more efficient. So the value of a dollar is 

going a lot further, and it's crucial. We have to protect and 

modernize the system; the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have to have the cooperation of the people. And I believe we have 

that. 

 

Delivering health care is as important as delivering education. In 

Saskatchewan, education has been a key to the population. As the 

immigrant population settled in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for the most part they made their way through life and 

put their kids through school with the callus on their hand and the 

sweat on their brow. They worked hard. They understood 

education and its importance. And I'll tell you, every immigrant 

family, I don't care if they were from Britain or from China or 

from Ukraine or from wherever they were, or Iceland, understood 

the value of education, and their priority was to ensure their 

children were educated. They worked, they saved, they scrimped. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their children were educated. And those educated 

children, with their parents' knowledge and background and heart, 

built this province up. Unfortunately some governments don't 

share that -- or it would appear don't share that. We've seen it in 

history, the demise of the provincial fortunes, about the third time 

now. The last 10 years we have run the province into ruin. Not 

we, they. 

 

So what we're doing again is trying to deliver an education 

system really with no money, just like the settlers did in the 

beginning. A little difference is there because, you know, the 

times were different. But basically trying to rebuild our education 

systems -- save it, improve it -- with very little money. 

So we know we have to cut back. We know we have to organize 

the system. We know that it's not going to be the same as before. 

We see the trustees association passing motions to perhaps go to 

larger areas. Whether that's right or wrong, whether it'll work or 

be more efficient, we don't know for sure. But the key is they're 

cooperating. They know something has to change. 

 

It's a bit disheartening to see the transient member from 

Shaunavon talk about buses, talk about buses, complaining that 

we don't . . . this cutting back the bus service. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that's the attitude that destroyed this province. Because 

we have a choice. Cut back, organize, and become more efficient, 

or lose the bus. 

 

But it doesn't seem that some people can grasp that. We all make 

choices and we live with those choices and we are choosing in 

this example of busing to try to turn the corporation into a viable 

moneymaking corporation so that we can expand the service. 

Because once you start to make money in a Crown corporation, 

you can expand the service. 

 

(1545) 

 

But if the member from Shaunavon and his colleagues had their 

way, as the Conservative government for the last 10 years did, 

which really is what he's promoting, is saying, it doesn't matter 

about the debt. Keep the bus. Keep everything as it was. Don't 

change it. 

 

Is this the new Liberal government stuck in the future? It sounds a 

lot like the horror calls from the last 10 years in our history. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think some attitudes should change across the 

way. 

 

And now that I'm on the subject of the member for Shaunavon, I 

have a few questions maybe he'll answer when he gets his turn to 

speak. I actually have to stop for a minute because it's kind of 

curious. I wonder if the Liberal leader knows or thought about 

where she placed the member in the seating plan, because he is 

literally breathing down her neck. And I think it's a good thing the 

Liberal member has a swivel chair because I'm sure she'll be 

looking over her shoulder repeatedly. At least with a swivel chair 

she can just turn around to watch the ambitious member for 

Shaunavon. 

 

And I'm wondering, I'm wondering if there'll be a little discussion 

as to who sits in the front chair next week between the ambitious 

member from Shaunavon and the Liberal leader. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would love to be a mouse in the corner of the caucus 

meetings. I wonder who wins the votes at caucus. Bet you Glen 

doesn't win. Oh, I apologize, Mr. Speaker -- bet the member from 

Shaunavon doesn't win. I bet the member for Greystone wins. I 

wonder how long that can be sustained before there are some . . . 

maybe a repeat of history starting to work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take a moment to explain to the 

people of Saskatchewan what they have 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

 

in their new stuck-in-the-future Liberal Party. I would like to 

know some time what the policy is on transportation. 

 

Now this is quite an amusing little story. I have three clippings 

here. One is from September 19, 1991. The Liberal leader is 

quoted . . . is not quoted in the Star-Phoenix . . . or Western 

Producer. Speaking of the Liberal leader, the clipping says, 

"Grain handling and transportation." And this is the Liberal 

leader: 

 

The Crow benefit should be paid directly to farmers, rather than 

to the railways. The Liberals generally favor less regulation . . . 

 

And talking about the Wheat Board: 

 

Haverstock has at times been critical of the degree of control 

exercised by the wheat board over the grain marketing system. 

She says Saskatchewan must be more self-reliant and farmers 

should be more directly involved in marketing their own crops. 

 

Now the next week there's a correction in the Western Producer. 

And it says: 

 

Editor's note: As reported last week (p. 13, Oct. 10), 

Saskatchewan Liberal leader Lynda Haverstock disagreed with 

a Western Producer story that described her as having been 

"critical of the degree of control exercised by the wheat board 

over the grain marketing system." 

 

And it reproduces the part. What happened was, without reading 

it, was that they asked for the policy, some policy on these issues, 

and they were sent, I believe it was a text prepared for the Liberal 

leader's use in October for the farming in the '90s. So they sent 

the text of the speech over. And part of that text, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to read so we can all form our own opinions 

as to exactly what she meant. She says: 

 

Both Manitoba and Alberta have done major studies on the 

impact of change in the method of payment of the "crow 

benefit" with recommendations on change in terms of their 

respective economies. The administration in Saskatchewan has 

done nothing. 

 

Well if you look at those, in Alberta and Manitoba the studies 

were to change the current system. And she was criticizing the 

then Tory government for not changing it. I think maybe the 

previous article was very correct when they spoke of Ms. 

Haverstock's opposition to the current system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go on, and I'm quoting again from the 

so-called notes of text prepared by the Liberal Party for their 

leader. 

 

 Saskatchewan must become more self-reliant when it comes to 

marketing its products. The (Canadian Wheat Board) 

"syndrome" or "let someone else look after it" permeates the 

marketing philosophy of most farmers and wheat pools, and 

unfortunately, the present government (speaking of the Tory 

government at the time) takes a "don't rock the boat" approach. 

 

The successful marketing of all farm crops must be done by 

farmers or their companies or marketing boards structured to 

marketing commodities not regulating them, or companies with 

marketing capabilities. In other words, a diversified, open, 

competitive marketplace. 

 

Well if I go back to the article, where it says: 

 

Haverstock has at times been critical of the degree of control 

exercised by the wheat board over the grain marketing system. 

She says Saskatchewan must be more self-reliant and farmers 

should be more directly involved in marketing their own crops. 

 

I would say the Western Producer has it fairly accurate. But the 

Liberal leader says no, you misquoted me. Well I think that's a 

pretty obvious trap. So then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in their 

benevolence the Western Producer invited all the leaders to put 

forward their positions on these things. So the Liberal leader was 

very happy, by the report here, that she had a chance to again 

explain exactly what she meant. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you can read it through and through, and the 

first article that appeared is the true one. But that's how this 

Liberal leader operates. 

 

But here's the rub. I have looked up some of the quotes on this 

topic by the transient member from Shaunavon, and he was 

talking about transportation. And he's saying, and I quote -- this is 

March 3, 1993: 

 

Liberal leader says election is about more than agriculture. But 

what does the Liberal leader say about it? Grain handling and 

transportation: the Crow benefit should be paid directly to 

farmers rather than the railways. The Liberals generally favour 

less regulation in the industry. 

 

Now this statement goes against those farmers that are writing 

letters from all our constituents to the private member from 

Greystone. 

 

The member goes on to say . . . criticizing the Liberal leader for 

her policy on the Wheat Board. Well I'd like to know what the 

policy is right now on the Wheat Board. Is it the Shaunavon 

member's policy or is it the Greystone member's policy? 

 

And can you imagine this new marriage of federal Liberal 

government and the three stooges across the way . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I think the member knows that that is 

really not adding anything to the debate in the 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

House and I wish he'd get back to the real debate. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker. I'm sorry. I wouldn't want to 

do that. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, what is the policy? What is the Liberal 

agriculture policy? And as I was saying, can you imagine Mr. 

Goodale, the federal Agriculture critic, calling up, asking what 

the policy is. Well I bet you the policy would depend on who he 

talked to that day. So do you think there's going to be any 

possible influence over policy? Even though they're trying to put 

forward this big Liberal marriage, I don't think there'll be much 

influence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't want to go on too long but there's just a 

couple of other things that I would like to touch on. The Liberal 

leader . . . I hate to inform the member of Shaunavon this, but I 

don't think it was him that attracted her. Because immediately the 

Liberal leader, upon going out, after she went out on her search 

for another member, she was eligible . . . she collects $17,000 

more -- $17,000 more immediately. 

 

So I don't know, if I was the member for Shaunavon, if I would 

think it was him or me that did it, or the money. It used to be said 

that when they say it's the principle not the money, it's the money. 

Well in this case it's neither. No principle, no money . . . I mean 

the opposite: no principle but the money. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition the Liberal leader's search for an 

additional member cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $122,000. 

This self-righteousness of the Liberal leader about how 

government should be lean, tight, mean, keep its cost down, cost 

$122,000 -- personally $17,000 to the Liberal leader. Can you 

imagine that? So I don't think it was the member from 

Shaunavon. I think she would have taken just about anybody. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote one more article, one more article 

from the member from Shaunavon. He used to cooperate; he used 

to think that what the government was doing was right. In fact 

there are a few headlines in the Shaunavon Standard: McPherson 

supports gay rights legislation. He used to support the 

government. 

 

He used to support us in other things as well. This is a Shaunavon 

Standard, Tuesday, March 30, Conflict laws is the title, by Glen 

McPherson. I want to read a little bit: Members will . . . he's 

outlining what members conflict of interest guidelines will mean. 

And very good legislation, the conflict of interest, it clearly 

identifies . . . I thought it clearly identified everything. But one of 

the points says: 

 

 Members will be required to absent themselves from any 

discussion that could be considered a conflict of interest. One of 

the commission's jobs will be to recommend penalties against 

any member of the Assembly found in violation of the Act. 

Penalties can range from simply ordering a member to comply 

with the Act or to the harshest penalty of declaring the MLA 

seat 

vacant. 

 

And the member of Shaunavon wrote this and put it into his paper 

in Shaunavon -- the conflict of interest guidelines which says that 

members will be required to absent themselves from any 

discussion that could be considered a conflict. 

 

Now before the time the member moved across the floor, from 

that point in time to the time he made his decision to move across 

the floor, the time when that member was sitting in government, 

the time that member was talking about conflict of interest and 

agreeing with conflict of interest, the question I ask, Mr. Speaker, 

is: was that member in a conflict situation? 

 

Was he in a conflict situation when he was talking to his then 

caucus colleagues about issues that concern the province of 

Saskatchewan, some of them very confidential because of the 

business nature of government in some areas? Was he in conflict? 

And maybe we have to go back and tighten up the conflict of 

information or ask the conflict commissioner for a little ruling on 

whether or not this member was in conflict. Because it says he 

should have absented himself from any discussion that could be 

considered a conflict. And if he knew he was moving across the 

floor, Mr. Speaker, I say he was in conflict. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many things that the new Liberal revival 

has with it that don't look like they're stuck in the future. I want to 

say one of them, Mr. Speaker, is one of the people -- guests -- in 

the gallery that the Liberal leader introduced as part of her 

delegation happened to be a former P.C. (Progressive 

Conservative) bagman in Regina. 

 

Moving to the future. A new, revitalized Liberal government. 

Well I hear what the Liberals say but I think what they do is a 

little bit different. 

 

And I want to end by saying, Mr. Speaker, I can prove what the 

Liberals say is different than what the Liberals do, and that's in 

the whole area of taxation. In taxation, I hear the Liberal leader 

saying we're taxing the people of Saskatchewan to death. And 

you can imagine, I mean you've heard it all, all the lines that she's 

used. The rhetoric, the tobacco, the . . . Let me talk about tobacco 

for a minute. 

 

I found a clipping today in the paper; this is to do . . . (inaudible) 

. . . with the federal government. "Teenagers like cut in cigarette 

prices". And I want to quote a couple of quotes from this: 

 

"Yeh, it's great," said 17-year-old Tina . . . who said she lit up 

for the first time when she was five . . . "It'll cost me less." 

 

"With lower prices . . . more people will smoke . . . 

 

"Less people will try quitting now too." 

 

(1600) 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

 

I mean this is the Liberal cousins in Ottawa. The predictable 

results, because eight out of ten provinces said no, because of 

health costs as the major reason, eight out of ten health care 

ministers said no. Really working together. 

 

But there's a longer story behind it, Mr. Speaker. Because there's 

a Liberal government in Quebec, a Liberal government that needs 

to be popular, so I think there was a little hand-holding going on. 

Because they have an election coming up pretty soon. 

 

I wonder if the Liberal leader here agrees with that -- her new 

politics. I haven't heard her say much -- if she agrees with 

Liberals helping Liberals for re-election. I mean we saw a lot of 

that in the past 10 years with Tories helping Tories get re-elected. 

It destroyed us. And I predict it's the same thing here and it'll 

destroy us again if we allow it to continue. And if we had Liberals 

in Saskatchewan, the same thing would take over as we had the 

last 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader talks about taxes. I happen to 

have here, Mr. Speaker, a list. This list is family income, $25,000, 

$50,000, and $75,000 -- taxes to the people in those brackets. 

This includes provincial income tax, tax credits and rebates, 

health premiums, retail sales tax, gasoline tax, car insurance, 

telephone, home heating, and electricity in March of 1993. 

 

How do we rate, one of my colleagues asks? Well better than the 

Liberals. Because guess what? Twenty-five thousand dollar tax 

bracket -- number one, the Liberal government of Newfoundland. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They're the highest. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- They're the highest. The second highest? The 

Liberal government from New Brunswick. The third highest? The 

Liberal government from Prince Edward Island. And the fourth 

highest? The Liberal government from Nova Scotia. The top four 

provinces, Liberal-governed provinces, tax their people in the 

$25,000 tax bracket the most. 

 

Now let's move over to the $50,000 bracket. And coming in at 

number one spot, the first star is the Liberal government from 

Newfoundland. The highest tax in the category $50,000. Second 

prize goes to the Liberal government from Nova Scotia; third 

prize goes to the Liberal government in Quebec; fourth, the 

Liberal government in Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker; and 

fifth, the Liberal government in New Brunswick. So in the 

$50,000 tax bracket, including all those things that I 

listed -- income tax, tax credit, health premiums, retail sales, 

gasoline tax, car insurance, telephone, home heating, and 

electricity -- the Liberal governments are the five highest tax 

provinces in the country. 

 

And we could move over to the $75,000 bracket. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'd love to. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- My colleague says he'd love to -- yes, 

so would I. 

 

Again, Liberal government taxation. You look at Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan has organized it so that we can have the least hurt 

for the poorest people. The $25,000 bracket, we're third from the 

lowest; the $50,000 bracket, we're fourth lowest; and the $75,000 

bracket, we come in fourth. Organized so that as the affordability 

. . . or ability to pay increases, so does your tax load. That's as fair 

as you can get it. And that's not just a graduated income tax 

system, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. Speaker, that's organized 

over electricity, heating, and everything else. 

 

Now the Liberal member may . . . or leader may condemn us for 

taxation, but I think she should be looking at her other provinces 

and condemning them for their taxation and commending our 

government for an organized tax system that gives ability to pay 

as the key to the level. That is fair and a heart . . . that's a 

government with a heart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to wrap up my comments by just thanking 

the people of Saskatchewan again, the people of Humboldt 

constituency, and the people of Saskatchewan in general, 

thanking them for their patience. I know we all . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. I would prefer if the two 

members wanted to converse with each other, if they went behind 

the bar rather than talking out . . . or outside. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I'm almost finished, Mr. Speaker, so maybe one 

of them will take over. 

 

Thanking the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for their 

patience. We have a lot as individuals to complain 

about -- everybody. Because it's hard to move down with your 

lifestyle as opposed to moving up. 

 

But I thank the people of Saskatchewan because I know they 

understand there is no choice. We will again see better days 

ahead. We will see it because this government has: one, laid out a 

plan for financial freedom; two, plan includes the cornerstones for 

jobs -- far-sighted plans that will create jobs in this country in the 

years to come long after we are members in this House, any of us, 

because the plan is there, and if the road is continued, it will 

produce. 

 

We have put forward reforms in health care. We have asked 

educators to tighten up and to try to do more with less. All these 

things, Mr. Speaker, are plans for a more productive and a 

brighter future. The people of Saskatchewan understand that. That 

is why I believe, for the most part, they are behind this 

government's actions for the direction that we're going in. 

 

No government does everything right -- every little thing 

right -- and we won't either. But, Mr. Speaker, those little things 

can be corrected. The big picture is the underlying most important 

feature and that is restoring our financial freedom, regaining the 

control of the destiny we so desperately need to again make 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Saskatchewan the great, great province it once was. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the people of 

Saskatoon Idylwyld, I am very pleased to enter into this debate on 

the speech delivered by Her Honour on Monday, the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

I want to firstly join with others in welcoming the member from 

Regina North West, the new member, to the legislature. I had the 

opportunity to do that personally, but I'm happy to do that now as 

well. And I certainly do wish her well in her work on behalf of 

the people of her constituency and all the people of our province. 

I know from my own experience, Mr. Speaker, that she will enjoy 

the benefit of your experience and guidance, as we all continue to 

enjoy it. 

 

Sometimes . . . I just heard the member for Humboldt say that we 

do tend to complain a lot at times and we ourselves are guilty of 

being complainers sometimes and it reminded me, Mr. Speaker, 

of what is going on in some parts of the world such as Sarajevo 

and Yugoslavia and . . . or the former Yugoslavia. And some 

commentators in the media were saying the other day what a 

shame it really is to consider that 10 years ago the Olympic 

games were being held in Sarajevo and to see the tragedy that is 

going on there today and the tragedy that is going on in many 

parts of the world. 

 

And in some ways the comment from the member from 

Humboldt reminded me that in this Chamber we have to put 

matters in perspective and we tend to dwell on our problems and 

dwell on the negatives at times in political debate and it would do 

all of us I think, well to remember how lucky we are to be born or 

to have moved to this country and this province and what a good 

life we really have and the good things that we have in our 

province. And I think we sometimes don't mention that because 

we're concentrating on the political differences we have and 

debating those and I certainly am no exception to that myself, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want today simply to comment on a few areas mentioned by Her 

Honour in the Speech from the Throne. She referred to the fact 

that this government has restored sound financial management to 

our province since coming to office in 1991. And I believe that's 

true, Mr. Speaker, and I'm very proud of the fact that I have been 

a member of that government and the fact that we are going to be 

on target to balance the budget of the province by 1996. I believe 

that that is a very significant accomplishment. 

 

There are those who say that you can ignore fiscal realities, that 

you don't have to run your province like you run your household, 

and that attention to financial matters is really not that necessary 

and that we paid too much attention to it. In fact the member from 

Shaunavon today said that repeatedly, that we 

are dwelling on the finances of the province. But the people of the 

province I believe know that you must, in order to build your 

economy and provide services to the people, you certainly have to 

be on a sound financial footing. 

 

And I remember campaigning in the 1991 election and people in 

my constituency saying to me that they did not know why people 

would want to go into the legislature and go into public life in 

Saskatchewan at this particular time . . . or at that time because 

they said the finances of the province were such a mess that you 

would never be able to get them under control. And I think that a 

lot of people have been surprised in the past few years, Mr. 

Speaker, because the annual deficit of the province has gone from 

over a billion dollars to the targeted I believe $294 million for the 

fiscal year about to end. 

 

And I want to congratulate the people of the province for the 

sacrifices that they have made to bring that about, because it's a 

collective effort. It doesn't just happen because of the 

government; it happens because of all the people in the province. 

And I want to commend the Premier and the cabinet and my 

colleagues and in particular the members from Regina Dewdney 

and Saskatoon Westmount who have served as ministers of 

Finance in very difficult times and I think displayed some tough 

decision making but compassionate decision making and worked 

very hard in providing good leadership to get our deficit under 

control. 

 

The fact that that is occurring is not known only to people in 

Saskatchewan. The Salomon Brothers investment house in New 

York in its 1993 "Budget Season & Outlook for Credit" indicated 

that Saskatchewan was the province most beleaguered by the 

rating agencies but also the one with the most impressive attempt 

to attack its fiscal problems. And I think that's very noteworthy. 

 

The Burns Fry Limited November, 1993 report indicated that: 

 

Saskatchewan's economic and fiscal performance is improving 

. . . Saskatchewan is on track to meet its target of eliminating 

the deficit by 1996/97. 

 

(1615) 

 

I think it's fine for people to get up and in one breath say that 

really financial matters are not a problem, you should ignore 

them, and in the next breath to condemn the government and say 

that there's so much more the government could do if only they 

were in power. 

 

But as we all know, actions speak much louder than words. And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people are going to remember that 

it was this government that didn't just talk about the problem of 

deficit and the problem of debt, but took action to do something 

about it. 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

 

Now the deficit of course is the amount by which the government 

spending exceeds government revenues in any year, and that 

problem is being tackled. That is something different from 

accumulated debt, which is the total amount owed because of 

deficits in the past. 

 

And I just want to note in passing that in terms of the debt of the 

province, the provincial government has been reducing taxpayers' 

liability in a variety of ways. And in the last 20 months or so, the 

government debts and guarantees have been reduced by about 

$430 million. We no longer have liability to pay $39 million with 

respect to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, $190 million 

in debt and loan guarantees connected with Weyerhaeuser, $30 

million on the Lloydminster upgrader, $80 million with respect to 

the Crown Life deal, $22 million regarding CanAmera oilseed 

crushing plant, and about $60 million with respect to other 

transactions. 

 

And this amounts to, I believe, Mr. Speaker, approximately a half 

million dollars per day in reduction of debt since this government 

took office. Now this has not been an easy task. It is in fact a 

difficult task. And it has involved difficult problems and 

decisions that are not always popular. 

 

As I said, some have denied and continue to deny the fiscal 

realities the government has dealt with. They will try to take 

advantage of the fact that the government is dealing with the 

situation and making some difficult decisions, by playing politics 

with respect to debt reduction measures. 

 

They will pretend that if we would only ignore this problem and 

be all things to all people, that the problem will go away. But 

notwithstanding the comments of the Liberal leader earlier in this 

debate, I don't believe that that is true. I don't believe that the debt 

situation is not important. I believe that the people know that 

there's a problem, they know where it came from, and they 

support the government's plan to deal with it. 

 

So I was pleased to hear in the Speech from the Throne that the 

government will continue on its course to get the province of 

Saskatchewan on a solid financial footing which I think, in terms 

of the deficit of the province, the government has already largely 

accomplished. 

 

Her Honour also referred, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that this 

government will continue to move forward with reform of the 

health care delivery system and I support that. I think that the 

government has taken steps that are correct and which in the long 

run will mean that our medicare system, of which we're all so 

proud, will be sustainable and strong for everyone in the future. 

 

The other parties in the legislature are fond of saying that we 

should wait and study the matter further before taking steps. But 

the reality is in my view, Mr. Speaker, that the organization of our 

health care system in Saskatchewan has really been quite 

exhaustively studied over the last 20 years and everyone who has 

looked at that system has agreed 

that change is needed, but up until now no one has been prepared 

to take any action with respect to it. Of course we had the Murray 

Commission report commissioned by the previous government, 

we had the Atkinson report in Saskatoon, and we've got the 

studies of the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission, and in short they all seem to support the general 

direction taken by the government. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that most reasonable people would agree 

that in times like this, if we spend any money on health -- which 

we do; it's the largest expenditure of the government -- we had 

better spend it wisely and efficiently. Formerly there were about 

500 boards in Saskatchewan delivering health care services in 

hospitals, senior citizens' homes, home care community health 

units, and so on. And these boards are being replaced by about 30 

district boards. 

 

In my own city of Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Health Board has 

become responsible for three hospitals -- St. Paul's, City Hospital, 

and the Royal University Hospital -- and I believe that it is 

rational to consider these hospitals as one hospital system rather 

than separate, free-standing units, each of them competing with 

the others to provide a whole range of services. 

 

And the cost savings that are happening in Saskatoon, the 

efficiencies being achieved, I think speak for themselves. And 

anyone can read the six-month report of the Saskatoon Health 

Board and the annual report to see what is happening there. 

 

And I want to commend the people that are involved in that 

reform, Mr. Speaker, because it is not something that happens in 

Regina. Part of the reform is the idea that you don't make all the 

decisions for the people in Regina; you'd evolve control to local 

people. And these people on the Saskatoon Health Board and 

people that work within the system -- from the nurses' union, the 

doctors, the service employees, CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees), and others -- work very hard to deliver health care. 

And I think they're doing a very good job in difficult times. 

 

We're not following the example, if I can call it that, of the 

province of Alberta, which is hacking and slashing away at the 

system with very little regard for the importance of a plan to 

sustain a public system, and where people are able if they have 

more money to buy private medicine such as the MRI (magnetic 

resonance imaging) or eye surgery. We're trying to coordinate the 

system but to keep it a public system. And I think the government 

is on the right track in that regard. 

 

Undoubtedly there will be many problems along the way, because 

when you do a restructuring of a system, it doesn't always occur 

completely smoothly. But in the end, I believe we're going to 

have a much stronger, sustainable system. And indeed 

commentators from around the world are saying that 

Saskatchewan is providing an example and leadership in terms of 

health care reform. 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

I think it's noteworthy that in Saskatchewan we had before the 

reform 6.8 hospital beds per 1,000 people, whereas in Canada 

generally the number is 5.1 and in the United States it's 3.8. And I 

don't say that Saskatchewan shouldn't necessarily have more 

hospital beds per capita than other parts of the world, but I would 

ask the question why it is that Saskatchewan would have the 

highest number of hospital beds per capita almost anywhere in the 

world. 

 

And after the reform of the health care system we are left with 8 

hospitals per 100,000 people -- 8 per 100,000, whereas the 

Canadian average is 3 per 100,000 people. 

 

So when members of the opposition get up and say that somehow 

the government is depriving people in Saskatchewan of hospital 

care and we don't . . . we no longer have hospital services for 

people, which of course is a ridiculous and untrue statement, I 

think the public should ask members of the opposition how that 

can be, when the average number of hospitals in Saskatchewan is 

more than twice that the Canadian average. 

 

In fact prior to October 1, 1993, when 51 institutions were 

converted to health care facilities, Saskatchewan had almost as 

many hospitals as the province of Ontario, which has 11 times the 

population. I believe that the opposition is misleading the people, 

Mr. Speaker, when they suggest, as has been suggested in this 

legislature, that somehow the government's reforms deprive 

people of health care, because of course nothing could be further 

from the truth. 

 

They should tell people that many more hospitals are unaffected 

by conversions than are affected. They should tell people that the 

51 rural hospitals that are affected have not been closed; they've 

been converted to health centres. And they will provide services 

which will include better emergency first response; assessment 

and observation services; primary-care nursing; lab and X-ray 

services; seniors' programs; access to travelling specialty services 

not now available, like physical therapy, chiropody, etc.; health 

promotion and education services. 

 

And I think that when people are running around or standing up 

in this legislature saying that there are individuals being deprived 

of health care, the public will begin to confront those people with 

the facts and will begin to question whether a lot of those 

statements aren't really made for political reasons, and I think will 

begin to question the motives of the people criticizing health care 

reform. Because when you look at the people who are objective, 

such as the Health Utilization and Research Commission, Dr. 

Murray, the former dean of medicine and health care observers 

from around the world, they're all in pretty much universal 

agreement that reform of the system is overdue and in fact is very 

well thought out. 

 

And I think that even though there are those who deny that reform 

is needed, just as there are those who deny 

that we have financial problems to deal with, I believe that in the 

end the people will support the government and will realize that 

the change is necessary and that the criticism of the change 

usually has more to do with the political agenda and the political 

well-being of some of the members in this House than it really 

has to do with the well-being of the people of the province. 

 

I believe that the reforms will withstand the test of time, and we 

will be on a much stronger foundation in health care than we were 

a few years ago; just as I think we're on a much stronger financial 

foundation in this province than when we first met here in this 

twenty-second legislature in December 1991. 

 

So I wanted to say that in terms of those two areas covered in the 

Speech from the Throne, I'm very pleased, Mr. Speaker, with the 

government's performance and fiscal management and health 

reform. And I'm pleased that the government has indicated that 

it's going to continue a well-thought-out, long-term approach to 

dealing with those issues. 

 

But I think we all know -- and members of the opposition and 

members on this side have both indicated -- that we have a lot of 

work to do in this province to rebuild the Saskatchewan economy, 

and to make decisions which will improve the job situation here 

and the income situation of Saskatchewan people. It's true that 

Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, but 

that is small comfort to people who are unemployed or 

underemployed. And it's not good enough for us to refer to our 

lowest unemployment rate. It's our responsibility to seek solutions 

in a practical way in wherever we can, involving communities 

and business people, people from labour, and farmers, and all 

sectors of our society to try to improve the job situation for our 

people. 

 

(1630) 

 

And I must say I was a bit perplexed listening to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party when she was saying that the government had no 

plan, because actually in the throne speech there was mention of 

several specific initiatives to deal with jobs and economic 

development. And it's available for anyone to read, including the 

Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

The throne speech said that the government would be creating, or 

facilitating the creation by local communities, I should say, of 

regional economic development authorities to enable 

communities to work together to promote local economic 

opportunities. I think that's a very specific measure and I think it's 

a very positive measure. 

 

The throne speech said that a tourism authority would be created 

involving the various players in tourism, most of which are from 

the private sector, to increase tourism, revenue, and jobs in our 

province. And I think we all know -- and if we don't know, we 

should know, Mr. Speaker -- that tourism is a very major industry 

for Saskatchewan. That was dealt with in the 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

 

throne speech but I didn't hear the Leader of the Liberal Party 

make any mention of that or say what was wrong with that 

particular idea. In fact it's a very good idea. 

 

The throne speech mentioned that we're going to create a trade 

development corporation with the purpose of taking our products 

to the world market. I didn't hear any mention of that either. It 

mentioned that we were developing a research and technology 

commercialization plan to support product development for 

international export. It mentioned that a transportation policy 

council was working toward improving access to markets and that 

a Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation was being created to 

develop Saskatchewan value added industry. 

 

The throne speech mentioned participation in the 

federal-provincial infrastructure program, which actually has been 

in the news quite a bit lately, and it mentioned increased mining 

activity in the North. It mentioned a strategic planning document, 

Agriculture 2000, released by the Minister of Agriculture last 

year, and containing a plan to continue the diversification of our 

farm production and to add value to it. 

 

Now these are all specific measures, and there were many of them 

in the throne speech. And I've referred to them. There are specific 

measures and specific plans. And I support that because that is 

what is our responsibility. We have to look at ways to improve 

the job situation and the economic situation in the province. We 

all know that. And we have to work at it; we have to work at it in 

a cooperative way. 

 

But we have to do it in a realistic way and a practical way as well, 

and we have to talk about specific measures we can take -- not pie 

in the sky. I mean it doesn't do anyone any good for somebody to 

stand up in the legislature without any specific measures or 

specific plans and pretend that there's some magic solution to 

everybody's economic problems or pretend that there is some 

quick fix, because there is no quick fix and there is no magic 

solution. There are specific measures that can be taken, which 

were referred to in the throne speech and which I've referred to 

just now. 

 

We're certainly not alone in facing a difficult economic situation. 

I think improvement will be made over time, but it will be made 

step by step. We should not pretend that anyone has a quick fix. 

And we should look at actions rather than words. 

 

I heard the Liberal Party say before the federal election that we 

were going to have jobs, jobs, jobs -- sort of an echo of Brian 

Mulroney -- and something done about the taxes and something 

done about the deficit. But I've been reading the papers since the 

federal election, and it's not that long since the Liberals took over, 

and already the Minister of Finance, Mr. Martin, has said that, 

well don't expect too much job creation because we've decided 

there's really not all that much we can do. 

I was reading in the paper today where he was saying, don't 

expect too much deficit reduction because there's not much we 

can do in that regard either. I think we've all heard that on taxes 

we're not going to get lower taxes or even the same taxes, out of 

the Liberals. We're all expecting taxes to go up in the federal 

budget. 

 

And my point isn't just to criticize the Liberals and say that -- and 

ignore that they have a difficult problem to deal with -- but my 

point is to say that when the Leader of the Liberal Party gets up in 

this House and says that somehow she has a magic solution to 

solve our problems if only we would come up with a plan, even 

though she offered a hundred weeks ago to, by now, give us a 

hundred specific ideas for economic development and hasn't 

delivered one of them, we have to remember when we're having a 

public discussion of these issues that the Liberals do have an 

opportunity now, in Ottawa, to put their words into action. But I 

think what we're going to find is, no plan to deal with the deficit 

in any realistic way, higher taxes, no real jobs planned, and things 

are going to go much the same. 

 

It's fine to speak in glowing terms about the ethics and philosophy 

of the Liberal Party as we heard today, but I don't think we should 

get too carried away by that kind of rhetoric. Because what we 

saw this week was the public policy of our country dictated by 

tobacco smugglers and tobacco companies, and I don't know what 

kind of an example that's supposed to be from a party that 

supposedly believes in some kind of new ethics and new politics. 

 

To my way of thinking that kind of action is not productive and it 

is not indicative of any kind of real reform and change on the 

political scene. It's indicative of something else, and I think there 

are a lot of people in this country, Mr. Speaker, that don't like it 

and I'm one of them. Because if we have a federal government 

that can't even enforce the law of the land then I think we're in a 

bit of trouble. 

 

Now here in Saskatchewan, speaking of the new politics, we have 

one member of the Liberal caucus that was not elected as a 

Liberal and did not resign his seat when he had differences with 

members on this side of the House, and does not sit as an 

independent. I think the member from Shaunavon thinks that he 

has saved his political hide by making some kind of a timely 

move to the Liberal Party, but the member from Shaunavon is 

going to have to remember that he is now bound to explain the 

actions of the federal Liberal government with which he is 

associated. 

 

He is going to have to explain their actions on the transportation 

policy and payment of the Crow benefit -- whether that's paid to 

the farmers or the railways. He's going to have to answer for the 

Liberals with respect to transfer payments to the province for 

health and education, and he is going to answer for them on their 

taxation policies and deficit reduction plan. 

 

And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

Shaunavon is going to find that it's not going to be easy all the 

time. And he may think that he's entered some safe political 

haven where his political hide will be protected but he may find 

out that he jumped a bit too soon. 

 

Now of course this move by him, I don't think we should forget, 

has cost the taxpayers of the province a great deal of money since 

the Liberals in one year alone, I believe, are taking $122,000 

more from the treasury. And at a time of restraint, Mr. Speaker, I 

do not believe that this is a good example for the people of the 

province. 

 

They want us to take less and get our expenditures under control 

but unfortunately they're taking much more for themselves and 

their party. So I think we have to work together, Saskatchewan 

people, towards realistic solutions. We need a practical, sensible, 

and hard-headed approach to decision making which in the short 

run will not please everyone but which in the long run will be 

sustainable and allow us to improve our economy. 

 

And as I said, I believe that the specific measures contained in the 

Speech from the Throne with respect to economic development 

will help us in that regard. I do truly believe that the government 

is on the correct path. And importantly I know that the 

government is led by individuals who are honest and 

straightforward with the people, and honest and responsible in 

terms of the operation of government. So I'm quite pleased to 

associate myself with these people and this Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was very impressed with the 

sincerity and the thoughtfulness of the speeches of the member 

from Regina Lake Centre who moved that the speech be received 

and the member from Biggar who seconded the motion. And I 

certainly will be very happy joining them in voting in favour of 

the Speech from the Throne and affirming my support for the 

approach being taken by this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It's my 

pleasure today to rise in my place and enter into the debate on the 

Speech from the Throne. I too, Mr. Speaker, want to join with 

previous speakers both today and yesterday in congratulating the 

government members from Regina Lake Centre and my desk 

mate, the member from Biggar, for their thoughtful and their 

expanded response to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

To the member from Regina North West too I offer my 

congratulations in the recent by-election victory and certainly 

look forward to looking to her contributions to this Assembly in 

the future. 

 

I also wish to take this occasion to recognize this government and 

our Premier's commitment by honouring and acting on his word 

in terms of holding the by-election in Regina North West in a 

time frame of a six-month period. Unlike, Mr. Speaker, the 

previous administrations where constituencies were left 

unrepresented in this province for as long as two years. And 

unlike the practice, Mr. Speaker, of the Leader of the Third Party, 

suggesting to be the mother of democratic reform but then make 

special provisions for those transparent Liberal principles of 

reforming to . . . of reform to accommodate that free spirit, to 

what I would suggest are really self-serving interests and are 

becoming more and more evident as time passes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- I also, Mr. Speaker, want to take this opportunity to 

congratulate you in your role as the Speaker of this Assembly in 

maintaining the order and decorum in this House. Within the past 

two years, I've had the privilege of witnessing the management of 

legislatures in other jurisdictions in Canada, and I have to say that 

your stewardship in the performance of this Assembly is to be 

commended. And I would go as far to suggest that possibly you 

could provide a seminar or two in other legislatures on procedures 

and decorum -- now I'm not sure if they would necessarily invite 

you -- but certainly I would like to see that opportunity put 

forward. 

 

Now I know also, Mr. Speaker, that although I congratulate you 

in your approach and success, I know that your job has been 

much easier because of the well-disciplined group of government 

members on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Serby: -- At this time, Mr. Speaker, I too wish to extend my 

appreciation and gratitude to the constituents of Yorkton, who 

have been most helpful and supportive to me personally, and 

certainly our government, in moulding and shaping the future of 

this province. The genuine support and partnerships of folks like 

our mayor and city council, the chamber of commerce, the 

economic development committees, the tribal council, and many, 

many other organizations and departments and groups and 

individuals, were in fact now helping, Mr. Speaker, to sort of 

bring together the fruits of our labours. And I very much want to 

thank the members of my community for their confidence and 

their support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through this speech . . . from this Speech from the 

Throne represents in many ways my own personal views and 

direction that our government is taking. And I was particularly 

moved by the reference in the speech to the two important 

anniversaries our province will be recognizing in 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 50th anniversary of the 6th day of June, D-Day 

invasion where allied troops stormed the beaches of Normandy, 

strike two prolific tones of emotion for me, which I'm reminded 

of. First, Mr. Speaker, is of course the cooperation that we saw, 

nations joining each other together, overlooking their own 

individual ideologies, political loyalties, culture, 



February 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

 

and philosophical differences, to form significant alliances in 

order to preserve democracy and freedom that we all today enjoy 

in this great province, in this nation, and certainly in many parts 

of the world. 

 

The second reminder of course on this occasion is of a more 

personal nature, Mr. Speaker, as I am one of those young 

Canadians, in comparison to the veterans who we will be 

recognizing this year, whose family had to undertake a new 

highway in life, because our father ended up being a number 

whom we think about when we pay tribute to these people who 

helped preserve this opportunity for me and for all of us who sit 

in this Assembly today. 

 

This sacrifice and this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, is one that I hold 

in high regard. Because today and in the future we as leaders 

recognize and can, from our little corners of the world, have a 

chance to make a difference. Like our veterans did who formed 

alliances and made sacrifices for the betterment of all our lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech, in my view, reflects the reality of 

the times, where decisions have been difficult but the process that 

we have been on has been correct. This throne speech, I might 

compare to an experience of a team of mountain climbers of 

which our team is made up of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we are halfway up that journey, so we take a moment to 

reflect and project. When we began this journey we had a plan in 

order to reach our goal, which would be the summit of the 

mountain. At the same time we knew the climb would be tough 

and there would be a number of tests. Our goal of course was to 

reach the top of the mountain together, recognizing full well that 

there would be obstacles as we moved along -- obstacles and 

limitations from within our own party; obstacles from sceptics 

around us; and the shifting terrain on the slopes making our 

journey a challenging climb. 

 

But prior to beginning that journey our government, like the 

mountain-climbing team, took a good deal of time to explore 

amongst ourselves, other professionals, and within our 

communities as to what the most appropriate route might be. Of 

course there were many suggestions and recommendations, but 

there were few options. We had to climb the mountain. What was 

clear however is that this was a monumental task and that in order 

to reach the summit we needed to climb together. 

 

As we began our journey in 1991 there were voices of 

discouragement and hopelessness, and those voices are still here 

today. Many of them are directly across this Assembly 

floor -- opposition. Because in my opinion their purpose exists, as 

I see it, is to paint doom and gloom, to discredit anyone who is 

trying to climb the mountain, because they, Mr. Speaker, have yet 

not learned the understanding and meaning of cooperation, 

community, or commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are now two years into our journey 

and I continue to hear the shrieking voice from the opposition 

benches, feverishly trying to understand why it is that they still 

stand alone at the base of the mountain while most everyone else 

has moved on. 

 

It is an interesting analysis when you examine it against the 

journey up the mountain. When the official opposition and their 

folks look at the mountain, they look at one another and they say, 

there is no mountain, and continue to shriek, hold temper 

tantrums, and wander aimlessly, oblivious to the realities around 

them. 

 

The official third party on the other hand, with the lonesome 

wanderer between them, say yes, there is a mountain. They 

believe the mountain must be tackled. But from what we've seen 

today, they have no tools, Mr. Speaker, and they have no ideas, 

because as of today we haven't yet seen one. 

 

And in the Speech from the Throne that the member from 

Greystone delivered today in response, again a lot of old, partisan, 

Liberal politics. Like the Tories, criticism, rejection of the ideas, 

no cooperation, and a blind eye to the reality of the day. For 

several minutes, Mr. Speaker, she went on being critical of our 

job plan. But not on one occasion in that period of time was there 

one word spoken about the kind of opportunities that might be 

available that she would put forward in terms of moving on the 

job issue in Saskatchewan -- not one. 

 

Well two years ago and a little bit more, the people of 

Saskatchewan said to our team, the New Democratic . . . the team 

and the team of New Democratic mountain climbers, you need to 

lead us up the mountain out of this disaster left here in 

Saskatchewan. We need to pack our backpacks filled with ideas, 

strategies, and reform, and together aim for the top of the 

mountain. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a part of that team. And in 

spite of the adversity of the two-year climb, I believe we are 

making progress. Yes, we've had some setbacks and even some 

casualties and we've lost some folks along the slippery slopes. 

We've lost some of our team because some believe that we've 

taken the wrong route; others believe that we've climbed too fast 

in this short space of time. And then there remain a few who 

believe that we didn't need to climb at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from where I come from and what my colleagues 

and my friends around the province tell me, we're on the right 

track. Mr. Speaker, when we reflect on our journey to date, we 

see that our financial circumstances are better, our foundation is 

beginning to set, bond rating agencies, lending institutions, and 

even our good friends, the federal government, are 

acknowledging that we have a hold on the finances of this 

province. Our base is becoming solidified, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yes, some tough decisions. There have been some tax 

increases, cuts in funding, and reduced expenditures to some of 

our government departments 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard February 10, 1994 

 

and third parties. However, Mr. Speaker, none of those initiatives, 

none of them, were undertaken without consideration of ensuring 

that in this province public services, basic needs, and public 

safety be preserved. 

 

Consultation, negotiation, and compromise have been the 

cornerstones of this government's agenda, unlike the practices of 

our neighbours to the east and the west of us who have adopted 

the practice of governance by, by and large, dictatorship and 

policies of slash and burn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the hollow, political rhetoric, dull rumblings, and 

misconstrued facts of opposition and third party, our province and 

our communities are moving forward. For example, our province 

enjoyed yet another year of growth in the retail sales area. And in 

my community, merchants tell me that as of January of 1994 sales 

for them are up by another percentile. 

 

Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, in this province is one of the third largest 

trading centres in Saskatchewan. In 1993 our city enjoyed one of 

the finest years in building projects in many years. And as they 

report to me today, we will exceed that again in this year's levels. 

 

Just to highlight the community's growth in 1993, we saw a new 

City Hall and RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) depot. 

We saw a new financial . . . two new financial institutions in the 

Royal Bank and the credit union -- probably one of the finest 

credit union buildings in the province in our community 

constructed this summer -- along with the beginnings of a $10 

million Superstore and a population in our city that has grown 

slightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we see increased housing starts, 

the second lowest unemployment rates in Canada, actively and 

certainly increasing revenue from our resource sector. Renewed 

confidence, Mr. Speaker, is what I see in Saskatchewan. And this 

is our government . . . And that's what our government talks about 

because that's what is happening out there. 

 

I say to my friends in opposition, join the team that's climbing the 

mountain. Start putting your energies to work to enhance and 

building a strong and prosperous Saskatchewan economy. Start 

making a contribution to further Saskatchewan's growth. The 

previous administration left us with lots of parasites. Lots of 

parasites. And Saskatchewan folks can't afford to carry you any 

longer. 

 

Just one idea I suggest, one positive initiative or contribution 

would sure be nice from that side of the House, certainly by now 

with 13 of you, or collectively. And I say that because there isn't 

much difference in my understanding in your politics as I see it. 

And as the Premier said it one day, of a chicken standing on the 

snow changing feet as the feet got cold; different feet, he says, but 

the same old chicken. No ideas and no tools. 

 

When we look in our backpacks we find a lot of ideas and we 

know that there's still lots to do. As we make 

our way to our goal, we know that we must provide a climate for 

job opportunities in this province, building on our Partnership for 

Renewal document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- And encouraging the development of economic 

development authorities. We know from history by just reading 

about the life in the early settlements in this province and the life 

of our grandparents as they pioneered this province, that only 

together they achieved greater success. So we must pool all of our 

resources and energies to enjoy the same successes as they did as 

they built this province. 

 

Jobs for the future. We know that in Saskatchewan we are rich in 

technological expertise. And at a time where our information 

highway calls for rich, high technology, our government will 

strive to provide those opportunities and skills, education and 

training and jobs, to meet the demand of the future in areas that, 

Mr. Speaker, we have some of the highest expertise and trained 

people in the world. 

 

Jobs through partnership with our aboriginal friends, like the 

development of the two uranium mining industries in northern 

Saskatchewan. And they're not short-term jobs, Mr. Speaker, but 

career employment opportunities that are achieved through the 

training and unemployment initiatives that have been established. 

 

Jobs through federal-provincial infrastructure programs which 

will not only enhance employment opportunities in communities 

across Saskatchewan but will greatly assist communities in 

refurbishing and retrofitting some major infrastructure projects 

that have been on their agendas for many, many months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our journey also includes the assurance that 

Saskatchewan people will be guaranteed quality of health. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. It now being 5 o'clock I do leave this 

chair until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


