




















































Hansard: May 10, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2169 

 May 10, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, in your west gallery, sir, I'd like to introduce 23 

grade 5 students from St. Mary's School, in the constituency of 

Regina Rosemont.  They're here today, accompanied by their 

teacher, Ms. Ferrara, and have five parents as chaperons.  It's a 

fairly interesting ratio.  I don't think they're that bad a group in 

need of that many chaperons.  However, I want to welcome all 

members and ask members here in the Assembly to welcome 

this group today. 

 

We'll be meeting at 2:20 for pictures in room 2l8, following 

that for discussions of today's proceedings in the Assembly.  So 

I'd ask all members to welcome St. Mary's School here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the member from Souris-Cannington, it's my pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce a school group from Alameda.  They're 

seated in your Speaker's gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are a group of grade 6 and 7 students from Alameda.  

Their teacher is Jeff Cameron and their bus driver is Donna 

Fraser. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll be meeting with these folks after question 

period this afternoon, and I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my honour on behalf of the 

Premier, the member from Riversdale, to introduce to you and 

through you to other members in the House, three persons in 

the west side of your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are with Script 

Services from Saskatoon.  They are Pat Thériault, Gary Martin, 

and Bev Lasuita. 

 

Their company does language training and translation for the 

public sector, as well as provincial and federal governments 

and for the universities.  The group today is doing French 

language training; they're from the Federal Development Bank. 

 

And I am looking forward to meeting with them later on after 

question period in the Speaker's boardroom.  Some of the work 

that they do in translation is not at all unlike the work that I 

used to do as a verbatim reporter, as a court reporter.  So I'm 

looking forward very much to our discussion and ask members 

of the Assembly to join me in welcoming our guests here 

today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me today to introduce to you and through you to 

the other members of the Assembly, two guests that are in your 

gallery today, sir. 

 

And we have with us two members of the State legislature for 

the State of North Dakota and I would ask them to stand when I 

introduce them.  We have Representative Frank Wald and 

Representative Rex Byerly, and these are both current, serving 

members of the State House, both Republicans, and here on a 

fact-finding mission with issues that are of mutual concern both 

to Canadians and our good friends to the south of us. 

 

And I might say, Mr. Speaker, that they also came here to 

apologize on behalf of Senator Conrad who made those awful 

remarks about the missile silos. 

 

We've had a nice visit with them today and I would ask all 

members of the House to please welcome our good friends 

from North Dakota. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Fourth Regional Economic Development Authority Formed 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On Friday I was 

pleased to be present at the announcement of Saskatchewan's 

fourth regional economic development authority.  The 

formation of the Northwest REDA was announced in Buffalo 

Narrows by the Minister of Economic Development and by its 

chairperson, Mike Blackmon. 

 

The members of the Northwest REDA include communities 

such as Beauval, Goodsoil, Green Lake, Buffalo Narrows, as 

well as several organizations such as the Freshwater Rural 

Development Corporation and the Northwest Tourist Group.  

We have a good mix of business, tourism, and local 

government among the founding members, covering a large 

area of north-west Saskatchewan.  It is my sincere hope that all 

communities and interested groups in the region will become 

involved in this very important development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the north-west region of Saskatchewan is a unique 

area with great economic potential in tourism, in natural 

resources, in commercial and sport fishing.  With the 

establishment of the Northwest REDA, we face the challenge 

of changing traditional patterns of shipping out our raw 

resources to southern points, and with them go the jobs that 

Northerners so badly need.  There is opportunity for us to begin 

finishing our products and keeping our jobs at home. 

 

As the REDA completes its organization and begins to develop, 

I look forward to more activity and 



2170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

opportunities for Northerners in their home communities.  

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

World Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday 

Canadians welcomed home the young men who won Canada its 

first World Hockey Championship in 33 years.  Not since 1961 

when the Trail Smoke Eaters captured gold, have Canadians 

done as well. 

 

Already this year, Canada has won four world curling 

championships as well as the women's, junior men's, and under 

17 world hockey championships.  Truly we are masters of 

winter sport. 

 

This year the World Hockey Championship was decided amid 

high drama.  Canada tied the game late in the third period, to 

force overtime and two shoot-outs before persevering to win. 

 

Of course no hockey success story is complete without a 

Saskatchewan connection.  Four of the players have our 

province to thank for their hockey upbringing.  Although not 

native to Saskatchewan, Geoff Sanderson and Joe Sakic played 

junior hockey with the Swift Current Broncos, while Rob 

Brind'amour was a product of the Notre Dame Hounds. 

 

But the young man who we can be most proud of is Kelly 

Buchberger.  Kelly is a native of Langenburg, in my 

constituency, and a former Moose Jaw Warrior.  A rugged 

defenceman, it is Kelly's style of play that helped Canada win 

eight straight games on its way to the gold medal.  In just seven 

years, Kelly has been part of two Stanley Cup winners and now 

a World Hockey Championship.  Not bad for a young man of 

27 years. 

 

Today I congratulate all the players from the championship 

team, but especially a fine hockey player, Kelly Buchberger.  I 

know that his family and the community of Langenburg and the 

entire constituency of Saltcoats are very proud.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Climax Farmers Helping Newfoundland Fishermen 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It pleases me to 

inform the Assembly about an example of the sharing nature of 

Saskatchewan farmers.  Twelve farmers in the Climax area 

have merged together to help their neighbours, the fishermen of 

Newfoundland. 

 

The twelve include:  Les Mything, Bryan Bennett, Lloyd 

Bakken, Richard Adelia, Don Stueck, Ross Gates, Bill Lowe, 

Maynard Rapley, Stan Peterson, Leo Coburn, Ken Cosgrove, 

and Charles Rapley. 

 

These outstanding farmers have agreed to donate 100 bushels 

of grain each, which by the time it makes its way to 

Newfoundland food banks will be in the form 

of flour. 

 

This consolidated effort began last January, when Gordon 

Stueck, who now lives in Leader, sent 500 pounds of pancake 

flour to Newfoundland.  Stueck decided to do this in support of 

the fishermen who had recently lost their right to fish for cod 

and help them in their time of crisis.  The shut-down of cod 

fishing in the Maritimes has meant real hardships for families 

that rely on their industry.  Stueck's donation made national 

news, and now many more have joined the effort. 

 

CSP Foods has agreed to grind 2,000 bushels of wheat into 

flour, bag it, and ship it to Winnipeg, all free of charge.  The 

1,200 bushels of grain from Climax has also been delivered to 

Saskatoon on its way to Newfoundland free of charge, by 

Bickner Trucking of Vanguard.  The grain being sent to 

Newfoundland from Climax will produce around 81,000 loaves 

of bread. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to recognize these outstanding farmers of 

Climax for their generous hearts and for showing the rest of 

Canada the true spirit of all Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Medical Research Council of Canada Grants 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  I have a good news/bad news 

announcement today.  The good news should be better; the bad 

stands to be corrected by a federal government ostensibly 

dedicated to correcting regional disparities. 

 

The good news is that in the fiscal year 1992-93, the Medical 

Research Council of Canada awarded $3.715 million to the 

Saskatchewan research establishment for medical research. 

 

The bad news is that this amount is only 1.5 per cent of the 

MRC's (Medical Research Council) total budget of more than 

$259 million, and that 1.5 per cent is down from 1.9 per cent 

two years before.  And this is despite the fact that 

Saskatchewan has 3.7 per cent of Canada's population and we 

pay 2.6 per cent of the total individual income tax received by 

Ottawa. 

 

What conclusions can we draw from this?  Does it mean we 

have no qualified medical researchers in Saskatchewan?  Tell 

that to Dr. Carol Haines who is pioneering survey research in 

breast cancer.  Or perhaps our outgoing Lieutenant Governor 

who did research on cobalt treatment for cancers, should be 

told that what she did in Saskatchewan wasn't worthy of 

recognition. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, we have the facilities and we have the 

experts.  What we haven't had in the past and what we don't 

seem to have at the moment is representation within the federal 

government that will speak up for Saskatchewan. That is the 

bad news. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

Aboriginal Business Magazine 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like to 

inform the House about a new magazine starting in Saskatoon 

called Aboriginal Business Magazine.  The concept for the 

magazine arose last year when Leighton Wensley and Brent 

Ballard, both of Saskatoon, posed the question:  how are 

aboriginal people investing their money? 

 

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that there are 3,000 viable 

aboriginal businesses in Canada.  Indian, Metis and Inuit 

people and organizations are very active in the Canadian 

economy and the role that they play is growing every day.  A 

lot of people don't realize that and I think the magazine will 

make Canadians better informed about that fact. 

 

The first issue will be out June 1 and it will deal mostly with 

Saskatchewan, including expected articles on ventures like 

Saskatoon's McKnight Commercial Centre and the Kitsaki 

Development Corporation, a very successful business operating 

out of La Ronge. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we should applaud the people behind 

this magazine who are going to keep us better informed and 

wish them luck in what is hopefully going to be a very long and 

successful venture. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Pipeline Explosion 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Environment.  Mr. Minister, for 

the second time this year, a major pipeline explosion has 

occurred in Saskatchewan.  Fortunately, no one was injured in 

this, but once again this raises some very serious concerns 

about the safety of various pipelines running throughout our 

province. 

 

Back in February when the first explosion occurred the Energy 

minister told us that this was a very rare occurrence and no 

reason for ongoing concern.  Now that a major explosion has 

occurred for a second time in three months, Mr. Minister, are 

you going to take this matter more seriously?  What steps are 

you taking to ensure that these pipelines are made safe and that 

no further explosions occur? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 

question.  I'd like to first point out that in this case, again this is 

not a TransGas pipeline; it's a pipeline that is owned in most 

part by Amoco, a private company.  There is no provincial 

jurisdiction over this or the Foothills pipeline; it comes under 

the purview of the National Energy Board. 

 

The Transportation Safety Board, which is a federal 

agency, is doing an investigation as we talk here today.  They 

will be making a report to the National Energy Board.  And if 

there's a problem with the integrity of the system, they'll 

undertake to take corrective action on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, although 

no one has been hurt in the two explosions to date this year, the 

potential exists for a major, life-threatening disaster.  Many of 

the pipelines which run through Saskatchewan pass very close 

to farms, to railways, highways, communities, and Indian 

reserves.  Because of this, Mr. Minister, there is a great 

potential for a major disaster. 

 

And the messages you've been receiving from people all over 

Saskatchewan should tell you that as well.  In fact, when we 

asked earlier about the Transportation Safety Board's report, 

warning of this very thing, the Minister of Economic 

Development simply told us this is a federal matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, even if this is a federal matter, this is 

Saskatchewan people that are at risk.  What are you going to 

do?  What are you going to do to ensure that these pipelines are 

safe and that no further explosions occur? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The member asks, what are we going to 

do.  There are a number of items open to us, but I again stress 

that if the pipeline's integrity was in question and we wanted to 

shut it down, we have no authority to do that.  And I want to 

make that very clear, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member from 

Kindersley. 

 

What I want to say in terms of what we're going to do is that 

I've had discussions with the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management this morning, and we are concerned 

about public safety in regard to having two pipeline incidents 

so close together; in a period of three months there have been 

two explosions in Saskatchewan. 

 

I have drafted a letter this morning under my signature -- it'll be 

reviewed by the department later this day -- for the chairman of 

the National Energy Board, Mr. Priddle.  And I'm asking Mr. 

Priddle to, upon the conclusion of the Transportation Safety 

Board's examination of the incident that happened at 2 a.m. this 

morning, to have a look at the integrity of the pipeline system 

in Saskatchewan, to give a level of comfort to Saskatchewan 

residents that they're not in danger.  If there is some danger, 

then I would insist that the National Energy Board take 

corrective action. 

 

The other thing that we're willing to do at SaskEnergy and 

TransGas is to provide an information workshop for all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, if you so wish.  If you 

want more information, we can tell you very clearly that 

TransGas, a Crown corporation, has one of the safest systems 

with the most integrity 



2172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

anywhere in North America, and we'd be more than willing 

upon your request to provide you with a full information 

package and presentation to opposition and government caucus 

members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, could 

you tell us what has been done about the explosion that 

occurred near Maple Creek earlier this year?  What follow-up 

has been done with regard to that explosion; what testing has 

been undertaken; what have you found out about the cause of 

that explosion?  And, Mr. Minister, what specific things are 

you doing besides writing letters with regard to these 

explosions so that future explosions can be prevented? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the pipeline explosion happened 

back on February 15.  We've met with Mr. Bob Reid, who was 

the president of Foothills Pipelines at that time.  The particular 

incident that happened with the Foothills pipeline is something 

that's very complex and hard to explain in the short time that's 

here before us at question period, but we can get into that at the 

presentation that we're willing to provide to MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly). 

 

The actual cause that was identified is something called 

hydrogen-induced cracking, and it's some very unique 

conditions that have to take place for that to occur.  In this case 

that did occur and there was an explosion on that particular 

pipeline. 

 

What the member opposite is suggesting I think, unless he's 

trying to make political hay, Mr. Speaker, is in fact we shut 

down the entire pipeline system in the province. And that's not 

acceptable to us.  We are concerned about the explosion that 

happened -- two of them in the past three months -- and we're 

looking at that very carefully.  And if there's action required, 

we will in fact take that action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  For many days my colleague from 

Souris-Cannington has been asking you questions regarding 

no-fault insurance, and your answers have shown your 

complete lack of knowledge regarding this very important and 

ill-advised initiative. 

 

Mr. Minister, this problem appears to be widespread.  Last 

week's edition of both newspapers in The Battlefords contained 

articles about a recent meeting you had with both local lawyers 

on no-fault insurance.  The News-Optimist says, quote: 

 

 Several lawyers who attended the meeting said the meeting 

was nothing more than a façade 

led more by SGI bureaucrats than Goulet himself. 

 

Local lawyer Micheal Hudec said: 

 

 The minister didn't have much to say.  The people he had 

with him did most of the talking. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is painfully evident that you don't have a 

handle on this issue and you are being led around by the hand.  

Mr. Minister, if not you, who is in charge at SGI?  Can you tell 

us that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 

member completely lacks any knowledge.  These members 

from across for the past two weeks have been there raising 

absolutely nothing except process questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have absolutely no concern for the fact that 

the seniors have the best benefits from any insurance scheme in 

Canada.  There is the best in regards to home-makers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

These people from across do not want to debate that -- they just 

read out from prepared text every time they stand up.  I think 

that they're the ones who have absolutely no understanding of 

the Bill. 

 

There was also youth in regards to youth benefits.  You have 

not raised one question about youth.  You are the people who 

lack absolute knowledge in regards to this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it's clear that you're not in 

charge otherwise this widespread consultation program that 

you've embarked on would be reality instead of fiction.  The 

Battleford Telegraph said that, quote: 

 

 Local lawyer Harvey Walker boycotted the meeting because 

he described it as completely reprehensible (Mr. Minister), a 

farce intended to make it seem as though Goulet is consulting 

with legal professionals. 

 

Walker goes on to say that: 

 

 If they did any consulting it was with three or four select 

lawyers.  Some half-serious conversations over a cup of 

coffee does not translate into widespread consultation. 

 

That's what he said.  And Mr. Harvey Walker is a long-time, 

respected legal counsel in the town of North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the face of this very real and very widespread 

concern, will you take the responsibility to delay the passage of 

the Bill until you have consulted reasonably and considerably 

with the people of the province of Saskatchewan?  Will you do 

that for us, please? 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, both the Liberals and the 

Conservatives will want to have a 24 per cent increase in 

regards to insurance rates in this province.  They have 

absolutely no care at all for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They will want 8 per cent increase every year.  

This is the position of the Liberals and this is the position of the 

Tories.  They're the same in that regard. 

 

There is no concern for the people of this province in that 

regard.  They're also having no concern on the seniors, the 

home-makers.  Ninety per cent of the people who are 

employed, the self-employed, absolutely no care at all.  All 

they worry about is saying this and that about the process.  

Absolutely nothing of substance. 

 

Quit reading your reports and say something special in regards 

to the issue of no-fault in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, this whole process is becoming 

a sham.  It's nothing but an it's-not-my-fault insurance program 

that you're putting out. 

 

Before the meeting in North Battleford, the media asked you if 

they would be allowed in.  You told them that you had no 

objections and that you would ask the lawyers if they had any, 

and they did not; the media would be allowed in.  Moments 

after the meeting started, a member of your staff told the media 

that they would not be allowed in. 

 

Yet one of the lawyers present at that meeting said, and I quote: 

 

 At no time did Mr. Goulet ask if the media would be present, 

or could be present.  That's a lie and it's just typical of how 

the government has handled this entire no-fault insurance 

thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, now it appears that you are going to drastic 

measures to cover up your incompetence.  Mr. Minister, why 

would you find it necessary to bar the media from the meeting 

they were invited to and then mislead them as to the reasons 

why they were barred?  Do you feel that is proper for a minister 

of the Crown to do that with your responsibilities to this 

Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member is 

misleading the Legislative Assembly.  I said, number one, I had 

a working meeting with the lawyers in North Battleford.  You 

cannot blame the lawyers or anybody for the decision that I 

make.  The decision was whether to include the press during 

the meeting or after the meeting.  I made the decision to include 

them after the meeting.  After the meeting they could contact 

any lawyer in that room, which they did.  And also they 

contacted me in regards to a 20- to 30-minute speech. 

 

Now when I looked at it I talked about the seniors' issue; I 

talked about the issue of the youth; 

home-makers.  It seems to me you're making the issue of 

whether or not the press coming in during the meeting or after 

the meeting is more important than the issues of the youth, the 

seniors, and everybody else in this province. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, he should be accurate, read the Bill and 

be accurate about exactly what happened in North Battleford 

before he stands up.  Quit reading from your prepared text and 

speak up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the Battleford 

Telegraph states, and I say . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I would like to ask the 

government members to please not interrupt when the 

member's on his feet and is trying to ask his question.  He has 

the right to ask that question and you should respect that right. 

 

Mr. Martens: --  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for SGI.  The headline in the Battleford Telegraph 

says, and I quote: Goulet lies to media. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think the member from . 

. . order.  I think the member from Morse knows full well that 

he can't do indirectly what he can't do directly; and simply by 

quoting someone else does not give you the right to use . . . or 

accuse a minister of misleading or lying to this House.  That 

simply is unacceptable; and I ask the member to withdraw from 

it.  Order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that line.  Mr. 

Minister, the Battleford News-Optimist says, and I quote: 

 

 Micheal Hudec said the number one feeling is that SGI is 

being dishonest and misleading about their advertising. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is clear the minister responsible, as you are, for 

SGI -- or supposedly are -- do not enjoy the confidence of the 

professionals nor the confidence of the public who are 

answering the questions.  Instead of dealing with the issue of 

no-fault insurance, you're talking about different kinds of areas 

than you really should be.  It is too important an issue, Mr. 

Minister, affecting thousands of Saskatchewan people, to have 

a person like you fumble the ball. 

 

Will you, Mr. Minister, provide to the people of the province 

an opportunity to openly discuss the issue of no-fault insurance 

across the province of Saskatchewan, leaving the door open for 

communications from the public to give you the answers that 

they want to have and not what you want to tell them to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I think those members 

should quit hiding behind prepared text and 



2174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

learn to speak from their feelings and from their knowledge.  I 

think that those members are scared to talk about the fact that 

they are asking for a 24 per cent increase for the people of the 

province; that 24 per cent increase which is backed up by both 

the Conservatives and the Liberals.  I think that's what they're 

scared to talk about.  All they're talking about is process issues. 

 

They also forget to talk about the fact that the Canadian 

Physiotherapy Association, the Saskatchewan physiotherapists 

association support no-fault.  The insurance brokers support 

no-fault.  The Canadian Paraplegic Association supports 

no-fault.  The Lac La Ronge Indian Band supports no-fault.  

And their basic position is that a lot of poor people are left out 

in this system right now.  And I think that's the way that they 

want to see it.  They say that this no-fault system is the best for 

the province of Saskatchewan.  You are back in the Dark Ages 

on your 24 per cent increase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Gaming 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

afternoon is for the Minister of Gaming. 

 

Mr. Minister, on December 11, 1991 I asked the hon. member 

from Saskatoon Fairview, the first in a long line of subsequent 

NDP (New Democratic Party) Gaming ministers, to explain, 

and I will give you my direct quote: 

 

 What the overall plan is concerning gaming before any 

changes are made or any new concepts introduced. 

 

The then minister said, and I quote him directly: 

 

 I agree that this policy seems to have drifted along without 

any firm direction and without any concept of where we want 

to go with this kind of gambling activity. 

 

Mr. Minister, I've been waiting now, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have been as well, for some two and a half years 

for an answer to my initial question. 

 

I ask you today: will you put a halt to further gaming expansion 

until you can produce your plan, complete with supporting 

research for your decisions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, let me say 

to the member from Greystone that I find her confusing.  One 

day she supports the expansion of gaming, urging us, as I've 

said before in this House, to hurry up and introduce the VLT 

(video lottery terminal) program because we're losing 50, $60 

million in revenue.  The next day she's saying, slow down 

because you're going too fast. 

 

Now I say to the member from Greystone, you can't ride both 

horses.  I ask you if you support jobs for aboriginal people, if 

you support the Market Mall 

study that was done that indicated that we'll create hundreds of 

new jobs in Regina.  Do you support those jobs?  I ask if you 

support the $25 million of investment that will happen to create 

jobs in construction in this province.  Do you support that? 

 

With respect to our policy, I say to the member from Greystone 

that our position and our implementation policy is clear, as it 

was with the video lottery terminal program.  We have, and we 

continue to believe in, controlled expansion of gaming, which 

is why we introduced the video lottery terminal program at 50 

per cent of market saturation. 

 

And I want to say, with respect to that particular program, we 

haven't had a glitch since it started running.  The central 

computer system is working well, the hospitality industry is 

comfortable with it, and I think the member from Greystone 

should put her case forward.  Do you oppose that video lottery 

terminal program? Do you oppose the investment of some $50 

million in this province in the casino expansion or don't you?  

Which side are you on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you simply don't seem to 

understand that question period is for you to put forward your 

answers to the people's questions. 

 

There is a growing level of discomfort with your very 

haphazard approach to gambling in Saskatchewan.  Even the 

people who do not oppose gambling very much object to the 

lack of comprehensive planning that is evident in your 

approach.  On Friday you indicated, as you did today, that 

some of the research you're relying upon for the Regina casino 

expansion was done by Peat Marwick.  You just mentioned it 

to me right now. 

 

Mr. Minister, the title of this study paper is, "Casino 

development in Regina:  building a case for a downtown 

location."  Now the study is overwhelming with the benefits of 

a downtown casino, but not one word on the negative costs.  

Now do you consider this to be objective research, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say to the member opposite 

that you can find studies on both sides of the issues.  There are 

people who are opposed to gaming and who are not proponents 

of gaming, who will give their background and give their 

analysis of the issue.  And we have looked and analysed studies 

from both sides. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite, one of the reasons 

that we embarked on the expansion of casinos in a measured 

way, as we have done, with only two locations, regulated and 

controlled by the Liquor and Gaming Authority, is because one 

of the reports clearly indicates that the expansion should be 

controlled and regulated.  And we're doing that.  And I think 

that's reasonable policy. 

 

Now I want to say to the member from Greystone that we were 

one of the first jurisdictions who acted, and in 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

advance, with respect to the minister's advisory board on the 

social impact of gaming.  They have made a number of 

recommendations to us, many of which we have introduced.  

They've asked us for an awareness program; we're developing 

that, it's ongoing. 

 

So I say to the member from Greystone, we have a policy and 

it's quite clearly articulated.  We have a policy with respect to 

video lottery terminals; that too is quite clearly articulated.  

And if you can't understand what the policy is and what the 

program is, and if you can't understand the fact that we've got a 

minister's advisory committee making recommendations 

ongoing to this government, then I'm sorry, ma'am, I can't help 

you to understand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Just take a moment, Mr. Minister, and talk 

about how you've relayed and articulated your policy to your 

own caucus members.  On May 5, 1992, the NDP caucus was 

provided with this document, consisting of questions that 

members might be asked about gaming.  They were alerted to 

the concerns of the public which included an increase in 

prostitution; in crime; incidents of addiction; concerns about an 

increase in alcohol consumption and access to VLTs by minors. 

 

The document also provides suggested answers which 

completely ignore the concerns of the public and proposes this 

response from members of this NDP government.  Quote: 

VLTs will provide the site-operators and the province with a 

much-needed source of revenue. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is obvious that your members have been 

instructed to ignore the public's concerns; that your government 

has abandoned its real responsibilities on this issue.  Mr. 

Minister, will you impose a moratorium on further gaming 

expansion until you can prove to the people of Saskatchewan 

that you've actually done your homework? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Greystone that yes, we have communicated with 

members of our caucus to be aware of issues that may be raised 

-- some of them based on fact, some of them based on none.  

But I want to say what has become very clear here today, Mr. 

Speaker, is that this member, this member from Greystone, the 

Leader of the Liberal Party who promised the people of 

Saskatchewan that she was going to bring a new form of 

politics, a new standard of ethics, drags information from a 

former member of this caucus into this legislature that was 

given to him as a member of this caucus and this is what she 

displays as the new ethics. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this is low, gutter politics and it's not unlike 

what Liberals are known for all over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Interprovincial Trade 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, your 

colleague the Deputy Premier is currently at a conference on 

interprovincial trade. 

 

As you know, the opposition supports free trade and the 

elimination of interprovincial trade barriers.  We are having a 

hard time understanding your government's desire to keep these 

trade barriers intact.  I understand that one point of contention 

is your government's continued support for restrictions on 

foreign ownership of land. 

 

I was wondering if you could clarify your position for us, Mr. 

Minister.  Just who are you talking about when you refer to 

foreign ownership?  Do you consider Canadian citizens who 

live in other provinces to be foreigners? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the deputy leader is 

attending a meeting in Winnipeg at the present time, dealing 

with provincial barriers and the removal of provincial barriers. 

 

So the member understands the position of the Saskatchewan 

government; we are working diligently with the other 

provincial premiers to remove barriers.  And I want to make it 

clear as well that there are areas where we believe we will not 

have the restrictions removed by the 30th deadline. 

 

These are restrictions that you had in place while you were in 

government, as well as this government, and they are there.  

And they're part of the economic development strategy that was 

there when you were in government; they're there now. 

 

What we're saying is that there is no way in the world that all of 

the restrictions can be removed by a June 30 deadline.  But we 

are confident that if everyone is patient, that we can come to 

some sort of an agreement by the date of June 30 whereby most 

of the barriers, significant barriers between provinces, can be 

removed. 

 

Whether or not that decision has been reached at the meeting in 

Winnipeg, I don't know.  I'm not even sure that they're 

concluded their consultation and deliberations.  But we are 

hopeful and optimistic that if there is consideration given to 

provincial needs and aspirations, that a deal can be reached by 

the June 30 deadline. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the question I asked you 

-- and I believe we are all Canadians here or we're not.  Your 

Premier, the member that was part of the constitutional process 

a short time ago in our history, believed that we should all be 

Canadians -- what I asked you was: do you support the 

dropping of barriers on the ownership of farm land for other 

Canadians? 

 

Our caucus supports it 100 per cent.  We moved the restriction 

from a quarter section to a half section.  We 



2176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

believe it's right now in our history to move up to unrestricted 

ownership of our farm resource by other Canadians. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you support that stand and will you pass that 

on to your minister, your Deputy Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well look, if the member wants to 

give his head a shake, he'll realize how convoluted his logic is.  

You had foreign ownership legislation on the books when you 

left government unceremoniously in 1991.  You had it in place.  

And you made amendments to it and you left it in place.  And 

it's there. 

 

What we're saying is there will be no changes to that legislation 

which you had in place, amended while you were in 

government, before the June 30 deadline.  So that isn't going to 

be done. 

 

What we're saying, in the negotiations that are ongoing, it's 

unusually naïve to believe that every barrier can be removed -- 

whether that's the monopoly of Crown corporations, the 

affirmative action in northern Saskatchewan, or your farm land 

security Bill which you amended and had in government for 

nine years -- that's what I'm saying.  So for you to say that 

you're absolutely opposed to any restriction on foreign 

ownership as it would relate to other Canadians, that's a phoney 

argument because you kept it in place for nine years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

and to enact a Consequential Amendment to The Forest 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Natural Resources Act and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment to The Forest Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act respecting the Superannuation of 

Teachers and Disability Benefits for Teachers 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a 

Bill respecting the Superannuation of Teachers and Disability 

Benefits for Teachers be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move that a Bill to amend The Crown 

Corporations Act, 1993 be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 86 -- Government's Gambling Strategy 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

finally have the opportunity to engage in some serious debate 

about the issue of the government's gambling strategy.  And I 

find it interesting that the NDP has chosen to make gambling 

the mainstay of its economic development policy without really 

having a comprehensive understanding of the industry itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many elements involved in the current 

gaming industry in Saskatchewan.  The first legalized gambling 

in the province was horse-racing.  And free from competition 

from other gambling forms, the industry grew and flourished in 

the 1960s and in the early 1970s. 

 

At its peak, the horse-racing industry employed thousands and 

generated hundreds of millions of dollars in economic 

spin-offs.  The racing industry was the foundation of legalized 

gambling in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With each government that is elected, renewed promises are 

made to the participants in the racing industry -- promises that 

the industry will not die, that government after government will 

see to it that horse-racing lives on. 

 

It is interesting to note that rarely is anything actually done to 

support those claims, but politicians continue to show up to the 

annual Saskatchewan derby and other prestigious events in 

racing to make the same claims and then they disappear. 

 

(1415) 

 

In the early 1990s the previous administration spent 

considerable time and considerable money studying the 

industry and decided to expand the industry through teletheatre 

betting terminals across the province.  This meant that 

communities such as Prince Albert, Melfort, Yorkton, Melville, 

Estevan, Swift Current, and Moose Jaw, just to name a few, 

were able to place bets at their local pari-mutuel theatre and 

watch the races on satellite television direct from the post track. 

 

For a while the extra revenue became the lifeblood of racing, 

but lately new competition from video lottery terminals has 

sounded the death-knell for racing once again. 

 

You know the minister has talked a good line with a lot 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

of groups, but they are realizing all too quickly that the 

government strategy was to tell them what they wanted to hear, 

just to minimize opposition to its plans. 

 

And here is an example of the kind of thing told to the 

horse-racing industry. And I quote from the minister's letter of 

October 15, 1993, and this is a direct quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Since being sworn in as the minister responsible for 

horse-racing on March 17, many horsemen have told me their 

concerns about the future of racing in this province.  I'm 

writing to you today to assure you that I both know and 

understand the importance of this agri-based industry and its 

benefits to the Saskatchewan economy.  Further, I want you 

to know that the Saskatchewan government is committed to 

its renewal. 

 

The minister ends his letter by saying: 

 

 I encourage you to develop your breeding program, to select 

your racing stock, and count on employment plans with the 

confidence that horse-racing in Saskatchewan is about to 

realize its true potential through renewal. 

 

Interesting.  Especially that a member of the Prairieland 

Exhibition management recently told the minister that 

horse-racing might have to be sacrificed, depending on the 

government's casino expansion plans.  And the minister in 

charge of Gaming this very day reportedly replied, and I quote: 

 

 Well you are in charge.  You'll have to do whatever you have 

to do. 

 

That hardly sounds like a strong commitment to the 

horse-racing industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a society which began with horse-racing 

gradually progressed to other forms of betting.  As public 

acceptance of gambling grew, other forms of competition 

sprang up around the province and across the country.  

Government-sponsored lotteries caught on quickly, and the 

new revenue source provided funding for sports and cultural 

organizations who put the money to work, supporting an 

important volunteer infrastructure at the community level. 

 

Lotteries were initially a federal jurisdiction.  But the 

provincial governments knew a good thing when they saw it, 

and soon provincial revenue-sharing agreements led to the 

establishment of the Western Canada Lottery Corporation 

which oversees the operation of lotteries for the prairie 

provinces.  Sask Lotteries is the administrative arm of the 

Saskatchewan Lotteries, and Sask Sport oversees the sport and 

culture organizations funded through the proceeds. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that government has 

continually increased its share of revenues going 

into the general coffers over the past few years.  On a parallel 

level, bingo began to expand and move into the electronic age.  

From plastic markers and popcorn kernels on cardboard cards 

played in the local church basement for turkeys and hams, 

bingo moved into the realm of commercial enterprise regulated 

by governments.  Prizes sky-rocketed and profit operators . . . 

private operators took over the marketing and promotion of the 

game for a share of the profits. 

 

The first commercial bingo hall was introduced in 

Saskatchewan in 1981, and the first operators of that enterprise 

encouraged the government of the day to move quickly -- 

quickly -- to implement stringent rules for the control of 

commercial operations. 

 

But government did not move quickly, and the development of 

stringent rules we are still waiting for; in fact they are still 

ongoing.  The guidelines developed by the previous 

Conservative administration were responsible for allowing 

abuses by many operators in the province of Saskatchewan -- 

abuses that went unpunished at the expense of many charitable 

organizations. 

 

The Conservative government, under tremendous pressure from 

charitable organizations to implement fair and understandable 

controls, finally called a provincial bingo inquiry to seek 

advice.  In spite of the many excellent suggestions put forward 

during that expensive inquiry, the government of the day 

summarily ignored it.  They knew, Mr. Speaker, that the 

industry was rife with problems and they chose to do virtually 

nothing about it. 

 

Not only did that mean that many charities were victimized by 

lack of control being exercised by the Gaming Commission, it 

meant that operators and community bingos who attempted to 

adhere to the guidelines without the enforcement support of the 

Gaming Commission were placed in an uncompetitive position 

and ended up being forced out of business. 

 

Today the business is controlled by very few operators.  And 

although the government has moved to increase the charity's 

share of the profits at the expense of the private operators, 

which is a very good thing, the government has doubled the 

percentage of revenue it collects in the name of a licensing fee. 

 

The end result is that commercial bingo operations have 

remained under licence by the provincial government.  And 

current policy does not reflect any intention on the part of this 

administration to change that situation.  Another result is that 

the level of gambling on bingo in Saskatchewan has increased 

dramatically since the advent of the first commercial bingo hall 

in 1982 and the introduction of the current system of play on 

disposable paper cards. 

 

When electronic bingo, as it was known then, was first 

introduced in 1981, the per-player spending at any given bingo 

event was in the range of $8 to $10.  The faster-paced games, 

higher prizes, and more expensive prices encourage not only 

more players to 



2178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

participate but had people digging into their wallets for $30 per 

person per night within the very first year. 

 

The introduction of break-open tickets, growing jackpots, and 

larger mega-bingos served to steadily increase the amount that 

people were willing to spend on a game.  At the time, although 

some concerns were raised by church groups and other 

organizations morally opposed to gambling, government saw 

the licensing fees from bingo as a windfall for their revenues. 

 

And local charities were earning more money than ever before, 

in spite of the fact that a disproportionate share was often 

ending up in the hands of the commercial bingo hall owners 

due to the lack of enforcement of the rules. 

 

In 1981 in Regina, for instance, there were approximately 

seven different charities running bingos every month.  By 1986 

there were more than 100 charities earning revenue from bingo, 

thousands licensed throughout the province.  At no time did the 

government undertake to measure the impact of increased 

gambling on the economy, but addiction began to surface as an 

identifiable problem within the industry during those early 

years and has continued to mount as gaming proliferates. 

 

Section 190 of the Criminal Code of Canada also allows for 

casino gambling to be supervised and licensed to agricultural 

fairs and exhibition boards, something which was only allowed 

during Exhibition Week in the early 1980s.  The government 

relaxed the rules on casino gaming as time went on, gradually 

licensing events at which there were animal judging events 

until the point where simply having a cow on the exhibition 

grounds constituted permission for a casino licence. 

 

In the 1990s, casinos have operated as standalone enterprises 

for the Regina and Saskatoon exhibition boards, and the 

number of dates per year has dramatically increased in satellite 

cities such as North Battleford, Prince Albert, Lloydminster, 

Moose Jaw, and Yorkton, with Swift Current holding casinos 

during special events. 

 

Break-open tickets increased in popularity, starting in the 

licensed premises of veterans' clubs and then moving into 

bingo halls.  In the mid-1980s, a deal was struck between the 

hotels association and the hospital foundations in Regina and 

Saskatoon, wherein the hospital -- pardon me, the hotels -- 

would sell the tickets for a small commission and the hospitals 

would apply the profits to purchase equipment and supplies. 

 

For the most part, the history of gambling in our province then 

has been one of charitable fund-raising. 

 

Very recently, with fiscal situations being what they are for 

governments not just in Saskatchewan and Canada but across 

North America, gambling has become increasingly appealing 

as a quick-fix solution for cash-strapped public administrations.  

Start-up 

costs are cheap, cash flow comes in fast, and what the heck, 

people are doing it anyway, so why shouldn't government 

profit? 

 

Therein, Mr. Speaker, lies the dilemma.  What we must attempt 

to determine is what is the role of government in the gambling 

business.  Well first off, I would like to say that government 

does have a role, that government must act, above all, as a 

regulator; that is not a job which can be left to outside forces 

for obvious reasons. 

 

But should government share directly in the profits?  Well 

traditionally the Saskatchewan government has been getting a 

pretty reasonable share of the profits through licence fees.  But 

lately there has been greater lures of coffers overflowing from 

VLT revenues and profits from expanded casino gambling.  In 

other words, gambling has become an economic development 

strategy for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it matters little whether we are talking about 

developing energy options or expanding gambling 

opportunities.  In that context, the province has spent huge 

amounts of time and money trying to quantify the perceived 

risks and the benefits of the nuclear industry, for instance. 

 

And why have we done that?  Because the people want to have 

a level of comfort that elected representatives and business 

leaders have done their homework, have researched the positive 

and the negative consequences of policy actions, and have 

based their decisions on objective evaluation of the information 

at hand. 

 

I have applied consistent pressure since 1991 for the 

government to produce its gaming strategy, not because I was 

in a hurry to install anything.  In fact a review of Hansard, of 

every single thing that's been said in this House by me, whether 

it be in estimates or in question period or others, will indicate at 

no time did I ever tell the government to hurry up and do 

anything with VLTs.  But I did this: I raised the issue of the 

government producing its gaming strategy because it was 

obvious that the government was in a hurry to install VLTs. 

 

I have not questioned the government on its lack of 

consideration for the horse-racing industry because I had a 

share in a horse one time ago, but because my brief 

involvement with the industry and the many people that it 

employs gave me some understanding of the value and yes, the 

potential of the industry. 

 

I have no interest in trying to protect the bingo industry because 

one of my staff was involved five years ago.  I'm concerned 

that charitable revenues be protected from government 

competition, because I acknowledge the tremendous challenge 

it is for non-profit agencies to raise money to do the wonderful 

work that they do do in communities from one end of 

Saskatchewan to the other. 

 

Furthermore, for the record, the viewpoint held by the 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2179 

present executive director of the Liberal Party on whether or 

not to pursue a casino in Moose Jaw five years ago should 

hardly preclude me or him from asking this government to 

produce evidence that its actions are based on sound research 

and strategic planning. 

 

No matter how many red herrings the government chooses to 

hold out in question period, the fact remains that there is no 

specific strategic plan.  Somehow it has never occurred to this 

government that I was pressuring them to produce a gaming 

strategy because it was the sensible way to approach the 

decision-making process. 

 

Since the government members are forever curious about my 

position on gaming, let me say this for the record: there are 

many people in the Liberal Party who support gaming; there 

are many people in the Liberal Party who are opposed to 

gaming; there are Liberals who have wanted to pursue casinos 

in Moose Jaw; and Liberals who have spoken out against the 

damage that gambling can do to our society.  The thing which 

gives me most pride in the Liberal Party is that we can sit down 

and objectively examine this issue, free from foregone policy 

conclusions. 

 

Something which all Liberals agree upon is that there is 

gambling in Saskatchewan, and that it is likely to stay.  

Therefore, the focus of the discussions about gambling in the 

Liberal Party is centred on how to measure the actual benefits 

and the actual detriments that can accrue from further gambling 

expansion, and what role government should play in the 

gambling industry. 

 

As I mentioned, there seems to be some confusion in the 

government ranks about my approach to and position on 

gambling, which is fairly obvious that they're trying to ensure 

they don't have any clarification on this afternoon, by their 

attempts not to listen. 

 

So I am very pleased to have this opportunity to walk the 

government members down memory lane from the start of the 

legislature, just to remind them how difficult it has been to get 

any sensible answers from the four different ministers 

responsible for Gaming since the NDP came to power in 1991. 

 

(1430) 

 

Let's see.  I think it all started back in December of 1991.  I 

questioned the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview, who 

was then minister of Gaming.  My opening statement was, and 

I quote from Hansard: 

 

 (Mr. Minister) You made comments recently concerning 

computerized slot machines being allowed in Saskatchewan.  

The whole gaming industry in our province from bingos to 

casinos and horse racing and lotteries should be re-evaluated.  

And there's tremendous potential within these industries.  

And at the same time, due largely to the lack of planning by 

the previous government, there are (many) 

problems. 

 

 Will you please tell us, Mr. Minister, what the overall plan is 

concerning gaming in Saskatchewan before any changes are 

made or any new concepts are . . . introduced. 

 

Now I remind the members that this was the question I asked in 

December of 1991.  That was two and a half years ago, Mr. 

Speaker.  At the time the then minister of Gaming replied, and I 

quote: 

 

I agree very strongly with certain parts of the preamble to the 

member's question, particularly that this policy or the policy in 

this area seems to have drifted along without any overall 

concept of where we want to go with this kind of gambling 

activity. 

 

That was the answer in 1991.  There was no policy at the time 

that gave firm direction or overall concept of where the 

government wanted to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Fair enough.  Their government had just been elected and 

understandably they needed time to put things in order.  I was 

quite accepting of that at the time.  They certainly didn't hear 

me saying, build a new casino or let's plug in those VLTs 

without a moment's hesitation. 

 

What I did say, and I refer again to page 219 of Hansard on 

December 11, 1991, and I quote: 

 

 (But) although governments have allowed gambling, they 

have never dealt with it from the standpoint of economic 

potential.  And there is tremendous potential for an overall 

plan which could connect tourism and non-profit agencies 

and I believe would generate employment as well. 

 

So the members opposite will see clearly from that statement 

that I was anxious for the government to develop a plan that 

examined the potential.  I also asked the minister to re-examine 

the findings of the public inquiry on bingo but never received 

any indication that he had done so. 

 

There were opportunities very early, very early on, for the NDP 

government to sit down with the industry participants and bring 

all the variables to the table.  But the sad fact of the matter is, 

the government got a sniff of the potential government 

revenues and the spirit of planning and cooperation was 

replaced by greed -- greed to get the cash before the charities 

did. 

 

Still in December of 1991, I asked the minister of Agriculture, 

who was responsible for horse-racing, if he would outline his 

plan for the horse-racing industry with respect to where video 

lottery terminals would be placed because of the competition 

threat they posed to horse-racing.  I don't claim to have special 

anticipatory powers, Mr. Speaker, but it seemed obvious to 

everyone but the minister at the time that video lottery 

terminals would not have a positive impact on horse-racing. 



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

Now let's fast-forward to 1994 for a moment.  Three years have 

passed and the newest minister of Gaming still hasn't bothered 

to figure out the impact of video lottery terminals on the 

horse-racing industry either.  One day he announces that there 

will be "no video lottery terminals at the racetracks."  Less than 

a month later he's back in the news saying that there will be 

video lottery terminals at the racetracks.  But that's okay 

because people need to come out to bet on the horses and . . . 

well, the logic was extremely hard to follow and quite honestly 

most people simply gave up at that point. 

 

The point is that all the right questions were asked in 1991, the 

right questions were asked in 1992.  I questioned the 

government about horse-racing, about bingo, about decreased 

Nevada ticket sales by hospital foundations, about the need to 

resolve the native casino gaming issue.  But not one minister, 

Mr. Speaker, not one had the common sense or the respect for 

the magnitude of this issue to provide a detailed, 

comprehensive plan for a gaming industry. 

 

Now was that too much to be asking for?  I wonder.  I wonder 

when all of them sit in caucus meetings, doesn't anyone ask the 

Premier, doesn't anyone ask the cabinet, why don't we have an 

intelligent plan for gaming? 

 

You know the public can't understand that either, how 53 

intelligent people can't even come up with a plan on gambling.  

The people figure that if they can't do that, Mr. Speaker, it isn't 

surprising that the economic development strategy for the 

province has fallen flat on its face. 

 

Now let's go back to gambling.  My motion today is to urge the 

government to do a couple of very simple things.  First of all, 

and I implore with a please, can we see the detailed plan that 

they are following to coordinate all the component parts of 

gambling.  Show us that you've brought all of the participants 

of the industry together; bring them together at a conference or 

a series of meetings, all of them at the same time, to achieve 

some consensus on what their expectations are for the long 

term as far as government control, regulation, and involvement 

in gambling.  That is step number one. 

 

If they've done it, which they have not done, the evidence 

should be easy to produce.  There must be minutes of all of 

these meetings where people have gathered, each and every 

part of the gaming industry.  There must be recommendations 

of the task force.  There must be something.  But there has been 

nothing produced to be brought forward in this House. 

 

Step two is also a simple step.  As we have asked on numerous 

occasions, as recently as last week, show us and show the 

people of Saskatchewan all of the research the government has 

commissioned, and in particular, the definitive, objective study 

being used to guide the decision-making process. 

 

Now let's face it, no self-respecting government would make a 

decision to plunge headlong into the 

gambling business without fairly assessing both the positive 

and the negative aspects of casino gambling.  Or would they?  

To this point, we have unearthed a few pieces of research in 

spite of being denied full access to the Bill Eadington report 

referred to by the minister on June 1, 1993. 

 

In that report the minister indicates that Eadington's research 

suggests that Saskatchewanians are not gambling to their 

potential.  I quote Hansard from June 1, 1993, Mr. Speaker: 

The present per capita gaming of Saskatchewan residents is 

$150.  The potential will increase as other forms of gaming are 

introduced and that, as the industry matures, "there's  potential 

for $500 per capita."  End of quote. 

 

Wow!  Five hundred dollars per capita for every man, woman, 

and child in the province.  That works out to $250 million a 

year.  That sounds like a lot of money.  It sounds like a lot of 

money, Mr. Speaker.  In fact to quote the minister on June 1 of 

1993, and I directly quote: 

 

 Now how that might break down and if we can reach 500 or 

if we can reach 300, I just don't know.  I guess we can 

speculate, but it would be nothing better than an educated 

guess. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that sure makes me feel secure.  The 

minister in charge of gambling expansion using words like 

"guess" and "speculate."  I wonder if he had never thought of 

doing actual research to examine the demographics of 

Saskatchewan, to determine what impact $500 annual spending 

by both adults would have on a family that lives on welfare. 

 

The minister, having already undertaken to install VLTs in 

Saskatchewan at that point, gave us his educated guess.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, he was definitely not on the mark.  In the first 

year of operation, almost a billion dollars in loonies will be bet 

through VLT machines.  If you just count the actual cash from 

which the government keeps 15 per cent, total amount plugged 

into VLT machines alone is, according to the February 19 

Leader-Post, $1.014 billion.  So much for the lucky guess of 

the minister in charge.  If he guessed this badly once, how 

many other things did he guess wrong about? 

 

It is obvious that the minister has no intention of revealing the 

bases for his decisions.  Because, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, I 

think he would be laughed right out of the province.  People in 

Saskatchewan are not naïve.  There isn't a person in this 

province who believes that the government can suck $700,000 

per year out of towns the size of Melfort and Assiniboia 

without having those communities pay a price somewhere 

down the line. 

 

And small towns and small cities are really a microcosm of 

what goes on in our larger cities -- cities like Saskatoon and 

Regina.  It isn't hard to imagine what will happen to the 

economy of a Melfort if $700,000 leaves the community this 

year.  I can't quantify the effects exactly, but I do know that a 

great deal of that money would have been spent in local 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

restaurants, in bars, in movie theatres, in retail outlets, if there 

were no VLTs to plug into.  Certainly some of it would have 

found its way to Las Vegas, but most of it wouldn't have been 

gambled at all. 

 

So why didn't the government take the time to figure this out?  

What possible explanations could there be for not wanting to 

figure this out?  Well we could assume that they had no way to 

calculate the effect this would have on a community.  I doubt 

that is true; economists can measure anything. 

 

And that isn't a complicated equation.  Establish the annual 

income of the community, extract $700,000, and figure out 

which sectors that it's likely to come from.   Recalculate the 

bottom line of those businesses with $700,000 missing in their 

collective sales, and you'll get a fairly accurate picture. 

 

The other possible explanation is that they knew how to figure 

it out, Mr. Speaker, but they didn't really want to know the 

truth, or at least they didn't want other people to know the truth.  

And I find that to be a far more plausible explanation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that far too many governments have 

moved to expand gambling for all of the wrong reasons.  In 

many jurisdictions gambling has become a last-ditch salvation 

for administrations bankrupt of other economic development 

ideas. 

 

Therefore the Liberal Party would like to see the government 

undertake objective research which examines all of the 

economic and social implications of expanded gaming 

opportunities before moving into any new projects.  The 

Liberals call on the minister to immediately invoke a 

moratorium on all further gaming expansion for a period of 18 

months. 

 

As of today the exhibition boards have expanded casino 

gambling and there are almost 4,000 VLTs operating across our 

province of Saskatchewan.  Charitable organizations are 

beginning to feel the pinch in their bingos and break-open 

ticket sales.  Horse-racing will suffer ill-effects from the 

competition and we have no concept of the impact on local 

economies. 

 

So far the only reasonable argument put forward by 

government for having to rush into building two $40 million 

casinos has been to create aboriginal employment.  If the 

government is serious, why not encourage the exhibition boards 

to increase the number of aboriginal people working in the 

existing casinos while we take the time -- the government takes 

the time -- to measure the possible impact on our society and 

the overall economy because of their expansion of gaming. 

 

And if the government is so concerned about aboriginal 

employment, why not dip into the VLT profits to create some 

sustainable jobs for first nations people?  Jobs that will not 

contribute to the equal decay of their society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is so easy to build the politically correct 

argument for expanded casino gambling.  After all, who's 

against entertainment?  Who's against jobs and aboriginal 

employment?  But in fairness to the people of Saskatchewan, 

let's ask the whole question, complete with empirical evidence 

on the other side of the issue.  Let's ask: who wants to 

encourage an industry which is known to increase crime, erode 

the profits of charitable organizations, feed addictive 

behaviours, cut into the revenues of other entertainment 

businesses, and possibly have an overall negative effect on our 

economy? 

 

I am vehemently opposed to government taking a position of 

pro-gambling or anti-gambling.  The leadership role of elected 

representatives should be to insure that all aspects of the issue 

are objectively examined, that expert advice is sought, and that 

the facts -- all of the facts and nothing but the facts -- are 

presented to the Saskatchewan people in order that society can 

reach a decision as to what is in its best interest. 

 

If the government believes so strongly in its gamble for 

economic development, why are they unwilling to hold up the 

concept to the scrutiny it deserves?  Mr. Speaker, this 

government is not the only one that is guilty of trying to pass a 

sow's ear as a silk purse. 

 

(1445) 

 

I recently drew the attention of the Assembly to a study done 

by Professor Robert Goodman.  This comprehensive, 222-page 

study was paid for by the Ford Foundation and the Aspen 

Institute.  The Ford Foundation typically funds studies on 

economic development and the Aspen foundation typically 

focuses on studying issues of broader social implications.  One 

could argue successfully that neither of these institutes has any 

interest in promoting or discouraging gambling. 

 

Dr. Goodman concentrated his research on the information 

relied upon by governments to reach decisions about the 

expansion of gambling . . . of increased casino gambling. 

 

Goodman says, and I quote: 

 

 The report does not recommend either for or against legalized 

gambling.  Rather, it describes consequences of the ways in 

which community leaders, the media, and the public are 

learning and making decisions about legalization. 

 

In compiling his research, Goodman interviewed over 50 public 

officials, business and media people.  In addition, working 

meetings were conducted with government officials.  They 

exchanged information with researchers and reviewed local as 

well as national studies. 

 

There are some very interesting conclusions drawn by 

Goodman.  But after analysing 14 different studies relied upon 

by governments to make decisions about whether to proceed 

with casino gambling expansion, I quote: 



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

 Claims of economic benefits were exaggerated while costs 

were understated.  Most could not be considered objective 

descriptions of the economic benefits and costs.  Ten of 

the reports were either unbalanced or mostly unbalanced. 

 

That's 10 out of 14, Mr. Speaker.  That's astonishing. 

 

I believe that we must give this conclusion some serious 

thought.  If governments are making decisions based on 

incomplete or missing or misleading information, it is 

incumbent upon us as an Assembly to ensure that this does not 

happen in Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm distressed by the political defensiveness exhibited by the 

minister of Gaming, when presented with simple questions 

about the impact of expanded casinos and video lotteries.  

Obviously if the government had done objective homework, 

they would simply furnish the evidence.  They would give us 

the evidence of the quality research that had been done, draw 

and substantiate their conclusions, and move on.  The fact that 

there has been no attempt made to provide substantive 

argument for their policy decision on gaming is indeed cause 

for alarm. 

 

I want to make it crystal clear to this Assembly that while I 

believed in 1991 that there was great potential in the gaming 

industry, I clearly understand the difference between 

methodological exploring and evaluating the potential and 

stumbling blindly along the way this government is doing. 

 

Mr. Goodman asked all the right questions about gambling.  He 

did not avoid the tough questions because he was not afraid of 

the answers.  Goodman says, and I quote: 

 

 Governments should avoid the consequences of becoming 

financially dependent on gambling ventures.  When revenues 

from gambling do not meet goals, important public programs 

can be jeopardized.  To avoid these consequences, 

governments should consider alternative sources of funding 

public programs. 

 

I wonder whether the government is obsessed with gaming 

revenue because of its inability to generate identifiable 

economic development, or whether they simply do not care 

about the negative impact that this is almost certain to have on 

our society in the long run. 

 

Goodman also articulates what I have been trying to convey to 

this particular government.  He says, and I quote: 

 

 In contemplating legalization, communities need to make 

more use of objective and accurate information about 

probable economic and social impacts.  They should avoid 

reliance on forecasts and studies provided by researchers and 

consultants who work either for the gambling industry or for 

pro-gambling constituencies. 

 

I cannot see why this is so difficult for the government 

members and the minister in charge to grasp. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have received a long list of complaints from 

community organizations, from hoteliers, and from gambling 

addicts.  The evidence is overwhelming.  And there are many, 

many people in aboriginal communities who raise exactly the 

same kinds of concerns -- that this government has already 

become addicted to gambling revenues and is deaf to the 

concerns of people affected. 

 

Many hotel and bar owners claim to be noticing a marked 

decline in their liquor sales and hence their liquor profits now 

that VLTs have been operational for a few months in their 

establishments. 

 

I contend that a moratorium on further expansion would give 

the opportunity to the government to conduct an objective 

impact study on the hotel and restaurant industry.  I contend 

that it would provide an opportunity to determine the full 

effects, both social and economic, on Saskatchewan's 

communities, taking into account factors such an income levels 

and the demographics of those communities.  We would be 

interested in data on how much money is being spent in 

communities where there is a high concentration of welfare 

recipients, in monitoring the extended impact on their lives. 

 

I believe that the imposition of a moratorium would provide the 

government with the opportunity to conduct real consultation 

with charitable organizations who are beginning to feel the true 

impact of government competition for gambling dollars.  

Unless government is prepared to pick up the slack in funding 

where it competes with non-profit groups, then their gambling 

policy must address the issue of compensation to those charities 

when those charities' revenues are eroded by what is nothing 

less than government competition. 

 

The issue of job creation is often attached to casino gambling 

expansion.  I take issue with the projections provided in the 

reports being relied upon by the government.  Given Robert 

Goodman's contention that studies often exaggerate the jobs 

created and the economic benefits derived from casinos, and 

given that at least two of the studies being referred to by 

government were done by or commissioned by proponents of 

casino expansion, I have very little faith in the accuracy of their 

projections. 

 

What is of great concern as well is the failure of government to 

attach any cost-per-job figures with respect to jobs in the casino 

industry.  I need to be convinced that there is an overall net 

gain to this investment based on what it costs to create these 

jobs and the socio-economic costs of sustaining them.  This 

should be the measure of viability for any job creation program 

undertaken by government, and casino gaming expansion 

should be no exception. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could continue for many hours on this subject, 

but I am hoping is that the remarks that I have made will clarify 

my position on the issue of gaming in Saskatchewan, and that 

the time will allow for many 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

members of the government side to put their positions on the 

record. 

 

I would be most pleased of course if the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow would speak on this issue, would speak on this 

issue this afternoon, making it very clear where he stands on 

the issue of expanded gaming and gambling in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I would be very pleased as well if other 

members would stand on their feet and discuss why it is they 

feel confident that this is the right thing to do. 

 

I want to close by summarizing.  The Liberal Party recognizes 

the existence of gaming in Saskatchewan and recognizes that 

the proper control and direction of gaming expansion has some 

economic potential. 

 

The Liberal Party considers it irresponsible for any political 

party, local or provincial government, to proceed with plans for 

expanded gaming beyond the current level of activity without 

complete and objective research on the economic and social 

impact of those plans being presented for open and public 

discussion. 

 

The Liberal Party believes that any policy decisions made must 

take fully into account the existing participants in the gaming 

industry and show respect for their traditional revenue sources, 

ensuring that they do not suffer at the hands of government 

competition. 

 

Our party believes that the government must accept full 

responsibility for accurately assessing, evaluating, and 

consulting about the implications of its policy on gaming 

before making any moves to expand the basis of gaming 

operations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Liberal Party believes that the government should declare a 

moratorium on any further gaming expansion until it has done 

the following: 

 

(a) conducted extensive and objective research on the overall 

issue, with special attention to measuring the economic and 

social implications of both the current levels of gaming and the 

effects of proposed expansion; 

 

(b) engage in open and public debate about the issue, inviting 

input and critical comment from all organizations and 

individuals concerned with the consequences of the 

government's gaming policy; 

 

(c) introduce legislation that clearly identifies the 

revenue-sharing agreements for all gaming revenues generated 

in the province before any further expansion takes place; and 

 

(d) clarifies the government's legal position on the expansion of 

casino gaming on first nations reserves to ensure a fair and 

peaceful participation in the gaming industry by aboriginal 

peoples. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 That this Assembly now urge the government to declare a 

moratorium on gaming expansion until the government 

presents a full gaming strategy including a full accounting 

of its projected revenues from gaming, all research and 

documentation held by the government on the 

Saskatchewan gaming industry, with emphasis on the 

evidence showing that the gaming projects undertaken by 

the provincial government are sustainable and that all 

participants in the gaming industry such as volunteer and 

non-profit organizations, hoteliers, exhibition associations, 

aboriginal groups, the horse-racing industry, hospital 

foundations, local governments, and those addicted to 

gambling, are being and will continue to be treated fairly 

in the face of increased government involvement in the 

gaming industry. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Regina North West. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

second the motion put by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  It is not uncommon for government members to put 

motions forward, asking the Assembly to commend the actions 

of one minister or another. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone for taking a leadership role in exposing 

the shortcomings of the government policy on gambling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked to a large number of people about 

this issue.  There are differing points of view, as one might 

expect, about the morality of gambling.  However most people, 

even those who are morally opposed to gambling, admit that it 

is here to stay and that the critical question is how to manage 

the level and the impact of gambling activity in Saskatchewan. 

 

Fundamentally people do not oppose the concept of raising 

money through gambling activity; however people understand 

that there are limits to the amount of money that society can 

contribute through gambling without producing serious 

negative impacts.  What people do not understand and what 

they expect government to have determined is where that line 

is. 

 

Generally, Mr. Speaker, people are placing their trust in 

government to employ the extensive resources at its disposal to 

ensure that government does not enact policies which will have 

a negative impact on society. This is where the wheels appear 

to have fallen off the New Democrat approach to gambling. 

 

(1500) 

 

Where to begin?  In the first place, it is obvious that the 

government really did not take into account the level of 

gambling that was already happening in Saskatchewan to create 

a benchmark for measuring the effects of increasing gambling 

activity.  No control 



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

groups were selected to monitor the impact on charities or on 

particular demographic groups who engaged in gambling 

activity.  The minister's own advisory committee to study the 

social impacts of gambling raises those concerns, but to date 

nothing is in place to address them. 

 

I quote: 

 

 As part of our ongoing mandate to study the social impacts of 

gaming, our committee will continue to try to answer some of 

the many questions that we have not yet addressed.  In order 

to deal effectively with the results of problem gambling, we 

must first answer a number of important questions. 

 

 Who participates in gaming in this province? 

 

 In what forms of gaming do they participate? 

 

 How often do they participate? 

 

 Why do they participate?  Where do they live?  How many of 

them have problems associated with the result of their 

gaming activity? 

 

 What causes people to gamble, or to quit gambling? 

 

The committee report continues by saying: 

 

 We recommend a participation and prevalence study be 

conducted during stage 1 to answer these and other questions 

about the extent and social impacts of gaming in 

Saskatchewan.  We suggest that these studies be designed 

and undertaken in such a way as to ensure attention is given 

to adolescent and Aboriginal gambling activity. 

 

 The (government's own) Committee believes that adolescent 

gambling has not received the attention that it should, and as 

a result, the true level of problem gambling amongst 

adolescents may be much different from that which is 

currently estimated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee has identified some very real and 

very pressing concerns.  That was done in August of 1993.  But 

the government, seemingly oblivious to the committee's 

recommendations, forged ahead with the installations of video 

lottery terminals and proceeded with planning casino 

expansion. 

 

The committee's report was based on one study conducted by 

Tanka Research, but it was a random phone sample of 1,000 

people.  The government's committee clearly recommends that 

gamblers be examined to determine who they are, where they 

live, and why they gamble. 

 

While the Tanka study may have been an attempt to show that 

research was being conducted, nobody has ever asked those 

important questions proposed by the 

Minister's Advisory Committee on the Social Impacts of 

Gaming.  At least if they have, the results have certainly been a 

well-kept secret. 

 

What is of enormous concern to me is that the government, 

knowing that there are inherent problems associated with 

gaming, having been advised of how to identify and possibly 

solve those problems at the outset, chose to summarily ignore 

the advice of its own committee.  Instead, they have really only 

paid lip service to the negative impact of gambling by 

providing less than 1 per cent of VLT revenues to address the 

problem of gambling addiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is overwhelming evidence that the 

government has not shouldered its responsibility for its 

gambling expansion policy.  The Liberal caucus has become a 

central point of input for people from all over the province who 

have concerns about the policy.  And believe me, they are 

steady, wide-ranging, and consistent in their criticisms. 

 

We hear from charitable organizations who feel that they are 

under attack from a government addicted to gambling revenues.  

The hospitals' foundations have seen the revenue steadily 

decline as the VLT income increases in the government coffers.  

Volunteers are left shaking their heads in disbelief as 

government sets up shop in direct competition with them and 

undermines the many worthy causes they attempt to support. 

 

All over Saskatchewan local service clubs are being told that 

they must abandon traditional fund-raising schemes and are left 

wondering how they fight a government driven by greed. 

 

Here is a sample of some of the correspondence we've 

received.  A letter to the Shaunavon Knights of Columbus from 

the Gaming Commission which reads: 

 

 The 5/18 draw licensed for your organization closely 

resembles a lotto 6/49 lottery scheme managed by the 

Western Canada Lottery Corporation.  The province, by 

agreement, has indicated that it will not license lottery 

schemes similar to those offered by the WCLC.  In the future 

we suggest your organization choose a different lottery 

scheme as 5/18 draws will no longer be licensed by the 

authority. 

 

In another letter the Swift Current Exhibition Association wrote 

to the minister on January 21, 1994: 

 

 The new policy announcement effectively puts us out of the 

gaming business.  With the introduction of the two major 

casinos in the province, combined with the VLT program that 

is already in place, we can no longer compete, and to 

continue in a same capacity would have been disastrous. 

 

In yet another letter, the Nipawin Elks have been told 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

that the snowmobile rally they operate with the local RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) to raise money for drug 

awareness programs will no longer be licensed. 

 

The Weyburn community bingo is having its viability 

threatened by government policy. 

 

Hotel and bar owners are calling to tell us of the serious 

problems VLTs are presenting for their customers. 

 

I have talked with members of the mental health association 

who tell me that the government's plan for addiction includes 

little in the way of treatment.  I understand that most of the 

limited resources now in the budget are being directed at 

education.  While that is a laudable goal, the fact remains that 

the education program will provide effective political 

window-dressing but won't go in far in curing the very real 

problems of gambling addiction. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the potential for charitable 

organizations to do good things with the money they raise 

through gaming is very real and very valuable.  To date 

Saskatchewan has had a proud history of volunteer 

involvement in raising money to support worthy causes.  The 

actions of this government to proceed willy-nilly with 

expanded gaming at the urging of casino proponents is ignoring 

the very real dangers of gambling addiction and negative 

impacts on the economies of our communities.  Such reckless 

pursuit of revenue downplays the value of our charitable 

organizations and ignores legitimate concerns of those who 

have challenged the sustainability of the government's gaming 

proposals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully support the repeated requests of the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone to obtain objective and 

complete research on the gaming issue.  As a member of the 

Liberal caucus and as the representative of the people of 

Regina North West, I am pleased to second the motion before 

the Assembly and I invite every member of this Assembly to 

take this opportunity to go on the record in support of this more 

sensible and necessary instruction to the government.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate very 

much the opportunity to rise to address the Assembly on this 

issue.  I was, Mr. Speaker, the critic responsible for gaming and 

liquor in the last session and I took it upon myself to raise a 

number of very important issues as it dealt with the video 

lottery terminals, as it dealt with gaming in the total 

perspective.  And so I am very comfortable, Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Assembly, that I want to speak on behalf of and 

support the resolution as it's presented. 

 

Our caucus has repeatedly tried to make the government 

account for its gaming strategy, Mr. Speaker.  Throughout the 

past two years since the government decided they were going 

to go on a spending spree in buying video lottery terminals, it 

has been a sense that I have had, and a lot of people in 

the public, that people of the province of Saskatchewan are not 

prepared for this overwhelming gaming to be presented to the 

province. 

 

I go back and ask the members to reconsider or just to consider 

if they haven't seen the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix that they . . . 

that was written up on a Saturday last year.  It identified a 

major part of the reasons why I think the people of 

Saskatchewan -- and it represented I believe the views of a lot 

of people in Saskatchewan -- why they believe the gaming 

should be restricted in many, many areas. 

 

And I believe that this government has decided it's not going to 

do that.  It's just going to go ahead and establish this at all kinds 

of risk to our communities, and all kinds of risks to various 

agencies, and all kinds of risks to various individuals in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I think it's time to take a 

serious look at this. 

 

The government looks to gambling as being a magnificent 

revenue generator and a boost to the province's tourism.  That 

is what they are believing in their own minds, Mr. Speaker.  

And I believe that they have done this just to set aside the real 

issues that are there.  However, even some of the government's 

own caucus members don't believe this.  And I wish they would 

speak out to present a clear understanding not only on how they 

believe, but also how their constituents would vote on this 

issue. 

 

Another point is the government needs to be held accountable.  

This resolution speaks to accountability, and I believe that it's 

necessary to hold the government accountable in a very 

dispassionate understanding of the pluses and the minuses of 

gaming in Saskatchewan.  We need to have a lot of research 

going into this because it is very high risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the Assembly an article that 

appeared today in the Leader-Post.  It says: bar manager sees 

effects of VLTs.  It's written by Dale Eisler.  I took the time to 

read that, Mr. Speaker, and it deals very pointedly with some 

very important, fundamental social implications as it relates to 

the gambling issue in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it talks about an individual who is from the Black Bear 

Inn, and this individual's name is Blaine Walsh.  And he gets a 

close-up look at all of this in the Sturgis hotel.  And he's talking 

about VLTs. 

 

 He talks about gambling as a "cancer on the whole society" 

and predicts it is gradually going to ruin not only countless 

people, but the economy it is supposed to help. 

 

That's an observation that Mr. Walsh makes as a part of his 

observations about VLTs.  And he has them in his own bar, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to point out some other things that he says: 

 

 The addictive effect of VLTs is something that Walsh not 

only sees in other people, but 



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

 something he felt himself.  He found that he was developing 

his own gambling problem, a habit he kicked two months ago 

and is determined to avoid in the future. 

 

 But in the meantime, Walsh sees people every day who have 

become hooked on the machines.  This past weekend, he said 

one middle-aged man spent $1000 playing the VLTs in the 

bar on Friday and Saturday. 

 

 "I finally told him that he should stop, that he's spending too 

much money.  But you have to ask if it's my responsibility to 

try and get people to stop gambling if they can't afford it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members of this Assembly, we are running 

into a very serious social problem.  And I'm going to point out 

some other things that Mr. Eisler . . . and I think he did a real 

good job of bringing out the issue.  It is not only an economic 

issue that we have to talk about, it isn't only a tourism issue that 

we need to talk about, it's the social impact in our society that 

we need to start to address. 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

 . . . the addictive effect gambling has on individuals is only 

one side of the story.  What is perhaps more insidious and 

potentially destructive is the addictive quality that gambling 

revenue has on governments. 

 

Not only is it a bad attitude to have on the part of society, but 

governments, he says, get hooked on the very fact that this is a 

revenue-generating part of their programs. 

 

 In that sense, gambling revenue is like any other money that 

flows to government.  It becomes a necessity (of government) 

. . . part of government's ever-growing appetite for money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what the people are beginning to see that 

gambling is doing in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1515) 

 

Going on in the quote: 

 

 Perhaps the best description of this problem comes from R.S. 

Salomon, chairman of the New York brokerage firm of 

Salomon Brothers that, for years, has been the lead agent in 

the sale of Saskatchewan government bonds. 

 

This is what he says, and I quote: 

 

 "When individuals become compulsive gamblers, self-help 

groups and counselling services stand ready to help them 

overcome their addiction.  When state and local governments 

find themselves in the same predicament, officials look for 

new ways to 

feed the habit," says Salomon. 

 

 In other words, gambling, as a source of revenue, is just as 

addictive for government as it is for individuals trying to 

strike it rich.  In effect, the moment the door is opened to 

legalized gambling, especially where the government has a 

significant stake in its success, it becomes impossible to 

eliminate.  Not only does government get hooked on the 

money, but another vested interest is created where jobs 

depend on a continuous flow of gambling dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to have this problem identified very, very 

clearly as outlined by the resolution.  We need to have it 

identified.  We need to have people say this is wrong, this is 

going to be a curse on the people of Saskatchewan for decades, 

if we don't start to recognize what the problems are. 

 

Going on in this article, I believe it's important for all of the 

Assembly to note: 

 

 As such, we should not underestimate the far-reaching effects 

(and I quote) of the Romanow government's decision to get 

involved in legalized gambling. The door has been opened 

and there will be no turning back. 

 

 And because the decision is virtually impossible to reverse, 

you would think the social and economic effects of this issue 

would have had (at least) a full public hearing.  But they 

haven't.  There have been no public hearings, no studies into 

the social and economic impact on the province, no process 

to do a social and economic cost-benefit analysis. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the point here is that there is no 

evaluation on the economic part of it, there is no evaluation on 

the social part of it. And put those two together, Mr. Speaker.  

If we were going to put, if we were going to put -- and it goes 

on to talk about environment -- if we were going to put an 

environmentally unfriendly building, construction of any 

roadway, power line, anything in this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we would in fact have an environmental study where 

the public could get involved with it; the public could say, I 

want to become involved in determining what is going to 

happen to my province. 

 

In an environmental way, everybody would demand the right to 

do that.  And in the environment of a socio-economic condition 

that will exist in the province of Saskatchewan, we just say . . . 

or we hear the government say no, I don't want to become 

involved in that; I'm not going to open the door for that because 

I may have to make a decision different than the executive 

branch of this government. 

 

And that is a serious problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because as 

we go around the province it's going to become more and more 

evident that not only are the 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

people going to become addicted to the woes of gambling, the 

government is going to become addicted because of a source of 

revenue for various parts of their services provided to the 

people of the province. 

 

That's the reason why it's important to address this and to ask 

the government to bring forward those studies that show that 

they are truly doing this on an economic basis.  They should 

make them public. The minister should go around to the public 

and ask the question, should I put this in here or should I not? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many, many times people will say that it's 

because I'm a religious person that I get up and say this.  Mr. 

Speaker, I am trying to point out to individuals of this 

Assembly that the social impact in this province is going to be 

overwhelming because of the gaming and the gambling that 

have been established as a part of this executive government's 

decisions. 

 

They are going to be serious social problems.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, who's going to be there in the 1-800 number when the 

mother who has just realized that her husband has spent all the 

money on gambling and she is supposed to buy groceries from 

the pay cheque, where is that 1-800 number going to get her 

groceries?  Where is that 1-800 number going to supply the 

individual who I heard about as I watched television last week 

-- in United States, high schools are having a very, very serious 

concern on how gaming is run in high schools. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in United States they have come to the 

place where they believe that they have a number one problem.  

It is greater than drug addiction, it is greater than prostitution, it 

is running the schools in many states in the United States, the 

high schools.  People who are under age going and gambling 

and losing the money; then going to their parents and saying, I 

lost this money.  Further to that, what is happening is that the 

individuals are having the bookies going to the parents and 

demanding the money -- at risk to themselves and their own 

safety. 

 

That's what's happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We have a 

social problem that is very, very serious.  And it will happen in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The first time this was addressed a reporter came to me and 

asked me, he said, do you think that this is going to have a 

negative impact in our society?  After all, if we put one in 

Regina and put one in Saskatoon, people will have to go a 

distance to get one, to go to gamble, to get addicted. 

 

Well they've got it in Alberta and they've got it in Manitoba; 

they can go to those provinces.  They've got it in the United 

States; they can go to those places.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the 

availability of an addiction is right next door, it is a lot easier 

and it becomes . . . and the greater the pressure for you to foster 

that addiction.  The greater the addictive process becomes, the 

greater the intensity.  And if it's in the bar in 

Sturgis, if it's in the bar in Meadow Lake, if it's in the bar in 

Consul, if it's in the bar in Maple Creek, then, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have access to it all over the place. 

 

And where does the economic benefit occur, Mr. Speaker?  

Those are dollars that are used to do economic development, 

that the individual has.  Let's just take a family, for example, in 

rural Saskatchewan.  What do they spend their money on?  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they spend it on various kinds of things, but 

they also spend it on economic development.  So they take this 

economic development money that they're going to use to buy 

cows or hogs, or create wealth within the framework of their 

farm and then they put it into the gambling machine. 

 

And where does that go?  It goes out of that community 

forever, Mr. Speaker, it goes out of that community forever. 

 

And where does it end up?  It ends up in the treasuries of this 

province and in that community you have a social problem; you 

develop a social problem. 

 

And as I pointed out, the bar manager at the Black Bear Inn in 

Sturgis had to tell a man who had spent $1,000 to quit; it's time 

to quit. 

 

Where was that money going to go?  Was that going to buy 

$1,000 worth of fertilizer for his farm?  Was that going to buy 

$1,000 worth of groceries for his family?  Was that $1,000 

going to go buy a car?  Was that $1,000 going to be spent on 

repairing the tractor so he could seed his crop?  Where was that 

$1,000 going to go? 

 

And that is $1,000 in every community.  In every home in the 

province that same thing can happen.  If it's 200 here, it could 

be 1,000 in the next one, it could be 10,000 in another one. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this government 

needs to come forward with a plan on how they're going to 

control that, how they're going to regulate that.  And I think it's 

time to say we got to start to seriously think about the social 

impact that this is going to have, a serious, serious social 

impact. 

 

I'm going to go on and point this out: 

 

 Others paint a much different picture.  Robert Goodman, in 

an exhaustive analysis of legalized gambling . . . as a strategy 

for economic development (of the U.S.), talks about the 

"cannibalization" of other jobs by money diverted into 

gambling. 

 

That's very serious stuff, Mr. Speaker.  That is just what I 

talked about. 

 

Where does this $1,000 go that this man was going to spend on 

whatever it could be in the home?  Could be a new washer or 

dryer.  It could be a various numbers of things including food 

for his family. 

 

And where does it go, Mr. Speaker?  It's cannibalizing 



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

the very area that the individual was supposed to spend it on in 

the first place.  And that is the reason why it's really important 

to consider it. 

 

There is an article in the Star-Phoenix today as well that I 

think needs to be seriously considered.  The title, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is "Forget the Casino!  Put a brothel downtown." 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are certain things that initiate certain 

reactions and certain responses.  And it goes on to say here:  

"Forget the casino!  Put a brothel downtown".  This is speaking 

about Saskatoon. 

 

 Like it or not, gambling looks very much like an irresistible 

force. 

 

Quoting: 

 

 Mr. Roy Romanow, acting in the proud tradition of Tommy 

Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney, seems 

determined to leave video gambling and casinos as his legacy 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what a legacy to leave -- what a legacy to leave.  And he 

goes on to say: 

 

 They justify a downtown Saskatoon casino as a solid 

foundation for various subsidiary projects including a new 

courthouse, a new convention centre and a windfall for 

Indians.  Think of it as justice and prosperity for all through 

vice. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, forget the casino, put a brothel downtown.  

That's what the people in Saskatoon are going to start to say.  Is 

that what the people in Regina are going to start to say soon? 

 

And then, tongue in cheek, he says: 

 

 (To make sure it's done right, I'd put Jack Messer in charge, 

but that's by the way). 

 

That's the kind of reference that the media are starting to make 

regarding the issue of gaming in the province of Saskatchewan.  

They are serious about it, and I think we, as a legislature, need 

to be serious about it as well. 

 

The whole issue, I believe, needs to be resolved in a way that 

would provide public input.  Public input is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the most glaring mistake that the people of this 

government have made.  They have not allowed public input in 

this issue.  Why?  I believe I know why.  When there was even 

a hint of this in Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when there 

was a hint of this in bygone years in Moose Jaw, the people of 

Moose Jaw wrote letters, letters after letters. 

 

And I was in government, Mr. Speaker, when a decision was 

made by our government at the time not to do this.  A decision 

was made -- I will not put video lottery terminals in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  The decision was made that we 

wouldn't do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of us stood there and said, 

that is the right decision.  Today, why doesn't the public have 

an opportunity to tell the government that it's the wrong 

decision to put it in?  Why don't they have the opportunity to 

do that? 

 

And why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government doesn't go out 

to ask?  They need to go out to ask.  I think they need to put a 

complete strategy out there and say, is there a better way to get 

native employment rather than in the gambling?  Is there a 

better way to get people employed than gambling?  Is there a 

better way to do it?  And I say to the members of this Assembly 

and to the people of Saskatchewan, there is. 

 

And I believe that people recognize this for what it is.  People 

in the province of Saskatchewan do not believe that casinos and 

video lottery terminals should be in place. 

 

And as I read through that Leader-Post article, which had done 

a review of the various issues and the various kinds of 

gambling, there was acceptance of 6/49's, there was acceptance 

of bingos, there was acceptance of Nevadas, but where did they 

draw the line, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They drew the line on 

casinos and video lottery terminals.  That's where the people 

drew the line.  They said, it's going to hurt us. 

 

And then when the demographics . . . they showed the 

demographics of the people who were against it the most; and I 

find this very, very interesting.  They found that the people who 

were most against this were that age group of people who were 

between 20 and 35, female.  Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Why?  

My greatest belief, and this is the reason why this group of 

people was the most against it, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this was money that was going to be allocated to video lottery 

terminals and to casinos which should go into providing food 

for families, the clothing for their families.  And that's the 

reason why this female age group was the most against it.  

That's the reason why, Mr. Speaker, this is a social problem, a 

very serious social problem. 

 

(1530) 

 

And then I'm going to go one step further and say this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  What kind of example is being shown by that 

home when that opportunity is presented and said, I'm going to 

gamble. And what kind of home life is that going to present to 

the individual who is a teenager and says, my father can go 

gamble, my mother can on occasion go gamble, and yet in high 

school when I'm going to bet on a ball game, that's illegal 

because I'm a minor. 

 

That is a social-economic problem that is not only going to be 

inherited by us as individuals across this province, but it's 

going to be inherited by the society that we live in today.  And 

that's where the problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, exists in the 

United States, in the high schools.  And we are one step away 

from doing exactly the same thing.  And states in the United 

States are seriously considering the impact that this is going to 

have. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

Those people are worried about the Mafia involvement in those 

high schools, and they are.  It was on television; as I saw it, 

people were talking about that Mafia involvement, about 

bookies, about breaking kneecaps, about breaking legs -- all of 

that.  For high school kids.  And where do they learn it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker?  In these cases more is caught than is taught, 

and it's caught by what the parents do and the parents decide to 

do. 

 

Now you ask me why females between 20 and 35 are most 

against this, and I have just explained the reason why.  Because 

they will see it as an intrusion in their home and they don't 

want to have it.  They don't want that standard to be developed 

as a part of the reason why a government should take that 

money away. 

 

And as was pointed out in Mr. Eisler's article, and I believe he's 

right on the money, the addiction comes twice: once by the 

individuals and the other time by the government who have to 

live off of that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I am going to support 

this motion as it exists here today.  I believe that it is the right 

thing to do.  It's time for this government to take a serious look 

at what the problems are and the problems they're going to 

create. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, there are numerous issues that 

really need to be addressed on this and I would dearly love to 

expound for quite some time on it, but I do believe that there 

has been an agreement between the House leaders to go on to 

government business at this time.  So I would move 

adjournment of debate on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The orders of the day that I am 

provided suggest that members may want to proceed to certain 

second readings.  If that is the case, then there will need to be a 

statement made to that effect and there will need to be 

agreement of the House to do so. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would 

move, with leave, that the House proceed to item no. 1, Bill 1, 

An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 

Committee) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and thank you to all members of the House for granting leave 

today to debate what I consider to 

be a very important item that is on the minds of Saskatchewan 

people.  And I would say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

official opposition was very proud to enter this particular Bill 

as the first Bill put before the Legislative Assembly this spring 

session of 1994, to debate it.  And in fact it was the first Bill in 

a number of reform initiatives put forward by the Assembly for 

discussion in this House during this session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the outcome of a long consultation process with 

Saskatchewan people, with members of the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, with a lot of various 

interest groups around the province who view the whole issue 

of how we manage the utilities, our Crown corporations in the 

province, and how they affect the average taxpayer, the average 

home-owner, businesses, schools, hospitals, that type of thing, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One thing that's become very apparent to everyone in the 

province of Saskatchewan in the 1990s is that we have to join 

the rest of Canada and indeed North America in talking about 

these issues and managing these issues.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction I believe left in North 

America that does not have some type of public process when 

utility rates and rates that all of us are mandated to use because 

we are dealing with monopoly situations or quasi monopolies . 

. . and the rates that they charge back to us. 

 

And I think Saskatchewan needs to rejoin that bigger picture, 

Mr. Speaker, because people today expect government and the 

appendages of government to be as cost-effective as possible in 

delivering services. 

 

As you are aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the early 1980s, the 

former Conservative administration brought forward a Public 

Utilities Review Commission.  And that particular commission 

was in place in this province for a couple of years.  Its mandate 

was to review things like the rates of SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, SGI, those types of things that every one of us use 

in our everyday lives. 

 

That experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was one of some good 

and some bad.  What it did was it made these particular 

agencies more transparent to the public.  And I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what we see today, this growing demand by 

the public to have these issues addressed is an outgrowth of 

what they experienced when PURC (Public Utilities Review 

Commission) was in place. 

 

Unfortunately the problem with the PURC exercise was that it 

proved to be very expensive to the taxpayer.  And the reason it 

was very expensive is that as people came before that utilities 

commission to make their arguments, there were a lot of legal 

costs incurred; the witness procedure was very expensive.  And 

at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, it became apparent that it 

perhaps wasn't the most cost-effective means for these issues to 

be handled in. 

 

Certainly the deregulation of the natural gas business 



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

in the mid-1980s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, meant that a lot more 

people became aware of things like tariff and polling.  The 

delivery costs attached to the pipelines, the construction of 

pipelines, how much that cost, accrued back to the taxpayer of 

the province. 

 

And with that deregulation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it meant that, 

for instance, hospitals, large public buildings, universities, large 

industrial concerns such as IPSCO, the potash mines, and 

others were able to go directly to well-head and access their 

gas. 

 

At the same time, the issues surrounding the transportation 

costs remained in the purview of the Crown corporation.  And 

even though they were in a deregulated market, the 

transparency that people would like with that transportation 

was not apparent. 

 

What we have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last few years, 

is the at least perception by a large segment of the public that 

the current administration uses the Crown corporations as a 

means of back-door taxation.  And the minister has stood many 

times in here and said no, that's not the case.  And he makes 

some valid argument as to what happens inside the Crown 

corporations. 

 

And I think recently with the changes occurring in even the 

Crown Corporations Committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see 

this need for the public to understand and know being brought 

forward.  And clearly the government members recognize that 

because the member from Saskatoon, as chair of the Crown 

Corporations Committee, said as much in her speech to the 

House last week, that the public is demanding to know more 

about rate-setting processes, capital expenditures, and how 

those capital expenditures are amortized out over a period of 

time; how the corporation remains viable and at the same time, 

how it plays a role in society. 

 

The big question is, Mr. Deputy Speaker:  are utilities in place 

to provide a service?  Because they are monopolies, is that 

service on a break-even basis, or are Crown corporations 

designed to indeed raise revenue which then goes through CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), and from 

CIC back into the Consolidated Fund? 

 

There are some philosophical discussions and questions that 

have to be answered there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I'm not 

sure that those philosophical questions have to be answered 

before this Legislative Assembly can move forward on its own 

into a new realm. 

 

What Bill 1 proposes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that a committee 

of this House, a committee of the House have the ability to 

review the rate-setting mechanisms of the Crown corporations 

before utility rates are increased.  And it clearly sets out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the existing ratios of the House must not 

be disturbed.  In other words, that the government, who are 

elected by majority, should have the majority on the committee. 

The costs of the committee must be watched very closely, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because what is envisioned in the Bill is that 

the committee would have the full powers that other 

committees of this House do.  In other words, that they could 

call before them witnesses, either from the Crown corporation 

or members of the public, who then would give verbatim 

testimony, and I would hope perhaps also do that in full view of 

the television cameras, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And by doing so, 

open up the rate-setting process to the public. 

 

And I don't think it's anything that we should be fearful of, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as legislators.  It would certainly give the 

private members of this Assembly the opportunity to be very, 

very involved in the lives of the people that they represent.  

Because as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a province like 

Saskatchewan, you don't have any option about turning off the 

heat on January 15.  If you're going to stay warm, you pretty 

well have to use electricity or natural gas in order to heat your 

home. 

 

So each and every one of us have no options, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in regards to something like natural gas.  We have to 

have it in order to stay warm. 

 

And I would think that private members in this Assembly 

would value the opportunity to be part of that process, in front 

of a utility rate increase rather at the back end, recognizing that 

the majority on the committee would probably also have the 

ability to exercise majority opinion.  Mr. Speaker, that truly I 

think would be a precedent-setting move for this House to 

make. 

 

The public today are demanding that we in this Assembly 

change the way that we do things.  All members of this House 

talk about democratic reform.  They talk about giving power 

back to individual members.  Every one of the political parties 

represented in this House -- whether they be Conservative, 

NDP, or Liberal -- have talked about, either prior to the last 

election or since the last election, about packages of democratic 

reform that democratize this institution, redemocratize this 

institution beyond where it is today. 

 

And those are laudable goals, Mr. Speaker.  They are very 

laudable goals.  But if all we do, Mr. Speaker, is talk about 

them, if we promised this to the public before election and we 

fail to deliver afterwards, then our credibility as an institution, 

Mr. Speaker, is diminished. 

 

(1545) 

 

And that's why today I thank the government members for 

allowing this opportunity to occur.  This is a historic 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, that an issue such as this, for the very 

first time to my knowledge, has been brought forward by a 

private member to be discussed in this House.  For the very 

first time at least in my memory, Mr. Speaker, that is the case.  

And I applaud the government members today for allowing that 

to occur. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

And I applaud them also for having the courage to allow this 

particular Bill, Bill No. 1, to be talked about.  And I think if all 

members took the opportunity to stand up and talk about this 

issue and debate this issue, some of the fear that has been 

attached to the mystique, if you will, of the Crown corporations 

and how they do their business, would be removed.  Because 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they belong to each and every one 

of us.  At the same time, they have the ability to make each and 

every one of us pay.  And I think for us to manage the 

taxpayers' money properly, to be responsible legislators, these 

kind of issues should hold no fear for us.  None at all.  And 

whether they be brought forward by executive government, by 

cabinet, or they be brought forward by any member of this 

House, there should be no fear. 

 

Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, I asked the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, the representative assembly in the state 

of North Dakota, how this issue was handled in their state.  

And they said there was a state commissioner for utilities who 

was elected but who had to appear before a committee of the 

House.  And at the time of appearing before the committee of 

the House, any member in the House could bring forward and 

ask some questions.  Any member of the public could come 

forward and ask questions. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, are the utilities, which in many 

cases are monopolistic in the state of North Dakota, any 

different than they are in the province of Saskatchewan?  Are 

we really any different at the end of the day than most other 

jurisdictions in western Canada?  And I say to you, we're not, 

Mr. Speaker, except in one regard.  The members of this House 

have never had the freedom or the ability to question the policy 

setters, the bureaucrats, the people that are in the structure the 

same as other jurisdictions have. 

 

And I think the legislators in Saskatchewan are as capable and 

bright and articulate and capable of arriving at logical decisions 

as they are in any other province in Canada or any state in the 

United States.  And I think that if we were granted the 

privilege, Mr. Speaker, of talking about these issues in a 

committee, then we would also take the responsibility to do it 

right. 

 

And the want, the want, Mr. Speaker, to be only political, to 

only play silly games would soon disappear.  Because the 

public, Mr. Speaker, would not put up with it.  They simply 

would not put up with it, because this issue is too close to the 

pocketbooks and the hearts of every person in this province.  

They are too close, Mr. Speaker.  And if anyone played fast and 

loose with that type of a committee, they would soon suffer 

public indignation.  And I believe the repercussions would be 

there at the polls, come the next election. 

 

So what we're asking for, Mr. Speaker, in this particular Bill is 

simply that members of this Assembly be trusted, that members 

of this Assembly assume the responsibility that they have been 

elected to perform on behalf of their constituents. 

And I think all members take that responsibility very seriously 

-- very, very seriously.  Because I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

when you go through the numbers and you see the magnitude 

of the dollars, when you see the rate increases coming every six 

months, when you understand that we are all absolutely 

dependent on these Crown corporations and these utilities for 

our everyday life, then you know that you have to take those 

responsibilities seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the lights were out in the building in the 

Assembly last week, all of us very quickly realized how 

dependent we are on electricity.  Our entire caucus operation 

virtually came to a standstill because you couldn't use a 

computer.  There was not even, Mr. Speaker, a mechanical 

typewriter in our caucus operation.  So there we were, down 

preparing for our day with writing in longhand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean we in this society are dependent on electricity, on our 

telephones and our communication system, on our natural gas, 

on our auto insurance -- all of the things that protect us, and at 

the same time we rely upon to make our society what it is 

today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I ask the members of this Assembly is to 

don't discount the Bill today, don't simply pass it off as an 

exercise that has to be gone through because we need to placate 

members of the opposition and we need to placate members of 

the public. But look at it as an opportunity to amend, if you 

will, to expand, and make a Bill come forward from this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that will satisfy the public's need to do 

this. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the government themselves are 

very close to bringing forward some type of a similar initiative.  

I know those initiatives were in the Department of Energy 

when I was Energy minister, and I know that the Energy 

minister today has had discussions with people in the natural 

gas business that . . . people, the industrial gas users in the 

province, have put forward a proposal to him and to cabinet to 

review; that there are initiatives going on. 

 

And what I would say to members of the Assembly, and 

particularly to the private members of the Assembly, don't be 

satisfied with some watered-down version that takes away the 

ability of this House to honestly look at the issues and help 

manage the issues. 

 

It would not be worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, to have some type of 

a public utilities review process that did not allow members of 

this House the ability for input before rates were set.  I think 

anything less than that simply would be seen as a sham by the 

public and they would view it with a great deal of cynicism.  

They would view it with a great deal of cynicism, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What they want is for their representatives to be part and parcel 

of the process.  And they also want us to be as cost-effective as 

possible, Mr. Speaker.  As cost-effective as possible. 



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

The members of this Assembly are already paid a salary.  And 

particularly when this House is in session, which is normally in 

the spring months, when budgets are being brought forward, 

when Crown corporations are doing a lot of their work, I don't 

think, Mr. Speaker, it would hurt for one minute for members 

of this Assembly to have that committee in place and working. 

 

And certainly during the course of the year, Mr. Speaker, when 

the House wasn't in session, there would be the ability to call 

that committee together and solicit input from the public to be 

able to call witnesses forward, to have witnesses under oath, 

which is the right of members of this Assembly, to give 

testimony and talk about the issue at hand. 

 

And that is not a fearful thing, Mr. Speaker, because it is done 

in so many other places in the world as a matter of course.  It is 

something that members of the public don't bat an eye at. 

 

In fact, I understand in a lot of jurisdictions that the schedule of 

the committee meetings is published in the newspaper.  And if 

anybody wishes, when they pick up their newspaper they say, 

oh yes, that particular committee on utilities is meeting today, 

and it meets.  And the public come and make presentations.  

And it isn't a scary thing at all.  And it goes on as a matter of 

course. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly are quite capable of 

doing that.  And at the end of the day, the recommendations 

that they make will still have to go through the process; they 

will still have to go to the board of directors of the particular 

Crown; they will have to go to executive government.  And 

executive government may decide to do something entirely 

different.  But they will know, Mr. Speaker, when they do 

something different, that they may be going against the will of 

the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no one in the public in this province that 

wants to see SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy or SGI 

destroyed.  They might like to see their format changed, they 

might like to see different options, but I don't think any of us 

living in a widely dispersed population as we are in a large land 

area want to see them destroyed. 

 

What the public wants is cost-effectiveness, they want to be 

included, and they want to know that there is accountability at 

the end of the day.  That's all they ask for.  And it would be the 

responsibility of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to give them that 

in a format that is cost-effective and is accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last few months I have received 

correspondence from many institutions around the province 

supporting this particular initiative.  I have letters from SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) to both the 

Minister of Energy and myself supporting the initiative.  And 

I'll only read the last line here, Mr. Speaker.  It says: 

 

 Therefore be it resolved that the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association requests that the province 

of Saskatchewan establish a regulatory agency to monitor the 

operations and rate charged by Saskatchewan's publicly 

owned utilities. 

 

That's from SUMA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The city of Weyburn, supporting the formation of the same 

entity; the city of Prince Albert, supporting the same initiative; 

the Regina Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, entities well-known to 

many members of the government who currently work with 

them on a daily basis as ministers of the Crown; the city of 

Yorkton, signed by Mayor Ben Weber -- council is suggesting 

that the responsibility for development of a structure and any 

necessary legislation be left to the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly: 

 

 We therefore do support your efforts to bring about a 

structure and a process that is effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people all across the province strongly desire to 

have a mechanism in place.  And I would hope that if this 

particular mechanism in some way has a major flaw to it, that 

members of the government, and particularly private members, 

would wish to speak on it; that they would wish to amend it, 

that they would wish to see the initiative carried forward to the 

point that they know when they go home when this legislature 

rises sometime probably later this month, that their constituents 

will be satisfied with the work that the Assembly has done. 

 

And I would like, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill be spoken on in 

second reading and come to a vote and that it then be allowed 

to proceed to committee, and during the committee stage, have 

some good discussion about what would be the proper 

mechanism. 

 

And if it were not passed, Mr. Speaker, perhaps in the next 

session that initiative could be picked up and that the members 

of this Assembly, not just executive government, but the 

members of this Assembly would take the initiative and put 

their stamp on something that the public undoubtedly would 

support 100 per cent.  And they would see all members, 

irregardless of political stripe, working together on such an 

institution. 

 

And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, after a very short period of time, 

that a committee of this House would develop the kind of 

rapport that was necessary, as they do in Public Accounts, as 

they do most of the time in Crown Corporations, as they have 

done in other committees, to make the proper, responsible 

decisions for this entity to be a proper tool of the public that 

this institution is supposed to serve. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members of this 

Assembly to vote yes on second reading of Bill No. 1, a Bill to 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

(1600) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I heard the 

impassioned plea of the Leader of the Opposition telling us 

why he thought that his replacement for PURC, LURC 

(legislative utilities review committee), son of PURC, would be 

a good idea.  And I agree with some of the things he said in that 

it is very clear that the public of today is demanding a greater 

level of accountability than they ever have in the past.  They 

are clearly asking that legislators ensure that they are getting 

the best bang for their buck, that finances and accounts are 

examined very carefully by the legislature and by committees 

of the legislature. 

 

However, I have to, while agreeing with the Leader of the 

Opposition that accountability is paramount and extremely 

important, I have to take issue with a few of the things he said.  

I wonder where he was in the '80s when members of my party, 

members of the current government, were saying, excuse me, 

but we do need greater accountability from the government of 

the day represented by the party that the Leader of the 

Opposition represents. 

 

I also wonder if the strategy that he's picking for this greater 

accountability, that is, LURC, son of PURC, is necessarily a 

good idea.  I would point to him that when PURC was 

disbanded, it was costing the public purse $3.2 million.  And it 

seems to me that since we are facing a $15 billion debt, a 

legacy of the spending spree of the '80s by the members 

opposite, that we need to be very leery about bringing in 

another permutation of the same strategy. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Wakamow points out that perhaps 

its  . . . Moose Jaw Wakamow . . . points out that perhaps 

LURC is the illegitimate son of PURC.  I'm not certain about 

that, but I do know that there are many problems with Bill 1 as 

presented by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

As I view it, it seems to me to be a grossly flawed Bill.  There 

is no provision, for instance, in that Bill to hire or remunerate 

staff. It would amount to legislators simply shooting from the 

hip in terms of setting rates.  And the Leader of the Opposition 

needs to be aware that the process for setting up utility rates is 

already spelled out in The Crown Corporations Act. 

 

I want to also pick up on a couple of things that he said, 

because it is important for us to recognize, as he does, the 

Crown corporations are extremely important to the economic 

well-being of this province.  Thank heavens they weren't all 

privatized during the 1980s; thank heavens we still have things 

like SaskPower around.  If SaskPower had been privatized, 

there would be no question of a utility rate review commission.  

We would have a private situation where the people of 

Saskatchewan wouldn't even be able to debate this kind of 

strategy. 

 

I would like to point out to the Leader of the Opposition that 

just last week this House did vote on 

several reforms that will be dealt with through the Crown 

Corporations Committee.  We have already made major steps 

in the direction of improving accountability through the Crown 

Corporations.  We will now be receiving an annual statement 

outlining Crown Investment Corporation's mandate, goals, 

objectives, and performance indicators.  All members of the 

Crown Corporations Committee or members of the legislature 

that choose to attend those committee meetings will be able to 

ask questions about the Crown corporations' challenges and the 

strategies that are being planned to deal with those challenges. 

 

That will enable us as legislators to put the whole question of 

rates in a much larger context and to look at the whole question 

of the finances of those Crown corporations.  I think that taking 

that more holistic point of view is a much better approach than 

simply dealing with the proposal under the proposed Bill for 

LURC which, as I say, I believe is a grossly flawed Bill. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition says that we need 

meaningful review.  I totally agree with him and I ask him to 

join with us, join with members of the Crown Corporations 

Committee, in making sure that the reforms that we've already 

voted on in this House for the functioning of the Crown 

Corporations Committee can be meaningful reforms and can 

accomplish the same kinds of purposes that he appears to be 

wanting to accomplish through his Bill. 

 

And what he seems to be saying is that there are three criteria -- 

that we have to ensure that there's a mechanism to make Crown 

corporations more accountable.  I'm suggesting that the reforms 

that we brought in already, both in Crown Corporations 

Committee functioning and with Bill 42 last year, will do that. 

 

He says that it has to be cost effective.  What is more cost 

effective than raising some of these issues through an already 

existing standing committee of the legislature? 

 

He also says that he feels that the people of Saskatchewan have 

to feel included in the process.  I would remind him that one of 

the reforms we brought in was to allow the electronic media the 

ability to come in and make audio or audiovisual recordings of 

the proceedings so that they can get the message out to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to me we've already made a great deal of reforms.  I 

would remind the Leader of the Opposition that these were 

reforms supported by all members of this House; so there is 

action already occurring.  And I believe it is important for us 

now to get on to other government business, to deal with other 

matters that are also equally important facing this legislature, 

so having said that I would now move adjournment of debate 

on Bill 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Four Year Term) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And thank you to 

members of the House for the opportunity to rise today and put 

forward Bill No. 4 which deals with the issue of a four-year 

term. 

 

This also, Mr. Speaker, is part of the legislative reform package 

that the official opposition brought forward in the early days of 

this House sitting.  And indeed this was the fourth Bill put 

before the Assembly this session, Mr. Speaker, to amend an 

existing Act of this House, that would allow the term of office 

of this Assembly to be legislated at a mandatory four-year term.  

And you'd probably ask, Mr. Speaker, why we would deem this 

to be a reform of the democratic process and why something 

that the Saskatchewan public would agree with. 

 

I think a lot of the cynicism surrounding the electoral process in 

Canada today, Mr. Speaker, surrounds the fact that under our 

British parliamentary system the Prime Minister or premier is 

allowed the discretion of calling a general election any time 

during the mandate.  Normally that is done around four years 

but it has varied anywhere from about three to five, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I don't believe people think that that is the 

proper mechanism to allow elections to occur. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, from being a member of the 

previous government, that when we went to the polls in 

October of 1991 there was a lot of criticism, not only levelled 

by the opposition of the day, but I took criticism from many 

members of the public who said that you had gone too long, 

that you should not be able to go to the last day. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, if you don't learn anything else while 

you have the opportunity to govern, you should learn that when 

you obviously have made an error, that you do everything you 

can to correct it.  And unlike some of the members of the New 

Democratic Party government over here, who seem very intent 

on repeating some of the mistakes that they were defeated for 

in 1982, I like to think that the mistakes that we made in 

government, that we're doing our best, Mr. Speaker, to put 

forward measures that will correct them. 

 

And the members of the government can justifiably criticize the 

fact that that term went too long, as I think members of the 

public criticized the Blakeney administration for going in the 

fall of 1978 when they didn't have to, but they had the 

opportunity with the medicare issue and were able to take that 

and run it through even though that was well short of even the 

normal four years. 

 

The public today, Mr. Speaker, don't like that type of 

politicking or electioneering.  Many people in our province are 

exposed to American television.  I find a lot of empathy from 

the public with the American model where they elect their 

presidents every four years at a set time.  They find that system 

better 

because it doesn't allow as much manipulation of the political 

system.  I think, Mr. Speaker, that we would not be 

Americanizing our system; we would simply be putting in 

place the wants of the public that we serve. 

 

The entire thrust, Mr. Speaker, of all of the Bills that we 

brought forward this session -- and I believe there's eight of 

them; the first time in the history of our province that an 

opposition party has brought forward a concerted legislative 

package of Bills to the House -- that the entire intent of that 

legislative package, Mr. Speaker, is to put in place regimes that 

the public feel more comfortable with, that allows them greater 

access to debate in this House, that does things that put power 

back in the hands of individual members. 

 

Because I think, Mr. Speaker, if there is one overriding 

criticism of our parliamentary system that I hear from the 

public, and I think that all members hear, is that the shift of 

power from the private member to executive government has 

increased far beyond what it was ever intended in the British 

parliamentary system. 

 

It was interesting having the opportunity to visit with the High 

Commissioner from Great Britain the other day, and talking 

about the House in Westminster, where we sent the member 

from Humboldt this session, to observe.  All of the checks and 

balances that are in Westminster with the different types of 

votes there, that allow private members far more flexibility in 

issues such as this. 

 

Private members in Westminster would have no problem 

voting against their own government on certain issues because 

they are viewed by the public as issues that should not have the 

mandate of Executive Council, the whip, in place.  In our 

Legislative Assembly here, nearly every vote is considered a 

confidence vote and members don't have the latitude to discuss 

issues the same way that they do in many other parliamentary 

democracies. 

 

(1615) 

 

Our entire legislative package, Mr. Speaker, is aimed at 

enhancing the rights and privileges and responsibility of 

individual members.  And I think individual members would 

take the issue surrounding four-year fixed terms very seriously.  

Because all of us come to this House as an individual member 

and then are selected afterwards to serving cabinet or to serve 

as Speaker, or serve in some capacity beyond that.  But we're 

all private members, who come to this House to be sworn in 

because we have gained the confidence of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any initiatives that come before this House that 

enhance those responsibilities for private members are 

something that we should take seriously, very, very seriously.  

Because that is the want of the public.  That is why the public 

today have a lot of cynicism with our system, because private 

members have either abdicated that responsibility or simply 

have been led to believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

other ways, i.e., caucus, party, to express those opinions. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in the paramountcy of this 

institution.  I honestly do.  After serving here for nine years, I 

believe in this institution.  And I think it is incumbent upon us 

to put back in place measures and systems, Mr. Speaker, that 

will make the public feel comfortable with that concept, feel 

comfortable with that concept of the primacy and the 

accountability of this institution. 

 

The four-year term, Mr. Speaker, is not something new to all of 

the political parties in this House.  It was in the platform of the 

Liberal Party prior to the 1991 election.  It was in the platform 

of the New Democratic Party prior to the 1991 election.  It has 

been talked about by the Reform Party of Canada.  It is not 

new, Mr. Speaker, to political thought in this country. 

 

But it was absolutely time, Mr. Speaker, that the issues come 

before the proper forum for discussion and that is this House.  

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, it was included in the package. 

 

This particular Bill does not take away the power of the 

Premier to set the date of the next election.  The Premier was 

elected prior to this Bill being brought before the House and the 

Premier should have the privilege and the opportunity to call an 

election based on the old rules. 

 

And it would be the election thereafter, Mr. Speaker, that 

would be the mandated four-year term.  So there's nothing in 

this Bill that takes away anything from the existing government 

-- nothing. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that members of the 

government would feel quite comfortable in discussing and 

debating this issue because it takes away nothing from the 

mandate which they received in October, 1991 -- nothing at all. 

 

And the date, Mr. Speaker, that was picked may not be the best 

date.  I admit that there is a little bit of bias in the Bill on my 

behalf because I've always felt that June is probably one of the 

nicest and best months in this entire province. 

 

It's when this province, which is an agricultural province, is at 

its greenest, usually.  It is when people feel very optimistic 

about the future of this province is usually in the month of 

June.  And I have always thought that we as politicians, who 

are supposed to have the best interests of the people of this 

province at heart, who are here to serve the population of this 

province, could probably present ourselves in the best way 

possible if we were campaigning in the month of June, every 

four years, for an election. 

 

But maybe that's not the most practical date, Mr. Speaker, and 

maybe other members of this Assembly have got other 

suggestions that would make more sense.  And I would be 

pleased to listen to those suggestions, Mr. Speaker; pleased that 

this Bill could move through second reading and into 

committee 

stage.  And at that time, do the proper amending, by all 

members of this House, to set in place a date that makes sense 

to Saskatchewan's people. 

 

And if necessary, take the time to hold a hearing process.  This 

Bill perhaps doesn't have to be passed this session; that that 

hearing process be put in place and let the public speak out on 

it.  And if October is the preference, then October it will be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is something that is on the minds of 

people.  It would be seen as very progressive and democratic, I 

think, and something that most of the people who we represent 

as legislators would be saying, well done, I can agree with that; 

you have moved the democratic process forward, and you have 

done it in such a way that you have not bickered this thing 

about in a partisan way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that as I take my seat that 

other members would get up and bring the views of their 

constituents forward on this issue, bring forward their ideas 

perhaps on date changes, and bring forward ideas that would 

make the electoral process in the province of Saskatchewan 

more open, democratic, and accountable. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of 

Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (Four Year Term). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to enter into debate on this private members' Bill that's 

before us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I listened carefully to the words of the 

Leader of the Opposition, the phrase kept going through my 

mind that the road to Damascus is a wonderful thing.  It is 

ironical indeed that it would be the Leader of the Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan that would be moving this piece of 

legislation for this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just remind the Assembly and put into a 

context here the purpose that people who are supportive of the 

notion that the Leader of the Opposition presents, the purpose 

that they would like to achieve.  I was just speaking a few 

moments ago with the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview-Haultain who reminded me that when he was elected 

in a by-election into this Assembly in 1988, in the last term of 

the Conservative government, that when his seat was filled in 

this Assembly, it had been vacant for the longest time of a 

provincial legislature in the history of Canada -- for 10 months 

-- when it was finally filled. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was an annoying contradiction of 

democracy and democratic principle that this government 

remedied within days of coming to office -- passed in this 

Assembly in December of 1991 a Bill that requires within six 

months of a vacancy that an election will be held in order to 

ensure representation of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That's 



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

democratic reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, what I found interesting is that 

after the member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain had come 

to this House to represent the people of Saskatoon, his riding, 

after a 10-month vacancy, that that same Conservative 

government when we finally had an election call in the fall of 

1991 had four vacancies and, Mr. Speaker, two of those 

vacancies were in excess of two years, a period of time half of 

a term as proposed by the entire length of the term by the 

Leader of the Opposition today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I listened, the road to Damascus is a 

wonderful thing indeed.  We have seen reform taking place in 

the mind of the Leader of the Opposition, who more than 

anything else recognizes that his party at this stage, in order to 

regain just a crumb of credibility in the eyes of Saskatchewan 

people, is going to have to wear sackcloth and ashes, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is their way of doing it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there must be a little more serious thought 

and reason; there must be a little more serious thought and 

reason in dealing with the issue of the timing of elections.  Mr. 

Speaker, we live in a nation which has a constitution.  Let me 

remind the Assembly, in this country in which we live, by the 

Canadian constitution there must be an election at any 

jurisdiction, whether that be federal or provincial, within five 

years. 

 

Let me remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that in 1986 the 

election called by the Conservative government of the day was 

held on October 20, 1986, and then the election in 1991, called 

again by the Conservative government of the day, was held on 

October 21, 1991 -- five years and a day, one day longer than 

permissible by the Canadian constitution.  Thank you to the 

denial of the democratic process by the Conservative 

government of the day. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is hard to take seriously the arguments of 

the Leader of the Conservative Party today. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Ask the people, Glenn. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- He says, ask the people.  He says, ask the people.  

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Walk down your riding for a change. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I walked down.  The Leader of the Opposition 

says, walk down the street.  Mr. Speaker, I walked down the 

street through an election in which people were saying for 

months, in fact for years, before 1991, that there should be a 

four-year term. 

 

You know why they were saying that, Mr. Speaker?  They were 

saying that because they had two kinds of governments to 

compare in the history of 

Saskatchewan.  They had the Conservative government, which 

pushed it to the limit and then a day, and they compared that, in 

the history of Saskatchewan, to the Tommy Douglas, New 

Democrat, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 

New Democrat government, from 1944 to 1964, which called 

an election every four years.  Not because it had to, but because 

it had made a commitment to the people of the province to do 

that as a matter of responsible government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the people of Saskatchewan are saying is, 

we're happy with the Canadian constitution that requires it 

within five years, but what we want in the province of 

Saskatchewan is responsible government.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is what they have today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- And all of the wearing of sackcloth and ashes in 

public, in this Legislative Assembly, as proposed by the Leader 

of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, does not do away, does not do 

away with that sentiment of the people of Saskatchewan who 

found it to be a day of victory and freedom on October 21, 

1991 because they no longer, they no longer had a government 

in the province of Saskatchewan that blatantly denied the 

principles of democracy and representation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has clamoured 

for weeks about having the opportunity to bring his thoughts 

and his repentance and his proposal for what would be the 

new-found Tory resolution for a representative democracy for 

this Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, he has had an opportunity to 

put his words on record on two Bills here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased, I am very pleased to have 

witnessed, to have witnessed these words of repentance on the 

part . . . by the Leader of the Opposition.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 

there's only one thing that would have made it perfect, and that 

would have been had it been by Gregorian chant. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that was not permissible in this Assembly. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, having had the opportunity to enjoy the 

remarks of the Leader of the Opposition, remind the Assembly 

of the history of Saskatchewan and that what people really 

want is responsible government.  We do have a country which 

has a constitution. I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave, that 

we move to motions for return (debatable). 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

Return No. 1 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina North West, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 1 as follows: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Agriculture's Farm Support 

Review Committee: (1) the amount the department has paid 

to each member for an indemnity, travel, lodging, meals and 

communications for their participation on the committee; (2) 

the amount the department has allocated to pay for the public 

meetings to be held by the committee in Melfort, Wadena, 

Spiritwood, Biggar, Swift Current, and Grenfell; and (3) the 

amount of that proposed expenditure that will be allocated to 

travel, lodging, meals, and communications for members of 

the committee. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1630) 

Return No. 2 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I move that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for a return showing, seconded by the member from Thunder 

Creek: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation: 

being this corporation recorded a loss of $150,494,000 in 

1992 (Public Accounts, Volume 1); a profit of $200,537,000 

in 1993; and had overestimated the final payment in 1991 by 

$85 million (Standing Committee of Public Accounts), I'd 

like to ask the question: (1) the reason the 1992-93 summary 

financial statement does not reflect an additional $85 million 

profit to account for the previous year's overestimation; (2) 

when the $85 million correction will be recorded in Public 

Accounts; and (3) where the $85 million correction will be 

recorded in those Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 3 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I move, seconded by the member from 

Regina North West, to move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 3 showing: 

 

 Regarding SaskPower Corporation's decision to purchase 25 

megawatts of electricity from non-utility sources: (1) whether 

SaskPower has selected a firm to supply the SaskPower 

Corporation with co-generated power; (2) the name of that 

firm and the criteria by which the firm was selected; (3) 

whether SaskPower did demand a deposit from any of the 

firms competing to supply SPC, Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, with this co-generated power; (4) if a 

deposit was required, the value of the deposit; (5) were the 

criteria for choosing the successful supplier clearly laid out 

for all the bidders before opening the competition. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could, by leave, 

introduce guests before I give a response. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce 

two special people who are seated in the west gallery, my son 

Matthew, and my son Travis.  Travis, you have to stand up too 

if you want to.  No.  And I just want to say that Matthew is in 

grade 3 and Travis is in grade 1 and they're with us to watch the 

proceedings for the next few minutes.  I appreciate that 

opportunity. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 3 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say on the return no. 3 that 

we will be providing, Mr. Speaker, this response in our answer 

to question no. 23, so we will be defeating this motion on the 

understanding that the answer to this will actually be provided 

in question no. 23.  And in order for this to show on the record, 

we will also be calling for a standing vote on this issue. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

The Speaker: -- Standing vote. Call in the members. 

 

I'm sorry.  There was only one member standing and I 

apologize to the House.  There will be no standing vote. 

 

Return No. 5 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Regina North West that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for return no. 5 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation (SPMC): (1) the number of air conditioner units 

that were purchased for use in provincially owned office 

buildings in the past year; (2) whether those purchases were 

made after public tender; (3) the value of such purchases; (4) 

the policy of the provincial government, specifically SPMC, 

regarding open tendering practices; and (5) the recourse in 

situations where open tendering practices have been violated. 

 

I so move. 



2198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 7 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Shaunavon, to move that an order of the Assembly 

do issue a return no. 7 showing: 

 

 Regarding the department of Executive Council: (1) the total 

expense incurred from expanding the cabinet from 16 to 18 

members; (2) the number of additional ministerial assistants 

or other staff that were hired; (3) whether there was any form 

of open competition for those positions, and if not, how were 

these staff enlisted and hired; (4) the total expense of those 

hired; (5) the total value of additional salaries provided to the 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) promoted to 

cabinet; and (6) the total value of additional benefits and 

allowances provided to MLAs promoted to cabinet. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 8 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to move that 

an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 8 showing 

that: 

 

 Regarding the Public Service Commission: (1) provide the 

number of individuals employed by the PSC that receive 

subsidized parking stalls; (2) the total amount monthly spent 

on providing parking stalls for these individuals. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 9 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Regina North West, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 9 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission's purchase 

of surveys and studies: (1) whether a survey done by Fox 

Consulting of Reno, Nevada purchased; (2) the total amount 

paid for the services provided by Fox Consulting; (3) the 

amount that was to provide for travel, lodging, 

communications, and entertainment expenses for the 

consultant, Ms. Candace Fox; (4) whether this contract was 

awarded following an open tender; (5) whether Fox 

Consulting was instructed to consult with people directly or 

indirectly affected by casino gambling, including licensed 

bingo charities, aboriginal peoples, the horse-racing industry 

and exhibition associations; (6) with whom did the Fox firm 

consult and at what length during 

the course of its survey into the feasibility of casino 

gambling; (7) whether there were any other surveys or studies 

commissioned by the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission 

from any other consultants; (8) if the answer to no. 7 is yes, 

who is performing those surveys or studies, at what cost, and 

are the surveys or studies available to the public. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 10 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 10 showing: 

 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Government Insurance (SGI): (1) 

the total amount of additional revenue that was generated by 

all increases in registration, licence fees, and vehicle 

insurance since November 1, 1991; (2) the percentage 

increases in registration, licence renewals, and vehicle 

insurance since November 1, 1991; (3) the average dollar 

amount increase per individual paid by Saskatchewan vehicle 

owners as a result of all SGI increases combined since 

November 1, 1991. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Morse. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 12 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for a return no. 12 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Workers' Compensation Board: (1) after 

moving from its past location, the value of the furnishings 

disposed of and whether those furnishings were sold 

according to SPMC, Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, guidelines; (2) the amount of the money that 

was paid to Brown & Associates in the past year and for what 

purpose was this payment made; (3) the cost of the electronic 

security system purchased by the Workers' Compensation 

Board; (4) the cost of the contract with Information Systems 

Management and the number of consultants that were hired 

as a result; (5) the contracts referred to in questions (2), (3), 

and (4) that were awarded after an open tender. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- Did the member say who her seconder was? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Shaunavon. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2199 

The Speaker: -- Shaunavon.  All right. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 13 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member for Moosomin, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue a return for no. 13 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health: dental health educators, 

classification no. 605210, have recently been reclassified to 

health educator 2, classification no. 108082 positions. Please 

provide details on this reclassification including: (1) the 

reasons for this reclassification; (2) the qualifications and 

educational requirements for both the dental health educators 

and the health educator 2 positions; (3) the pay range for each 

classification; (4) the number of individuals affected by this 

reclassification; (5) the total increased cost to the taxpayer by 

this reclassification in one fiscal year; (6) the total spent on 

dental health educators for the last fiscal year itemizing salary 

and expenses; and (7) who authorized the reclassification. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 14 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina North West, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 14 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Education:  (1) the number of 

student loans that were issued in the last year to 

Saskatchewan residents enrolled in educational programs in 

Saskatchewan; (2) the number of student loans that were 

issued in the last year to Saskatchewan residents enrolled in 

educational programs outside of Saskatchewan; (3) the 

number of those loans in (1) and (2) above that are in arrears; 

(4) the total dollar value of the loans now in arrears. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

Return No. 15 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member for Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for return no. 15 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Social Services:  (1) the number 

of children that were forced to the government sponsored or 

supported child hunger programs in the last year; (2) the 

number of meals that were served; (3) the amount the 

government paid to support these 

child hunger projects; (4) the number of non-governmental 

agencies that are involved and the level of funding they 

receive from the government as a percentage of their entire 

budgets. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 16 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for a return no. 16 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health and the prescription 

drug plan: (1) the amount that was paid by users of the plan 

in premiums in the last year; (2) the number of persons that 

received benefits from the plan during the last year; (3) the 

value of the benefits received; (4) the number of those 

receiving benefits that were seniors, on social assistance, or 

considered chronically ill; (5) the total value of prescription 

drugs purchased by the province of Saskatchewan from drug 

manufacturers and suppliers; (6) the number of prescriptions 

in total that have been ordered by Saskatchewan physicians 

for the past year, and how many of these prescriptions were 

actually filled. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 17 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for a return no. 17 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health: (1) the number of 

Saskatchewan residents that have gone out of province for 

eye surgery in the past year; (2) the cost of those surgeries; 

(3) the amount of the total cost that was reimbursed by the 

Saskatchewan government towards the cost of those 

procedures; (4) the number of Saskatchewan residents that 

have had eye surgery in the province of Saskatchewan in the 

past year; (5) the number of Saskatchewan residents that are 

on waiting-lists to have eye surgery performed in 

Saskatchewan and the anticipated time frame for having 

those operations performed. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 18 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member for Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for return no. 18 showing: 



2200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

 Regarding the Department of Health: (1) the current policy 

of the Department of Health regarding health care 

coverage for foreign students;  (2) the actual cost to the 

Department of Health for coverage under this policy in the 

past; (3) the nature of the policy review that is currently 

taking place, i.e., the mandate, the policy that is driving 

this review; (4) when will the review be completed, and 

when will the affected students be notified of any 

proposed change to the existing policy. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 19 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 19 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 

please provide information on special warrant no. 63/94 

authorizing an additional expenditure of 14,776,000 for a 

write-off in the corporation including:  (1) why the write-off 

occurred; (2) what the write-off was for; (3) where this figure 

will be documented in Public Accounts; and (4) when this 

figure will be documented in Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 21 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina North West, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 21 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation: (1) 

the number of farmers that have dropped out of the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program during the past year; 

(2) the number of acres that have been taken out of the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program during the past year 

that are no longer insured. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 23 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Kindersley, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 23 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation's request to 

communities, agencies and other organizations to submit 

proposals for co-generation projects: whether a 

decision has been reached on any projects and if not, the 

reason for the delay and when will a decision be reached. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 24 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Wilkie, that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for a return no. 24 showing: 

 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Energy Corporation, SaskEnergy, 

please provide: (1) a list of all fees and charges levied by 

SaskEnergy; (2) the amount of increase in each fee and 

charge in the last fiscal year; (3) total revenue raised by fees 

and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (4) additional revenue 

raised by increases in fees and charges in the fiscal year of 

1993; (5) total revenue raised by fees and charges, to date, in 

the fiscal year of 1994; (6) the projected revenue for the fees 

and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (7) the projected 

revenue for the fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1994. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would move a small 

amendment to the motion in order to make it conform with 

what we have provided in the past, in fact what has been 

provided for many, many years in the House. 

 

I would move, seconded by the member for Rosetown, that in 

return no. 24: 

 

 To add the words "and decrease" in question no. (2), after the 

word "increase"; 

 

 and further, to delete the words in no. (5) "total raised by fees 

and charges, to date, in the fiscal year of '94", and the words 

in (7) "the projected revenue for fees and charges in the fiscal 

year of '94"; 

 

 and renumber no. (6) as no. (5). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 25 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 25 showing: 

 

 Regarding SaskTel, please provide: (1) a list of all fees and 

charges levied by SaskTel; (2) the amount of increase in each 

fee and charge in the last fiscal year; (3) total revenue raised 

by fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (4) additional 

revenue raised by increase in fees 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2201 

and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (5) total revenue raised 

by fees and charges to date, in the fiscal year of 1994; (6) the 

projected revenue of all fees and charges in the fiscal year of 

1993; (7) the projected revenue of all fees and charges in the 

fiscal year of 1994. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons 

as mentioned in the previous motion, I would move, seconded 

by the member from Melfort, that: 

 

 To add the words "and decrease" in question (2) after the 

word "increase"; 

 

 and further to delete the words in (5) "total raised by fees and 

charges to date, in the fiscal year of '94"; and the words in (7) 

"the projected revenue and fees and charges in the fiscal year 

'94"; 

 

 and renumber (6) as (5). 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well on this motion, in terms of providing the 

material asked for, I would ask leave that the Assembly receive 

only one copy of this information. 

 

SaskTel is telling us that each answer, because of the vast 

volume of material involved, costs about a thousand dollars per 

set.  And we would ask that rather than making seven copies, 

we provide one copy for the Assembly, and those who actually 

need a copy would come and make their own. 

 

I can provide it, but they cost about a thousand dollars per set 

for the information that we're talking about here.  Just to give 

you an idea of the absolute cost -- this is just in the printing and 

providing -- but these questions do come with a fair price tag; 

and in this one, because of the extent of the cost, I would ask 

that by leave we provide only one copy. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 26 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 26 showing: 

 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Power Corporation, SPC, please 

provide: (1) a list of all fees and charges levied by SPC; (2) 

the amount of increase in each fee and charge in the last 

fiscal year; (3) total revenue raised by fees and charges in the 

fiscal year of 1993; (4) additional revenue raised by increases 

in fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (5) total 

revenue raised by fees and charges to date in the fiscal 

 year of 1994;  (6) the projected revenue for the fees and 

charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (7) the projected revenue 

for the fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1994. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as with the previous 

two motions, I would move an amendment, seconded by the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow: 

 

 To add the words "and decrease" in question 2 after the word 

"increase". 

 

 And further to delete the words in (5) "total raised by fees 

and charges to date in the fiscal year '94"; and the words in 

(7) "the projected revenue for the fees and charges in the 

fiscal year '94". 

 

 And renumber (6) as (5). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 27 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member for Moosomin, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return no. 27 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Finance, please provide:  (1) 

total revenue raised by taxation, excluding corporations, in 

the last fiscal year; (2) a detailed breakdown, by tax, of 

revenue raised; the projected revenue, by tax, for the last 

fiscal year; (4) the projected revenue, by tax, for the fiscal 

year of '94; (5) a list of studies conducted analysing the 

impact these taxes have on the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 29 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return No. 29 

showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health, of the 1,884 abortions 

covered by the Saskatchewan medical care insurance branch 

in 1992-93, the number conducted on individuals who had 

previously been covered for this procedure. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Moosomin. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 30 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move: 



2202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

 That an order of the Assembly do issue for returns no. 30, 

no. 31, no. 32, no. 33, no. 34, and no. 35 showing. 

 

Seconded by the member from Wilkie. 

 

The Speaker: -- I believe the member should ask leave to do 

this, just in case there may be an amendment or two on any one 

of these.  Are there amendments?  Does the member ask for 

leave . . . (inaudible) . . . Does the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 36 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue a return for no. 36 

showing: 

 

 Regarding SaskPower:  The minister responsible has stated 

that Mr. David Dombowsky has "literally to this time saved 

us tens of millions of dollars" -- Hansard, March 11, 1994, 

page 816: (1) the detailed information regarding the tens of 

millions of dollars that Mr. Dombowsky has saved the 

provincial government; (2) the full details of the number of 

contracts that Mr. Dombowsky has had with SaskPower since 

November 1, 1991; (3) copies of each contract with Mr. 

Dombowsky since November 1, 1991 and the details 

including expenses, fees, length of contract, purpose of 

contract, and how each contract has benefited the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I suggest a small 

amendment to return no. 36: 

 

 to delete: 

 

 (3) copies of each contract with Mr. Dombowsky since 

November of '91 and the details including expenses, fees, 

length of contract, purpose of contract and how each contract 

has benefited the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

 and substitute therefor: 

 

 (3) the details of Mr. Dombowsky's contract with SaskPower 

including expenses, fees, length of contract, and purpose of 

contract. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Rosetown. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

Return No. 40 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Shaunavon, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 40 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority: 

for all Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority's 

full-time equivalents: (1) the number of those FTEs in 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority that are 

temporary, part-time, labour service or summer students; (2) 

the payroll cost for all those employees in (1); (3) the number 

of those positions that will be affected by the proposed 

changes to The Labour Standards Act as contained in Bill 32; 

(4) the projected cost to the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority for (3) above; (5) whether the cost stated 

in (4) has been factored into the expenditure estimates for 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to be 

making one small amendment which basically takes into 

account the fact that the regulations for The Labour Standards 

Act are not in place yet and will be developed by the sectoral 

committees.  And therefore part (3), (4), and (5) we won't be 

able to give to you at this time because of the fact that they're 

just not there. 

 

And so I would move, seconded by the member for Rosetown: 

 

 to delete parts (3), (4), and (5), in return no. 40. 

 

And I would so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 41 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon Greystone, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 41 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Public Service Commission: for all provincial 

government full-time equivalents covered by The Public 

Service Act: (1) the number of those full-time equivalents 

government-wide that are temporary, part time, labour 

service or summer students; and (2) the departments that 

those above-named categories of employees are located and 

in what numbers; (3) the payroll cost for those employees on 

a department basis; (4) the number of those positions that will 

be affected by the proposed changes to The Labour Standards 

Act as contained in Bill 32; (5) the projected cost for the 

government as a whole 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2203 

and on a department basis for (4) above; (6) whether the cost 

stated in (5) has been factored into the expenditure estimates 

for the government as a whole and each government 

department. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as with the previous 

motion, because we can't provide the specific amount that this 

will cost because of the development of the regulations, I 

would move, seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow: 

 

 That in return no. 41 to delete parts (3), (4), and (5). 

 

I would so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 42 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member from Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for return no. 42 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Water Corporation: for all 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation's full-time equivalents: (1) 

the number of these FTEs in Saskatchewan Water 

Corporation that are temporary, part time, labour service, or 

summer students; (2) the payroll cost for all those employees 

in no. (1); (3) the number of those positions that will be 

affected by the proposed changes to The Labour Standards 

Act as contained in Bill 32; (4) the projected cost to 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation for (3) above; (5) whether 

the cost stated in (4) has been factored into the expenditure 

estimates for Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons, I 

would move, seconded by the member for Rosetown: 

 

 That in return no. 42, to delete parts (3), (4), and (5). 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 43 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina North West, 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 43 

showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, SPMC: for all SPMC full-time equivalents not 

covered by the The Public Service Act: (1) the number of 

full-time equivalents in SPMC that are temporary, part time, 

labour service, or summer students; (2) the payroll cost for all 

those employees in (1); (3) the number of those positions that 

will be affected by the proposed changes to The Labour 

Standards Act contained in Bill 32; (4) the projected cost to 

SPMC for (3) above; and (5) whether the cost stated in (4) 

has been been factored into the expenditure estimates for 

SPMC. 

 

I so move. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, for the same reasons 

elaborated on in the last two motions, I would move, seconded 

by the member from Melfort: 

 

 That in return no. 43, to delete parts 3, 4, and 5. 

 

I so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 45 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded 

by the member for Shaunavon, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return no. 45 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Justice: (1) the benefits that 

Provincial Court judges receive in addition to their base 

salary; (2) the value of benefits payments detailed in (1) 

above last year; (3) the transportation allowance paid to 

Provincial Court judges; (4) the value of all payments 

detailed in (3) above last year; (5) the per diem paid to 

Provincial Court judges while travelling or hearing cases; (6) 

the value of all payments detailed in (5) above last year. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The Chair: -- It being past 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


