




















































Hansard: March 04, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 629 

 March 4, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the other members of this 

Assembly, sitting in the west gallery there, my constituency 

assistant and my very able campaign manager at the last 

election, Debbie McDonald and her son Taylore; and two 

friends and neighbours of Taylore, namely Blake Mulatz and 

Frank Mulatz.  And I'd ask you to welcome them to Regina, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grey Cup Bid 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is for the Premier of the province.  Mr. 

Speaker, we all knew that if the government continued, and the 

ministers and the Premier continued to make as many trips as 

they have been making over the last while, eventually one of 

them would pay some dividends. 

 

And I'd like to congratulate the government today, Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, congratulate them 

for bringing the Grey Cup to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, as you know, this is the first time 

that the Grey Cup will be hosted in Saskatchewan, and I'd like 

the Premier or his designate to provide us with a brief report of 

the trip to Sacramento and the results of that trip. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to join 

with the hon. member in basically congratulating the people of 

the province and in particular the bid committee that has spent 

an enormous amount of time and effort in putting together a bid 

over the last number of months.  This is not something that has 

come up recently.  There have been a number of meetings with 

Mr. Shepherd and Mr. Lipp who have been the promoters; of 

course, the team through Al Ford and the Regina Economic 

Development Authority. 

 

The city of Regina were very instrumental in putting together a 

bid that in the end won the day yesterday in Sacramento.  And I 

think we're all proud of that.  Obviously our Premier played -- 

as Mr. Lipp says -- a key role in making it happen with a very 

appropriate speech, talking about the advantages of coming to 

Saskatchewan.  This is a similar speech and recommendation 

that was given to Sears Canada when the call centre came here, 

about the advantages 

of having relatively low utility rates, second lowest in Canada; 

a relatively reasonable taxation policy.  And I say to the 

member opposite is the kind of theme that the Premier took to 

Monsanto a few weeks ago in St. Louis.  And the Premier, 

being the best sales person in the province, has a key role to 

play in these kind of projects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand that the Premier's speech was indeed a major factor 

in the CFL's decision.  And we've always known, Mr. Minister, 

that the Premier is a great campaigner, no question about it.  

After all, just look around, Mr. Speaker, at the number of 

people that he was able to get elected almost single-handedly.  

And there's no telling, Mr. Minister, when he has a good cause 

to promote he can do well, like he did yesterday. 

 

But I have to remind the government of one thing that hasn't 

been accomplished under an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government.  The Riders, the Saskatchewan Roughriders, won 

a Grey Cup while under the Liberals when they were in 

government.  They won a Grey Cup while under the Tory 

administration.  And yet after all of the years that the NDP has 

been in office in Saskatchewan, they have yet to be able to win 

a Grey Cup under the term of an NDP administration. 

 

Mr. Minister, on a lighter side, I wonder if you might be able to 

give the assurance to the people of Saskatchewan that indeed in 

1995 that Saskatchewan will be the host team and the winner of 

the Grey Cup. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. 

member, I'd like to say that it is very important that he 

recognize the fact that it was an NDP government that got the 

first Grey Cup to the province of Saskatchewan.  And that is 

something that you, sir, in your party still have to try to 

achieve. 

 

Now on the side of the issue of winning the Grey Cup, there 

would be nothing we would like better.  And you can be 

guaranteed we're going to be doing everything in our darned 

power to make sure that when the Grey Cup is held in 1995 in 

the fall in my constituency, in Regina Elphinstone, that we will 

be doing everything we can to make sure Saskatchewan 

Roughriders are there and winning the Grey Cup. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'm sure 

that the Roughriders take great comfort in knowing that you'll 

be helping in every way possible, particularly with the things 

like the training and all of that, I'm sure. 

 

On a more serious note, Mr. Minister, on a more serious note 

now, has the government provided or 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

committed any funds or concessions to the Roughriders or to 

the CFL (Canadian Football League) to bring the Grey Cup to 

Saskatchewan?  And if they have, I wonder if you'd care to 

report on that today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, at this time, as you 

know, and just so we have a background of the arrangement 

that exists with the Saskatchewan Roughriders, when we came 

to office we found that there had been a guarantee given to the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders by the previous administration, a 

loan guarantee for about a million dollars, that had never been 

made public or had never seen the light of day. 

 

In fact it was about six months after we took power that I found 

in SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation) there had been a secret arrangement made to give 

a loan guarantee with no charge or fees attached to it.  And this 

says something about the process that was followed. 

 

Following that, the Roughriders came to us and asked for a 

further $1.1 million above the $1 million that was already in 

place.  We agreed and told the public with the positive and 

negative ramifications of that, that we would guarantee a $2.1 

million loan guarantee, but that we would charge a fee of 2 per 

cent for arranging the loan guarantee.  And that was done 

through the Department of Economic Development. 

 

So the people of the province, while they're giving a guarantee 

of $2.1 million, are receiving a very reasonable -- I might say 

as high as anyone would get for a loan guarantee -- 2 per cent 

commission for arranging the loan guarantee.  That's our 

commitment at this point. 

 

Future developments that might be needed in that area, if the 

Roughriders are approaching us I'm not aware of it.  But at this 

point we have, as I have already indicated, a loan guarantee, 

$2.1 million at 2 per cent for the loan guarantee.  Part of that is 

an arrangement by the previous administration, part by our 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Livestock Program Proposal 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, now while we all 

know that the Premier is the quarterback of the NDP team, Mr. 

Speaker, my question is to their drawback, the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, for some time now we have been monitoring . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows that 

any adjectives like that when referring to a minister are simply 

not permitted in question period.  Order, order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- For some time now, Minister of Agriculture, 

we have been monitoring your moves towards taking over the 

cattle producers voluntary research and marketing fund.  Now 

quite frankly, Mr. 

Minister, we feel your approach is less than honourable.  Today 

we see the issue has been made public and so we want to 

discuss it with you, Mr. Minister. 

 

And my question is fairly simple.  Is it your intention to 

introduce legislation during this session to combine the horned 

cattle trust fund and the cattle marketing deduction, and change 

the committee which administers that fund to include two of 

your own appointees and the members from the Wheat Pool 

and the National Farmers Union? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have not yet made 

a decision on bringing that Bill forward.  This Bill was in a 

response to requests from the Livestock Policy Advisory 

Committee who recommended that we combine these 

committees, that we increase the horned check-off fund, the 

fee, and that we increase the check-off.  And those 

recommendations were made to us.  We've been discussing 

within the industry.  There's a good deal of dispute over who 

should sit on the board and no decision has been made whether 

or not that will be brought to this House in this session at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Minister, 

we're happy that you haven't made a decision yet and we hope 

that you will continue to review the circumstances around it. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Stock Growers' Association and the 

Saskatchewan Livestock Association have both made 

submissions to you, completely disagreeing with the proposal 

that we have heard about.  Now they say there is no reason why 

the Wheat Pool should have representation on a producer 

committee.  The Pool is a major marketer of cattle, not a cattle 

producer.  And the NFU (National Farmers Union), they argue, 

is a national political lobby and not much more.  That is their 

position, Mr. Minister. 

 

What is the purpose of putting these two groups and two of 

your political appointees on a committee to administer a 

voluntary producer fund?  Perhaps you could tell us what you 

think is broken that needs to be fixed, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we had submissions 

from the stock growers themselves asking for the Act to be 

opened up to increase the fees.  I might remind the member 

opposite that the stock growers are part of the Livestock Policy 

Advisory Committee that recommended to me to combine 

those boards.  And one of those boards already has farmers 

union members on it and so on. 

 

But I will repeat to the member that I do not intend to inflame 

the conflicts that exist between farm groups.  We're talking to 

the farm groups.  We haven't made a 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

decision as to whether or not we bring this Bill in. 

 

Our concern is for the beef industry and that there continues to 

be adequate funds for research and development in the beef 

industry.  Witness that -- 1.3 million in our budget which will 

be matched by the federal government for a beef development 

fund and agreement with the industry that we need to increase 

the check-off to have more money there in order to enhance the 

beef industry in this province.  That's our main concern, not the 

petty politics between farm groups that you seem to want to get 

involved in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that if the cattle 

producers were involved in the committee, you must have a 

split decision on that committee because they obviously would 

not have agreed in that committee with the recommendations 

that I've read in the newspaper.  Now we have problems not 

only with the intent of this legislation, but with the way that 

you have gone about it.  We have been told that you have been 

less than professional, uncooperative, and very selective in 

your approach to bringing in this legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you provide a list of groups and individuals 

that you have talked to in the last few months regarding this 

issue, and can you tell us about the outcome of the meetings 

that you have had? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite will have to ask the stock growers why they advised 

one thing and signed the Livestock Policy Advisory Committee 

report to me, requesting the combination of these boards, and 

now say they are opposed to it.  I think you have to ask the 

stock growers, and they may have had a change of opinion, and 

I don't know why that is. 

 

We have been talking to all of the groups involved in this, and 

we are continuing to talk to them.  Met with the stock growers, 

along with ag caucus, representatives of the stock growers and 

ag caucus just this week.  So we continue to meet with groups 

and try to iron out the differences so that we can get on with 

enhancing the beef industry in this province and not quibble 

about who represents beef producers. 

 

I think the Wheat Pool and the farmers' union represent many 

beef producers in this province, as do the stock growers and as 

does the livestock association and as do the dairy producers and 

others.  And we want to have everybody's input into how we do 

research and development and where the money gets spent.  

And that's all we're trying to achieve, is a balance so that we 

can get on with enhancing the beef industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, are 

you saying to me that the stock growers and the cattlemen of 

this province have come into a committee that you set up and 

agreed in that 

committee that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and the National 

Farmers Union and the NDP selected hacks should be allowed 

to administer their horned cattle fund.  Are you saying that they 

have agreed to that?  I'd like you to answer that question 

directly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, what I said was that 

the Livestock Policy Advisory Committee on which the stock 

growers sit recommended combination of these two 

committees.  And upon consultation with the members as to 

who sits on there, we are now doing those consultations.  That 

was exactly the recommendation of the Livestock Policy 

Advisory Committee to the minister. 

 

And if there's a dispute and that's what the dispute is over, as to 

who gets to sit and who represents beef producers, I would tell 

the member opposite that in my riding many of the beef 

producers are not represented by any of those organizations.  

They spend their time doing chores, not going to meetings.  

And who speaks for them is a question that may have to be 

decided by elections, I don't know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 

confirm some of the rumours that we have been hearing with 

respect to your conduct with the producer groups that you have 

been consulting with.  Mr. Minister, as I have said earlier, we 

have heard that you were less than professional when you were 

meeting with these groups.  And I ask you specifically, Mr. 

Minister, will you report to this Assembly what went on at 

those meetings?  What exactly was said?  What did you say to 

those people and what did they say to you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we've had many 

meetings with many livestock groups.  What I ask when I go to 

meetings is confidentiality of the discussions at meetings.  I 

honour that when I go out of the meetings.  At the meetings 

we've had some discussion, and strong opinions have been 

expressed on all sides on all these issues, and we continue to 

meet with all the groups. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Piper Aircraft Bid 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the Minister of Economic Development.  Many 

months ago you said you had a list of some 700 companies that 

your department was pursuing.  All you have to do is look 

around and see there's very little evidence of any economic 

development coming to our province.  For example, let's take a 

look at the failed attempt to land the Piper Aircraft company.  

Your government invested $650,000 and the result was a big 

zero. 

 

We note with interest that one of the firms your government 

used to try to secure Piper was a company called G-5 

Management.  For its services, G-5 was paid $40,261.  Our 

investigation shows G-5 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

Management lists its sole shareholder as Mr. Reg Gross, a 

former New Democrat cabinet minister, close personal friend 

of the Premier. 

 

To the minister: what is the track record and success of G-5 in 

economic development that prompted you to hire this 

company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite that when it comes to economic development, one of 

the main areas where we're focusing on is regional economic 

development authorities. 

 

I say to the member opposite that I have had great cooperation 

from some members of the Conservative caucus in working 

with them on economic development.  I have to say the 

member from Kindersley, for example, when it comes to the 

winter games, came to me early.  We worked together, not 

always to the satisfaction of everyone, but there was positive 

initiatives put forward. 

 

I cannot say the same thing from the member from Shaunavon, 

who has done little or nothing to work with the regional 

economic development people in Shaunavon, but instead 

scurries around behind the scenes, trying to put down anyone 

who is doing anything positive in his community.  I say that's 

very unfortunate, and you might learn from the member sitting 

beside you from Kindersley as to how to positively build a 

community.  There's a great deal you could do. 

 

When it comes to G-5, you're right; the main shareholder in 

that company is one Mr. Reg Gross.  His track record -- again I 

refer to Kindersley -- my understanding is, did a report on the 

Eston airport some years ago, has a great deal of expertise in 

working with aircraft, is a former owner of a spray company.  

Anyone in the public who knows Mr. Gross, knows he is not 

only an enthusiast about aircraft but is as knowledgeable about 

aircraft and the aircraft industry as anyone else. 

 

One thing I will not take is criticism from that member from 

Shaunavon that he knows anything about economic 

development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I obviously have 

hit a nerve here.  Mr. Gross's company, G-5 Management, is 

listed as a fund-raising and promotion company.  Now I know 

Mr. Gross did an admirable job when he was raising funds for 

the New Democratic Party and for the Premier, but to the 

minister: can you explain what role a fund-raising, promotion 

company would play in economic development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

people who work for our government who have a record with 

the New Democratic Party, there's no doubt about it.  Some 

have a record with the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party, 

even some with the 

Liberal Party. 

 

But what I find interesting is the criticism from that member 

about new-style politics.  The other day in the House, Mr. Ted 

Yarnton, who was the bagman for the Tory Party and used to 

bring the booze to the Assembly -- it's on record -- for Joan 

Duncan, the former cabinet minister, is here as part of the new 

team of the Liberal Party.  This is the new politics. 

 

And for you to be criticizing because there are some New 

Democrats who work in a New Democratic government, is a 

little bit absurd and strikes a note that the member simply 

doesn't know what he's talking about when he talks about new 

politics in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

your government is more concerned with creating economic 

prosperity for your friends and party faithful than for the people 

of Saskatchewan.  According to the Leader-Post, more than 

$650,000 was spent by SEDCO to secure Piper, most of it 

being accountants' fees.  It goes on to say that in addition, the 

Economic Development minister's department spent $30,000 

on the Piper bid. 

 

To the minister: how much, if any, of that $30,000 was paid to 

Mr. Gross and if none, well what was it used for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member clearly that he points out one New Democrat who 

worked and earned a small amount of money on the Piper 

project.  Some of our other new-found friends who he will want 

to check into their political background would be Mr. Paul Hill, 

obviously not a well-known New Democrat, who worked very 

closely with us. 

 

The record of the business people who work with this 

government is impeccable -- the chamber of commerce 

provincially, Mel Watson, who says that our economic 

development strategy, the Partnership for Renewal, is the 

Bible for economic development in the province.  Those are his 

words, not mine.  The people who went with the Premier to 

Sacramento to win the bid for the football Grey Cup to be in 

Saskatchewan are not well-known New Democrats. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Member, if you would get your head out of 

the sand and follow even along the lines of the other members 

of the opposition who are today very happy and pleased with 

the economic development taking place, you may get a little bit 

going in your community in south-west Saskatchewan.  It's 

your negative attitude that is causing the problems in your 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the minister 

well knows, it has nothing to do with my attitude when they 

pulled nearly every service out of 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

that constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious your government is not doing the 

best possible job in bringing economic development to the 

province.  The NDP is no better than the Tories were.  It's just 

patronage, patronage, patronage.  To the minister: how many 

other times has G-5 Management and Mr. Gross been used to 

attract economic development to Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe once more 

the issue of G-5 . . . they were involved and brought us one 

project that we wanted to look at and worked with us on Piper.  

I think one. 

 

But that's one more than the Leader of Liberal Party who 

promised us to bring one project a week.  That's one more.  

And for that I thank Mr. Gross and G-5 because he's ahead by 

one of the Liberal leader, the member for Greystone who 

promised to bring one a week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tree Pruning Contract 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance). 

 

Yesterday's Star-Phoenix reported that a contract to prune 845 

trees in Saskatoon was awarded to an Edmonton tree firm 

instead of a local company.  Obviously many people are asking 

why we would award such contracts to an out-of-province firm 

rather than keeping the money in our local economy. 

 

One Saskatoon resident said: if city employees are too 

expensive, why not hire a local company to do the job instead 

of sending the money out of the province?  And that's a good 

question, Mr. Minister.  Do you know why a local company 

was not awarded this contract? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the member's 

questions: number one, he should get his facts straight.  In 

regards to the contract, the city of Saskatoon actually sets the 

contract and bonding requirements, not SGI.  The fact that the 

city has a contract, you know, is outside the province, is the 

city's business. 

 

In regards to the fact that in the paper also that there was 

something unusual.  Actually the city follows industry 

standards.  So that's the information, you know, for the 

member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, the city sets the requirement that the firms be bonded 

but SGI sets the standard.  The owner of Schwinghammer's 

Tree Service, a Saskatoon business, blames unreasonable 

provincial standards for preventing him from being awarded 

the bid for the tree pruning contract.  He said that SGI would 

not bond his firm unless he had close to $65,000 in his 

firm's bank account. 

 

Mr. Minister, this gentleman's company has been in business 

for 22 years.  He's obviously not a fly-by-night operation, Mr. 

Minister.  I'm sure that Mr. Schwinghammer would like to 

know why SGI is placing unreasonable standards on bonding to 

the point where his contracts are heading over the border.  Why 

is this, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, in response to 

the question from the member, again I might tell the member 

that these requirements are based on industry standards.  And 

again I would like to tell the member, it is the city of Saskatoon 

that sets the bonding requirement, not SGI.  SGI would supply 

a bond to the contractor to meet the requirements of the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

In most cases, SGI doesn't require any additional security in the 

way of a bond if the company has proven experience and 

financial strength.  I cannot comment on Mr. Schwinghammer's 

case.  However if he or any other contractor wishes to bid on 

contracts, SGI would be more than willing to help them 

anyway they can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day I would like to just 

remind members that pursuant to the rule changes on Monday 

that the House will open at 1:30 and not at 2 o'clock. 

 

Appointment of Acting Deputy Clerk 

 

The Speaker: -- Secondly, I have an announcement to make 

and that is that Gregory Putz has been temporarily appointed as 

the Deputy Clerk of this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Before orders of the day, I ask leave to present 

a private member's statement on Saskatchewan being awarded 

the Grey Cup. 

 

Leave granted. 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As everyone knows 

by now, Regina and Saskatchewan have been awarded the 1995 

Grey Cup game.  And Saskatchewan people are thrilled, as was 

our caucus unanimously this morning, and I have the privilege 

to express our delight. 

 

I have been a Rider fan and season ticket holder for over 30 

years.  And as many fans, I started in the rookie section, moved 

to the student section in the corner, finally got to the 15-yard 

line as a university student, and have now made it into the adult 

section near centre line. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Soon to be in the senior section. 

 

(1030) 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Yes, I may be in the senior section too at some 

time.  But where I sit at Rider games, there are people of all 

ages from all over the province sitting there.  Right in our own 

area there's people from Saskatoon, Regina, Lumsden, and 

Hudson Bay. 

 

The Saskatchewan Roughriders are truly a provincial team.  I 

have rejoiced in the good times, suffered in the bad ones, and, 

like Rider fans across the country, was absolutely jubilant when 

we won the Grey Cup in 1989. 

 

I am proud to be just one of the thousands who constitute the 

greatest fans in Canada.  Rider fanatics go right across this 

country, and now we have the chance to bring the entire 

country to our province of Saskatchewan to see the Grey Cup. 

 

I can say right now that the 1995 Grey Cup will be some game 

and some party.  The Riders have the greatest tradition in 

Canadian football.  The team has produced some of the greatest 

players in the CFL, and year in and year out have fielded 

exciting, competitive teams. 

 

I want to congratulate the Rider organization for over the years 

giving us Saskatchewan's team.  And now we all congratulate 

them for this fine accomplishment. 

 

To the bid committee, president John Lipp, former president 

Dick Rendek, Alan Ford, Tom Shepherd, we say well done.  

We should also thank Mayor Archer and Premier Romanow for 

their support. 

 

Winning the bid or the game for Saskatchewan was truly a 

provincial effort.  We did not win the bid because we had the 

most money to offer, but because we offered the Saskatchewan 

spirit of cooperation, community, and tradition. 

 

I am confident we will host the biggest Grey Cup home-coming 

spectacular in CFL history.  Congratulations, Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: -- With leave, to respond or to reply as well. 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member has a private statement to 

make, I would accept that by leave -- not to respond but to 

make a private statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I'd like to 

join with the member -- and I'm sure it frightens her that I 

would join with her, and it certainly does me, Mr. Speaker -- to 

congratulate the folks for their successful bid by bringing the 

Grey Cup to Saskatchewan in 1995. 

 

We all recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders have enjoyed a very proud tradition in 

Saskatchewan -- 84 years of involvement in our province.  And 

the people of Saskatchewan have been extremely supportive of 

them all the way. 

 

We only have to think back, Mr. Speaker, of the great players, 

just to name a few that have played with the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders over time -- the Ronnie Lancasters and the George 

Reeds in their last-minute come-backs that they used to 

perform on the field, Mr. Speaker, and all the excitement 

associated with those. 

 

People from all over the province have enjoyed the CFL and 

indeed the Saskatchewan Roughriders.  There's a number of 

season ticket holders, Mr. Speaker, from way over on the west 

side of the province where I'm from, and have supported the 

Roughriders over the years. 

 

So as I say, I'd like to join with the member and the 

government and all the members of the House today, in 

congratulating all associated with the bid, from the Roughrider 

management to the mayor of Regina and the Premier of the 

province for their very successful endeavours in bringing the 

Grey Cup to Saskatchewan in 1995. 

 

We hope, we sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Roughriders 

will not only be represented in spirit, in fact hosting it, but will 

be the team playing there that day and will be successful in 

winning the Grey Cup as well in '95. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I crave leave of the House to 

make a private member's statement on Telemiracle. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir, and members of 

the House.  Tomorrow the Kinsmen Telemiracle starts and will 

be broadcast throughout the province on both TV networks and 

six TV stations over the whole of this coming weekend. 

 

Telemiracle is appropriately so called.  It has wrought many 

miracles over the past 18 years of its existence.  I 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

doubt if there's a better organized and better supported 

fund-raiser in Canada, and deservedly so. 

 

Many top-line stars of the entertainment world freely give their 

time and their talents to this, what too many people consider 

the backwater in a cultural desert.  Saskatchewan of course is 

not a cultural desert or a backwater.  And it is organizations of 

the nature of the Kinsmen and the Kinettes, with their efforts 

for the Saskatchewan Association for Community Living, the 

Institute on the Prevention of Handicaps, the Kinsmen 

Children's Centre, Wheelchair Sports Association, Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre, Special Olympics, Heart and Stroke 

Foundation, and more, that give Saskatchewan the large and 

sensitive heart that it is renowned for. 

 

As mayor of Gravelbourg, I participated in Telemiracle from 

Regina, taking my place on the platform to answer the 

telephone and take pledges.  In Gravelbourg we have very 

active Kinsmen and Kinette clubs, through whose kind offices 

we obtained the special bus with a wheelchair lift for the use of 

our elderly, both in and out of the nursing home, and our 

disabled at the Sarcan workshop.  We are all indebted to the 

Kinsmen, the Kinettes, the Telemiracle, and I wish to put this 

House's thanks on record. 

 

Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- With leave, I would make a private member's 

statement on Telemiracle. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it would 

certainly seem a good day for all of us to congratulate some of 

the better things that happen in our province, and certainly the 

official opposition would not want to miss the opportunity to 

talk for a minute about the good things that the Kinsmen and 

Kinettes of this province do for people.  They certainly fill a 

void in that area of need where sometimes people fall through 

the cracks of our system and need that little extra help and that 

little extra boost and to get themselves on the way in life. 

 

Things like wheelchairs for those that can't afford to get them 

and are unable to get the kinds of service they need through the 

system are quickly helped by Kinsmen in many parts of our 

province.  I know that construction in private homes is even 

done at some times with the monies that are raised in order to 

facilitate those that are handicapped and have special needs. 

 

And so the tradition goes on and it is a remarkable thing how 

the people of Saskatchewan can and will pull together, Mr. 

Speaker, when things need to be done.  And that is proven by 

the fact that the Telemiracle program put on every year is such 

a huge success. 

 

I'm told that the Telemiracle broadcast and the 

contributions that are donated through that process are a 

phenomenon throughout the entire world.  There have been 

many, many kinds of requests for monies through the history of 

the world and this one is by far the most successful one ever to 

run in the world.  And they have a record there.  It's going to be 

in The Guinness Book of Records I'm sure.  So we congratulate 

all those who are involved and we wish them success in their 

endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

questions mentioned -- 40, 41, and 42 -- I request they be 

converted to motions for returns (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- 40, 41, 42, motions for return debate. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 

1994.  The Land Titles Act is being amended for two reasons. 

 

First, these amendments will clear up technical issues that have 

delayed the use of summary form mortgages.  Second, 

amendments will protect registered and caveated interests in 

land from off-registry interests. 

 

This Assembly passed amendments to The Land Titles Act in 

1992 that provided for the use of summary form mortgages.  

However these amendments have never been proclaimed 

because a number of technical issues have arisen. 

 

Under the current process the entire mortgage document must 

be reviewed and filed in the Land Titles Office.  Summary 

form mortgages will provide for a form mortgage containing 

standard provisions to be on file in the Land Titles offices.  

Summary forms can then be filed for specific mortgages 

identifying unique aspects of the mortgage agreement and 

incorporating, by reference, the standard mortgage provisions. 

 

Members of the Saskatchewan bar raised two concerns 

regarding the 1992 amendments for summary form mortgages.  

First, the bar was concerned that the amendments might 

prohibit the ability to register, by way of caveat, an interest in 

land created by a mortgage.  The bar was also concerned that 

the format requirements contained in the amendments might 

prohibit the creation of a valid mortgage.  The amendments 

before this House today will ensure that the use of summary 

form mortgages will not restrict the registration of land by way 

of a 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

caveat or the creation of a valid mortgage.  With these concerns 

addressed, the use of summary form mortgages can finally be 

implemented. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Land Titles Act 

being introduced today also protect purchasers from 

off-registry interests.  A major principle of our system of land 

registration is that purchasers who acquire an interest in land 

from an owner in whose name a certificate of title has been 

registered are not affected by knowledge of a non-registered 

interest.  Purchasers who acquire an interest in land from an 

owner with registered and caveated interests have assumed that 

this same principle protects them from off-registry interests. 

 

However the present wording of the Act does not clearly 

indicate that this principle also extends to purchasers who 

acquire an interest from an owner whose interest is registered 

or caveated, but in whose name a certificate of title has not 

been granted. 

 

The Alberta Court of Appeal has considered this issue in a 

court decision and expressed some reservations about the 

sufficiency of Alberta's legislation.  In that instance a company 

had purchased an oil lease which had been registered as a 

caveat but there was not a corresponding certificate of title in 

the vendor's name.  To ensure that there is sufficient protection 

against off-registry interests in Saskatchewan, section 237 of 

The Land Titles Act will be amended to provide that registered 

and caveated interests in land are protected from off-registry 

interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will address technical concerns 

to allow the use of summary form mortgages to proceed and 

will ensure that purchasers of interests in land for which a 

certificate of title has not been issued are protected from 

non-registered interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Land Titles Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in 

response to the minister's motion.  As the minister has said, this 

is a very technical question and, Mr. Speaker, it deserves due 

consideration and some investigation.  When you start talking 

about caveats on land property, I know that there are a good 

many landowners across this province that have a number of 

questions dealing with that, both the initiation of the caveat and 

the removal of a caveat. 

 

Non-registered or off-registered interest in property is also a 

very complex matter, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, and people 

need the time to have a look at what these changes will mean to 

them and what implications are in fact in place. 

 

One of the sections of the Bill that I find interesting and that 

needs some consideration is the making of this Act retroactive 

to 1906.  I'm sure there is a very good reason why the minister 

is doing that, but I think that 

also needs some exploration, Mr. Speaker, as to why this would 

be in place. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act respecting the Convention on the Law 

Applicable to Trusts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Trusts Convention Implementation Act. 

 

This Bill addresses legal confusion about the administration of 

trusts in those nations which have a civil law rather than a 

common law system.  The concept of a trust whereby a trustee 

holds property on behalf of beneficiaries is unknown to the 

civil law system. 

 

For example, a civil law jurisdiction such as France will deem a 

trustee to be the legal owner of trust funds, thereby making 

those trust funds subject to seizure by the trustee's creditors.  

This result was not intended by the creator of the trust and is 

disastrous for the intended beneficiary. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is uniform implementation legislation.  

When enacted, it will activate the international trusts 

convention in the province of Saskatchewan and establish an 

international protocol for the recognition of the administration 

of trusts by courts in civil law jurisdictions.  As Saskatchewan 

is a common law jurisdiction, this convention operates 

substantially to the benefit of Saskatchewan people who have 

assets held in trust or are trustees of assets held in trust in civil 

law jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, legislation to implement this convention has 

already been passed in British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, 

New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and Prince Edward Island.  

Through the introduction of this Bill, the province of 

Saskatchewan will gain access to the benefits of an important 

convention to which nations such as the United Kingdom, Italy, 

France, United States, and Australia are already signatories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act implementing 

The International Trust Convention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again we have 

another Bill that is fairly complex before us, and I must admit I 

had no expectations I would be standing in this House talking 

on a Hague convention. 

 

Dealing with trusts and trustees, Mr. Speaker, is very 

important.  People who place their money with a trustee do 

indeed need the protection of the law to ensure that their assets 

are safe from seizure.  The trustee in his place also needs 

protection that the 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

services he can provide and will perform are protected and that 

those clients which he has coming forward to him have their 

assets protected. 

 

This issue needs to be considered, Mr. Speaker, needs time for 

those parties who will be affected by this to have their input 

into the situation.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to Amend The Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Trustee Amendment Act, 1994.  The 

proposed amendment will provide for the payment of 

reasonable funeral, testamentary, and administrative expenses 

before other claims against an insolvent estate are paid. 

 

Currently the Act provides that where the assets of an estate are 

not sufficient to pay all claims, the claims will be paid 

proportionally.  Any excess expenses are the responsibility of 

the executor or administrator.  The proposed amendments to 

The Trustee Act will adopt the same approach that is taken by 

The Bankruptcy Act regarding the administration of insolvent 

estates.  Under The Bankruptcy Act, reasonable funeral and 

testamentary expenses have priority over other claims. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Trustee Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is an 

important protection for estates and the executors of the estates.  

I think this may very well be an excellent piece of legislation, 

although I do have one concern that people bring forward when 

estates are being resolved, and that is the administrative costs.  

And I think that needs to be looked at carefully when protection 

is given to the administration. 

 

There may well be people within the public who wish to have 

some comments on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, therefore I would 

move adjournment of it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act respecting Frustrated Contracts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today, conscious of a 

sense of anticipation in the House, to move second reading of 

The Frustrated Contracts Act. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a law reform Bill and is intended to fill a 

gap in the common law where a contract between parties 

becomes impossible to perform through no fault or action of 

either party. 

 

Sorry to let the House down by that statement of the intention 

of the Bill, considering the title of it, but it is really quite 

technical.  For example, a contract may be frustrated in law 

where an individual who is central to that contract dies, or in a 

situation where a natural disaster makes the contract impossible 

to perform. 

Under common law, when a contract cannot be performed the 

parties are released from further obligations under the contract.  

However there's no method for ensuring that the parties to the 

contract share the cost of the frustration of that contract in an 

equitable manner.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill addresses this 

problem in several ways. 

 

The Act provides for apportionment between the parties of any 

benefits remaining after the frustration of a contract.  The Act 

provides that all lost expenses under a contract will be 

apportioned.  The Act provides that any arbitration clause in a 

contract will survive the frustration of that contract to allow 

parties to seek to resolve the dispute on their own terms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will only apply to contracts that do not 

address the issue of frustration by the terms of that contract 

between the parties.  I should also note that the Act is not 

retroactive and will not apply to contracts which were in 

existence before this Act is proclaimed. 

 

Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia are currently the only provinces 

in Canada without this type of legislation. 

 

In 1988 the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan 

recommended implementation of frustrated contracts 

legislation.  We are confident that implementing a joint venture 

approach to the frustration of a contract so that parties equally 

share losses and benefits will increase equity in the 

Saskatchewan market-place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is pleased to introduce this Bill 

as an important element in its commitment to promote the 

ongoing reform of Saskatchewan legislation.  Mr. Speaker, I 

move second reading of An Act respecting Frustrated 

Contracts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

it seems like you're taking up a new career as a conductor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does lend itself to some questions as to 

the meaning of a frustrated contract.  While it may indeed mean 

a circumstance where both parties are affected by something 

beyond their individual control, there are a number of people 

across this province who would look at frustrated contracts in a 

different manner. 

 

I notice that this Bill, the minister has clearly stated will not be 

retroactive.  And I wonder if there is a particular reason for 

that, given the consideration that some members of the public 

and some organizations feel that their contracts were frustrated 

when it comes to dealing with civil servants' contracts, GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program), and the Co-op upgrader. 

 

This Act also binds the Crown, and given the history of this 

government, I find that one somewhat surprising that it would 

be in there.  Because most pieces of 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

legislation that have come forward before this government that 

have any real substance to them have allowed the government 

to escape from the court imposing some decisions on them, or 

even having the citizens try to seek redress from the 

government through the court system.  But in this particular 

case, the Crown is bound, and that is good.  But it's unusual for 

this government to allow that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is again another complex issue.  Frustrated 

contracts, while they occur within the province, are not well 

known and understood by people.  Therefore I would ask, Mr. 

Speaker, that the public be given the time to assess this Bill.  

Therefore I ask that this Bill be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the minister to 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm just getting the absolute titles 

because I wouldn't want to introduce my officials without 

having the titles correct.  But first of all, seated directly behind 

me is Sharon Roulston, the executive director of 

administration; and Peter Phillips, who is the assistant deputy 

of policy in the department.  There are a number of other 

members of my staff who are here with us.  I won't take this 

opportunity, Mr. Chairman, to introduce them, but as they 

become involved in the estimates, I'll take that opportunity to 

do it. 

 

Oh sorry, the main person in my staff, my deputy, Mr. Frank 

Hart.  Frank and I have worked together for so long, it just 

seems like he's my right-hand man, and really in many ways he 

is. 

 

(1100) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 

welcome to the officials with you today. 

 

In a day of positive news for Saskatchewan, I'm not surprised 

that you would want to bring forward Economic Development.  

However as you know, Mr. Minister, your record with respect 

to economic development isn't all that good.  So we're going to 

have to today, I guess, rain a little bit on your parade of good 

news with respect to the Grey Cup coming to Saskatchewan.  I 

think we've given you all of the bouquets today that we can 

give you, and now we're going to have to return to the serious 

issues that the province of Saskatchewan faces. 

 

Just an aside to that as well, Mr. Minister.  It was our 

understanding that Economic Development was not going to be 

coming up today, that Environment was 

going to be coming up today.  And we're quite concerned about 

that, Mr. Minister, particularly in light of the fact that some of 

our members -- particularly the member that has the critic role 

for Economic Development, the member from Thunder Creek 

-- is attending a funeral of a past MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) in this House, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I'm sure you were aware of that, and it was our 

understanding that that was going to be set aside to allow for 

other members who weren't going to be attending the funeral to 

ask questions of a department that would have been here today, 

and that would have been Environment.  So we're quite 

concerned about that, Mr. Minister, that there was a 

misunderstanding.  I don't know whether there was a 

misunderstanding.  We certainly hope that it wasn't done 

deliberately, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now to go to the developments that we're concerned about, Mr. 

Minister, in this province with respect to economic 

development, that are on the minds of people today, are things 

like Piper Aircraft, co-generation, union-only contracting, and 

labour legislation -- a whole host of those types of questions, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

To begin with, let's start with Piper Aircraft.  I'm wondering if 

you could provide us with all information relative to the Piper 

Aircraft bid.  There was, I understand, some $656,000 spent on 

it.  I wonder if you could give us a detailed breakdown of the 

costs associated with it and what benefit Saskatchewan gets out 

of the expenditure of $656,000 of taxpayers' money.  At this 

point we see absolutely no benefit to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan.  I wonder if you would provide us with details 

of your travel, of all expenses associated with the failed Piper 

bid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm not sure exactly how to handle 

the question on Piper.  But first of all, let me say on the issue of 

timing of estimates, we have had Economic Development on 

stand-by in the list that we have given for some days.  And it's 

absolute news to me that this comes as any kind of a surprise or 

a shock to the opposition.  No one has raised this with me 

before now and I know our staff had talked about it. 

 

If it's a huge inconvenience, I'm a little bit surprised at that and 

also not meaning to be here obviously for the reason that the 

Grey Cup was awarded to Saskatchewan.  We made this 

decision and the negotiations went on in my office to be on 

today, long before we knew that the bid was successful.  So I 

can quite honestly say I would have been standing here doing 

Economic Development regardless of how that bid would have 

gone. 

 

On the issue of Piper and the spending, Mr. Chairman, I may 

ask you for clarification on this, but this was part of the 

spending out of SEDCO and this discussion went on in SEDCO 

review last week.  I'm not opposed to spending the time of the 

committee discussing the spending on Piper, but I would just 

ask you in terms of what is legitimate in the committee, 

whether this is 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

something we should in fact be doing at this point or whether 

we await the next Crown Corporation Committee, which is 

coming up very soon, I might add, to complete and to further 

the debate on Piper. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm not 

surprised you don't want to talk about Piper Aircraft.  I'm not 

surprised at all in light of the fact that there was a significant 

amount of taxpayers' dollars spent on what you people were 

touting as one of your most important economic development 

initiatives.  It wasn't us, Mr. Minister, if you recall, that held a 

grandiose meeting down in, I believe, the ballroom of the Hotel 

Saskatchewan to announce the bid that you were planning on 

bringing forward.  It was you that was announcing it, and I 

recall the announcement and how you were spinning it to 

everyone out there that day of how important an economic 

development initiative this was. 

 

So it comes as little surprise to me, Mr. Minister, that you 

wouldn't like to talk about it with respect to economic 

development and the overall strategy that your government has 

for economic development. 

 

But I think, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that it is an 

important . . . at least it was, in your mind, going to be an 

economic development initiative for the people of 

Saskatchewan, so I think it's relevant that we ask questions on 

the Piper Aircraft deal because it fits into the strategy that you 

have -- or supposedly have -- and developed, with respect to 

economic development. 

 

So I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you'll show a little 

cooperation and provide us with the details of it, and we'll 

discuss it further. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask for 

your opinion and decision on whether or not the spending in 

SEDCO, which is really what we're talking about here today, is 

appropriate or not.  In terms of the general discussion about 

Piper, I've got no problem, and we can spend all day talking 

about things that happened in SEDCO, and I've got no problem 

with doing that, but I really would ask the Chairperson to rule 

on whether or not this is where the committee should be 

spending its time on what happened in the detailed spending in 

a Crown corporation. 

 

I intend to spend a lot of time talking about Piper and the 

spending on Piper and where that money was spent when I'm 

doing SEDCO.  But in terms of the working of the committee, I 

need the Chairperson to make a ruling whether this is an 

appropriate use of the committee's time or not. 

 

The Chair: -- It's basically up to the minister to determine 

what falls under the purview of his department.  If the minister 

is of the opinion that expenditures, in this case of SEDCO, 

don't fall under the consideration of estimates that are before us 

today, then we have to take the minister's word for that. 

 

The minister has also suggested that there are other 

venues under which those kinds of expenditures can be 

examined.  He mentioned the Crown Corporations Committee.  

I don't know if there are other appropriations in the Estimates 

where those kinds of questions might be appropriately put.  But 

if the minister says that those expenditures don't relate to the 

estimates that are before us, then we have to take the minister's 

word for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd just say, I mean a lot of the detail 

has been released, so it's not as if we haven't already released it 

to the press.  We did that in Crown Corporations, basically 

unsolicited by the opposition or by the press, because we really 

do want to give out as much information as we can. 

 

On the whole issue of economic development, you'll know that 

when governments play a role in economic development there 

has been a very, very significant mind shift.  And I think this is 

part of the problem in dealing with the opposition members, 

who believe that government intervention in the economy and 

the spending of hundreds of millions of dollars, if not billions 

of dollars, of taxpayers' money to do economic development 

was the way to do economic development. 

 

But I must say that the result of that, whether it's the 

construction of the Rafferty dam or the construction of the 

upgraders here in the province, which continue to hemorrhage 

huge amounts of money, large amounts of it coming to rest in 

the provincial deficit, which is the main reason we have a $15 

billion deficit for, what I would argue, very, very questionable 

results. 

 

If you look at the population of Saskatchewan, which has 

continually decreased under their administration, from 1985 to 

1991, even at a time when they were pumping billions of 

dollars of borrowed money that was being borrowed on behalf 

of the taxpayers into the economy in the name of economic 

development, is a theory of economic development that I think 

was one of the major reasons that the member from Estevan as 

premier, and his government, were defeated in 1991. 

 

Now I guess having said that, what surprises me is that still to 

this day members of that opposition have not only not 

apologized to the people of the province and admitted their 

misdirected economic development policy, have not apologized 

to the public, which is I think what governments should do 

when they're defeated.  I remember very clearly when Al 

Blakeney was defeated in 1982, shortly after the election he 

said, look, the people of the province are always right; the 

direction I was taking them at that time obviously wasn't 

meeting the needs of the public.  And he came clean with the 

people of the province. 

 

It's interesting that after two years this opposition party, now 

led by a new leader, still has not admitted to the public the 

mistakes that they made, still stand in this House every day and 

say the Rafferty dam was a great idea, digging this huge hole in 

the ground, over $100 million spent digging the hole in the 

ground, with infrastructure all around it, a boat launch up on 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

the side of the hill which stands as a mark of Tory economic 

development.  People come not to boat in the water in the dam, 

not to fish in the water in the dam, not to cool the power 

station, but it's become a tourist attraction to look at this boat 

launch up on the side of the hill.  And you get about 10 people 

straggling in there a year to look at the boat launch. 

 

What's amazing to me is that this party in opposition has not 

only not admitted their mistaken economic policy, but 

continues to push this government to go at haphazard economic 

development, and therefore, coming back to Piper, is surprised 

when our government spends half a million dollars doing due 

diligence on a project with a very strong private sector partner, 

the Hill family, and comes to the conclusion -- each of us, the 

Hill family spending half a million dollars, we spending half a 

million dollars -- come to the conclusion together and jointly as 

a partnership, private and public spending on this due diligence, 

come to the conclusion that the deal wasn't right.  The member 

opposite says, even though you decided the deal wasn't right, 

you should have went ahead and done it. 

 

Well what kind of economic madness is this?  Not only that he 

is a new member who could skate away from the disaster of the 

1980s, which is what I would advise him in his leadership bid 

he should be doing.  Get the heck away from that nonsense of 

the 1980s.  Far from defending it, you should be saying, look, 

the idea of regional economic development, the idea of local 

people making local decisions, is the way to go.  Get on the 

bandwagon of what your very community is saying. 

 

Have flexible oil policy, like the Minister of Energy and Mines 

has done for the Kindersley area and has gotten great support 

from your Mayor, Darla Dorsett, who has complimented him 

publicly at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association). 

 

(1115) 

 

But none of that.  All you do is stand here and say, why aren't 

you doing more of those megaprojects, and especially those 

megaprojects that you've proven don't make any sense.  Look, 

this is not a game.  This is economic development.  And when 

we do due diligence on projects, it's going to cost money.  

That's what Piper was about.  We did the study, the analysis.  

And what they wanted for the company was more than Mr. Hill 

and the government, on behalf of the people, were willing to 

put into it. 

 

What would you have us do?  You argued that we should have 

went for the project.  We went for the project.  We did the due 

diligence on the project.  We found that the deal wasn't right 

for the people of the province.  At which point do you think we 

went wrong?  Was it going after the deal?  Was it doing the due 

diligence?  Or was it not doing the deal after we found out it 

wasn't economic to do? 

 

Obviously it couldn't be the first because you were pushing us 

to go after the deal.  I'm sure that you, hon. 

member from Kindersley, would not argue about doing due 

diligence. And we did that. 

 

The only area where it's possible that you would be out of sync 

with us is that we should have went ahead and did the deal even 

after we found it was not economically viable.  And that 

surprises me a great deal coming from a new member who 

should be getting away from that past record of the Tory 

government that was to do those kind of deals -- Trinitel, 

Supercart, GigaText, Rafferty.  And now you're saying on this 

one, where your private sector partners were saying you 

shouldn't do it, we should have jammed it under the table like 

so many of your deals were made and have done the deal. 

 

Maybe the member opposite could comment on which part of 

the Piper arrangement he disagrees with.  Was it ever starting 

the program, of going for it?  Was it doing the due diligence?  

Or was it, as I believe, that we should have went and done the 

deal even though people were advising us that it was not a good 

deal to follow up on? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm not surprised, once 

again, that you're concerned about our reasons for wanting to 

discuss this.  After all it is your first major endeavour into 

economic development and it was an abysmal failure, Mr. 

Minister.  And you and everyone else, I think, in this province 

recognizes how big of a failure your department has become as 

a result of it. 

 

This is your GigaText, Mr. Minister, your first attempt. And 

your first attempt has failed, Mr. Minister.  And you chastise 

people all over the province the moment they suggest to you 

that it failed, Mr. Minister; and we shouldn't allow anyone to 

ask questions about the failed bid, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, and you talked about the previous administration 

and all the while that they were spending, and all of that kind of 

stuff. And what were you doing while that was going on, Mr. 

Minister?  Do you recall back in the period from '82 to '89, '86 

to '89, or '91 specifically for yourself.  What were you doing 

during that period of time, Mr. Minister? 

 

You were standing in opposition benches over here 

condemning the government day after day after day for not 

spending more.  That's what you were doing, sir.  Day after day 

you stood in your place and said, there isn't enough money in 

education spending; there isn't enough money in health care 

spending; the economic development projects are not good 

enough, not big enough, not everything about them, Mr. 

Minister.  That's what you did, day after day after day.  You 

stood in your place.  And we'll produce the quotes for you if 

you like, Mr. Minister, because I'm sure that there's lots of 

quotes about your past performance in this House and how you 

used to stand and chastise everybody for not spending enough. 

 

Mr. Minister, you know and the people of Saskatchewan know 

very, very well, that had you and Allan Blakeney been elected 

in 1986, the deficit of 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

today would be substantially higher, by some estimates as 

much as $5 billion higher today than it was then . . . than it is 

today, Mr. Minister. 

 

You don't have to take my word for it.  Ask people like the 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) who just 

put out a proposal the other day saying, three and a half billion 

dollars would've been the cost of implementing your programs 

from '86 to '92, Mr. Minister.  And you know very well that 

that's the case.  And you'll stand and say no, that isn't the case; 

we wouldn't have done any of that sort of stuff.  But your 

record is different, Mr. Minister. 

 

Your record says that you would have spent on programs like 

the 7-7-7.  Do you remember that one?  Do you remember 

touting that in '86, Mr. Minister, going around the province and 

saying how you were going to provide mortgage opportunities 

for up to $70,000 at 7 per cent for 7 years.  Can you tell us 

what that little item there alone would have cost the people of 

Saskatchewan?  One and a half billion dollars, it's been 

calculated at, Mr. Minister.  In one single election promise that 

you people promised to bring the people in '86 election 

campaign. 

 

So for you to sanctimoniously stand up and suggest that now 

for some reason you have had a change of heart and that you 

are the great white captains of industry and the people who are 

going to bring about proper economic development, I find it 

absolutely hypocritical for you to do such a thing, Mr. Minister, 

in light of the fact that you campaigned long and hard in '86 to 

have spending substantially higher than the previous 

administration was talking about. 

 

Your record now, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking about -- 

not what happened in '86 or any of the other time frames in 

Saskatchewan's history.  It's the record of today that the people 

of Saskatchewan are concerned about, Mr. Minister.  Things 

like 12,000 fewer jobs today than when your administration 

took office in 1991, Mr. Minister. 

 

What do you have to tell the people of Saskatchewan about that 

economic development record and employment record?  What 

kinds of comfort can you provide the people of Saskatchewan 

with today for the fact that you have 12,000 less people 

working in Saskatchewan than there were in 1991 when you 

took over?  What is your answer to those 12,000 people out 

there that are unemployed today, the less number of people that 

are working today than were working then?  What is your 

answer also, Mr. Minister, to the eighty-some thousand people 

out there that are on welfare today, the highest number in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan?  What is your answer 

to them with respect to economic development, Mr. Minister?  

What is your answer to that? 

 

Mr. Minister, as well, you talked about why would we be 

opposed to due diligence with respect to Piper Aircraft.  Did 

you ever once hear us say that we were opposed to due 

diligence on the Piper Aircraft deal?  Not once from any 

member of this opposition did you hear anything about it, Mr. 

Minister. 

You suggested at that time, Mr. Minister, that . . . what is it that 

we were opposed to?  We were opposed to things like the 

grandiose announcement that you put on down at the Hotel 

Saskatchewan in an attempt, in an attempt, as you said, to scare 

off the competition.  That's the kinds of things, that's the kind 

of things that you were trying to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan that day, Mr. Minister -- that you and your 

government were going to fly on down to Florida and bring this 

thing back.  You announced a number of job opportunities that 

were associated, and hundreds of millions of dollars of 

investment that it would bring into Saskatchewan.  That's what 

you announced that day, Mr. Minister, and it didn't come about, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell the people of 

Saskatchewan today, the 12,000 fewer people that are 

employed today, what your answer to them is for economic 

development.  What is your answer, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite that, first of all, on the one small point on 

the Piper announcement, when Mr. Hill was being interviewed 

last week, after we released the numbers of the monies that we 

had spent and that he had spent on the due diligence, it was not 

necessarily the government that was saying that we did this as a 

strategy to affect our bid; it was Mr. Paul Hill. 

 

And when you rant and rave about this . . . and I will circle the 

Hansard and send it off to Mr. Hill because he'll be interested 

in your appreciation of his business strategy.  However with 

your attack on this joint venture between Mr. Hill and 

ourselves, what I'd be interested in knowing is where you get 

off, a member of that former government in Saskatchewan, 

Conservative government, that led this province from having 

balanced books for 11 years under Allan Blakeney.  You now 

say that you know more about economic development, and you 

would have a better strategy than Mr. Paul Hill.  Now that's 

laughable, sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Never said that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, it's in Hansard, and you talk 

about producing . . . I'm producing it, and I'm sending it to our 

business partners that you say, that you as a member of the 

Conservative back benches, sitting behind the now Leader of 

the Conservative Party and the former premier, know more 

about economic development than Mr. Hill.  You would have 

done the press conference differently.  Well isn't that brilliant 

that you would have a better idea how to . . . That's what you're 

opposed to in this arrangement. 

 

Well I doubt that that's going to shock many people in 

Saskatchewan that the member from Kindersley says he knows 

more about press conferences on economic development than 

Mr. Hill.  I know where I'd put my money if I were betting on 

who could do economic development in the province -- the 

member from Kindersley or Mr. Paul Hill.  Because one has a 

very, 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

very impressive track record, and being a member of that 

caucus, the economic development strategies of your party and 

your caucus stand in stark contrast to that of Mr. Paul Hill. 

 

But I want to comment on one other point in your comments 

you made a minute ago.  And that was trying to attribute debt 

and deficit record to Allan Blakeney.  Now if there's any part of 

your comments where you lose total credibility, it's saying to 

the people of the province that if you had elected Allan 

Blakeney you would have had an even bigger deficit.  This, 

about a man who was in government in 1971 to 1982, and had 

a balanced budget every year.  Balanced budget every year. 

 

And you're going to change history. The member from 

Kindersley is going to stand here in the House and in five 

minutes, destroy that record.  And just on the flip of his hat say, 

now if you had elected Allan Blakeney you would have had an 

even huger deficit than what the former premier of the 

Conservative Party did for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now where's the credibility?  Where's the credibility of an 

individual who would stand here and say, one, he knows more 

about economic development than Mr. Hill, who is our private 

sector partner in Piper, and we should have done it differently 

and if you had been there you would have done the deal, even 

though the due diligence says that you shouldn't do it. 

 

I say again to the member, you have not learned from the 

mistakes made by the previous government.  That when you do 

due diligence on projects, it's no wonder now understanding 

where you come from, why you did GigaText; why you did the 

deal with Trinitel; why you did the Supercart deal; why you did 

the upgrader deals the way you did. 

 

It's no wonder that you would continue on arguing that we 

should have done Piper even though all the evidence was that 

we shouldn't do it.  But you know better.  Sitting there with no 

studies, no analysis, no knowledge of the aircraft industry.  

Sitting there as a back-bencher in the Conservative opposition, 

you know what should have been done and what the private 

sector and government should have done with Piper. 

 

Well where's the credibility, given your past record on 

economic development?  And I just want to comment on that 

for a moment. 

 

During the period after the second election, when you were 

elected on the promise of spending even more money and 

spending it faster, you spent billions of dollars on so-called 

economic development -- billions of dollars.  Do you have any 

idea what happened to the population of Saskatchewan during 

that four-year period or the period from '86 to '91?  The 

population of the province decreased by 30,000.  Members 

should know that the population in Saskatchewan during the 

second term of the Conservatives, 1986 to 1991, decreased by 

30,000 people; there were 30,000 fewer people living in the 

province when you were defeated in '91 than when you were 

elected in 1986.  And that at a time when you were driving the 

deficit through the ceiling in the name of economic 

development. 

 

And even after that, even after spending the money, not getting 

economic development, being defeated as a result, do you 

know what their solution is today for economic development?  

Go borrow more money, spend it faster, don't do due diligence, 

and even when you do due diligence, do the deal anyway.  

That's what you're telling us. 

 

You keep picking on the one deal that we didn't go ahead with 

after we did the due diligence.  What about your aircraft deal 

with Promavia?  Where you did the due diligence?  The due 

diligence was that you shouldn't do the deal and you went 

ahead and did it anyway.  You left us holding the bag for what 

-- $2 million?  Two million we had to throw out the window.  

Two million dollars to a company that everyone believed 

couldn't manufacture the aircraft.  In fact that's proven; they 

haven't done it anywhere in the world.  But the Tory 

government of that day bought the deal, sight unseen, even 

though everyone was telling them that they shouldn't do it. 

 

And you say that I in opposition was arguing with you to spend 

more.  That is not accurate.  I stood and said, you shouldn't 

have put money into GigaText;  taxpayers' money should not 

have gone into GigaText.  You should have made a better deal 

when you were dealing on the upgrader; that's what we said.  

We said, on Rafferty, you shouldn't have spent the hundred 

million digging that hole in the ground. 

 

(1130) 

 

So don't tell me we were arguing for you to spend more on that 

kind of nonsense; we were making the argument to spend less 

on those kind of foolish programs.  But for you today to say, 

look you should have done the Piper deal even though the 

evidence was to the contrary, tells me you have learned nothing 

from your bad experiences in government.  Mr. Chairman, I 

want to say that there have been a number of projects where we 

have been involved directly or indirectly in creating 

employment in Saskatchewan.  I'm going to take a few 

moments just to talk about some of them. 

 

The expansion of the uranium industry, which has been 

announced by the uranium companies, creating 270 jobs, a 

couple hundred million dollars in investment.  No money from 

the province of Saskatchewan directly.  We're putting a little bit 

of money into training. 

 

One of the biggest expansions in the economy of Saskatchewan 

in the next two years is going to be uranium development, 

which we have helped facilitate.  Now you fly right by that and 

ignore it, and maybe it isn't important to you because we didn't 

have to borrow hundreds of millions of dollars to chuck into 

that deal and waste, as you did so many times. 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

Maybe that doesn't mean anything to the member from 

Kindersley. But 270 jobs in northern Saskatchewan, all as a 

result of private sector investment with the exception of the 

small interest we have in Cameco, is important to the people of 

northern Saskatchewan, and is true economic development 

because we're not putting at risk taxpayers' money. 

 

But I think you, sir, don't consider it to be economic 

development because you haven't fleeced the taxpayers in order 

to make it happen.  And unless you fleece the taxpayers, that 

opposition caucus doesn't consider it to be economic 

development.  Because unless there's a bottom line of going 

and shaking out those last few nickels out of the taxpayers' 

pocket, taking it and putting it into silly deals, it's not economic 

development. 

 

But some hundreds of millions of dollars into uranium in 

northern Saskatchewan is true economic development because 

it comes from the private sector, it's aimed at an area where 

there is a lot of unemployment.  We have a number of 

percentages of northern people, 50 per cent, who we're going to 

be hiring from northern Saskatchewan.  This is true economic 

development. 

 

The Kalium plant conversion at Belle Plaine which was 

announced a couple of weeks ago, and we had the opportunity 

to be out there.  Nature's Own, which is a replacement for salt 

in soft water softeners, which uses potassium, a waste product 

in some ways, or a product from the potash mine at Belle 

Plaine. 

 

Investment, $45 million.  How much money from the 

taxpayers? Zero.  Now that too you'll be very disappointed in 

because that's not economic development.  There's no 

taxpayers' money in it.  It's just the private sector investing in a 

strategic area in the economy of Saskatchewan.  So I don't 

expect you to give that any credence because it's just the good 

old private sector investing money in something where they're 

going to make money.  You would have no concept of what 

that means.  Because unless it's fleecing the taxpayer, digging 

big holes in the ground, moving dirt from one spot to another, 

even though you didn't do the due diligence to find out there's 

no water running in that particular spot, it's not economic 

development. 

 

Another project, Canamino in Saskatoon, expansion, 15 jobs, 

developing and working on fractionation of the oat kernel, 

contract signed with Estee Lauder.  This wouldn't mean 

economic development to the member opposite either. 

 

The Excel Fiberglass Manufacturing at Balcarres, 23 jobs.  

Here again I don't know that we were involved in that directly 

but it's 23 jobs.  But here again because the government wasn't 

involved in a hand-out, that can't be economic development to 

the members opposite because nobody was being fleeced in the 

process. 

Eight hundred jobs at the Sears call centre in Regina.  That 

would fly right by the member opposite and mean nothing to 

him because here again it's a private sector company coming 

from all over western Canada to centre in Regina.  Why?  They 

tell us, Mr. Dave Radford tells us, the reason they chose Regina 

is because it's a good place to find trained workers -- 800 of 

them.  It's a good taxation regime, it's fair.  We removed the E 

& H (education and health) tax on 1-800 numbers to make this 

project viable.  They say it's a good community to live in.  But 

here again it won't mean economic development to the 

members opposite because it's the private sector doing it and 

we didn't have to borrow hundreds of millions of dollars to 

make it happen. 

 

And I might add that there are certain members of the press 

who share this concept of economic development.  We need 

only read recently in the Leader-Post, one of our scribes who 

says, that unless there's hundreds of millions of dollars 

taxpayers' money, it's not economic development.  So you're 

not alone in this theory.  You're a very small minority but 

you're not alone. 

 

Ford Storage in Saskatoon, another example of private sector 

companies leasing in a combination of government and private 

sector, but meaningful employment.  AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) where we have a relationship with the federal 

government.  Project started by your former leader, but cleaned 

up by our administration, less money being put into it and a 

better deal being struck, 140 jobs.  There's Biostar in 

Saskatoon, there's Goldenhill Cattle Company at Viscount, 

there's Alcatel Canada Wire in Weyburn and the list goes on 

and on. 

 

The difference is, to the hon. member from Kindersley, is 

definition of economic development.  And there's the whole 

REDA, the regional economic development authority concept 

which is being very ably accepted by communities like Prince 

Albert and Rosetown and other communities where they say, 

we don't want the government sticking their nose into every 

deal we make. 

 

But I tell you that your attitude about economic development, 

where the government has to be there, putting their nose into 

everything, is the reason why I believe other right-wing parties 

are taking over from where you legitimately should be.  

Because you don't understand what the market-place is about. 

 

It's hard to believe, at a time when the political spectrum in 

Canada has moved to the right, you sit their with a rump party 

of 10 members when the whole spectrum has moved to the 

right in Canadian politics.  The reason is on economic 

development, because you don't have a concept of what it's 

about. 

 

You still are stuck with the member from Estevan and I argue 

with you to get out of that rut.  You're one of the new members.  

You could have a vision for economic development.  It's not 

too late to design your own structure of economic development.  

It is not, I'll advise you, borrowing hundreds of millions of 

dollars 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

for misguided economic projects.  Try to separate yourself 

from the 1980s.  It's not good enough to come here and say: 

look, do more bad deals, spend more taxpayers' money on 

economic development, because it just doesn't work. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I'm not 

surprised that the minister is so sensitive about this. Mr. 

Minister, this was your first opportunity to show what kind of 

an economic guru you were to the province of Saskatchewan.  

The first opportunity for the great member from Regina 

Elphinstone to stand up, stand up in front of everybody in 

Saskatchewan and show everyone what kind of an economic 

development genius this man was, and is today he would have 

us believe.  And stand up and say to the people of 

Saskatchewan: I'm going to bring about economic development 

into this province and it doesn't matter what happened in the 

past or the future or anything else.  I'm here today, Mr. Minister 

says, and now things are going to turn around. 

 

Well did they turn around, Mr. Minister?  Did they turn around 

under your failed economic development strategies to date?  

Have they?  Is $656,000 blown by you and your department on 

an economic development strategy or an economic 

development project, is that a turnaround? 

 

The member from Regina Elphinstone, I would say to the 

public of Saskatchewan, will forever be remembered for 

blowing $656,000 on an aircraft deal, with a failed attempt to 

bring in Piper Aircraft.  You will always be remembered for 

that.  Regina Elphinstone, the member, failed Piper Aircraft 

deal.  And that's why, Mr. Chairman, he's so sensitive about 

talking about this sort of stuff.  So extremely sensitive about 

talking about this stuff and why he always harks back, harks 

back to what the previous administration did. 

 

Well we're talking about your administration now, Mr. 

Minister.  We're talking about you and your policies and your 

failed economic development strategy.  We're not talking about 

what happened in the past any longer, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  We're talking about you and your first foray into the 

great unknown to the New Democratic Party of economic 

development. 

 

And I can understand why you would want to remain in the 

past, Mr. Minister, because you have no concept into the future.  

You have no idea what you're going to do into the future.  I 

suspect after your hands being burned on this issue for 

$656,000, it will be a longer time likely before you venture into 

it again.  And hopefully for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that 

is the case, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you mentioned a number of projects and they are 

positive developments; and we say yes, you are correct.  We 

give full congratulations to the people that are bringing in 

economic development projects into this province -- full marks.  

Happy to see them, welcome to Saskatchewan, tremendous 

place, Mr. Minister, tremendous place.  We welcome them with 

open arms.  We hope that they can overcome the kind of 

inequities that are found in this province -- the high utility rates 

and those kinds of things, Mr. Minister.  We hope those people 

can continue to bring economic development projects.  We 

welcome them with open arms.  We hope there are more 

entrepreneurs out there that are willing to start up projects.  

That's our sincere hope, Mr. Minister. 

 

Our sincere hope is as well that you won't get involved in 

spending $656,000 again in these types of projects and then not 

wanting to be held accountable before the committee on 

economic development, not wanting to be held accountable 

because you want to hide it into the back room somewhere in 

Crown Corporations meeting and hope that no one will be there 

that day to undertake to hear what you and your department 

spent $656,000 on, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now the minister, Mr. Chairman, stands and wants to take 

credit for all of these companies coming to Saskatchewan.  He 

has the unmitigated gall to stand up and say that the reason 

they're here is because of his policies, Mr. Minister.  I say that 

they're likely here in spite of your policies, Mr. Minister.  They 

think there is still an opportunity, a glimmer of hope in 

Saskatchewan, to be able to carry out business, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm surprised that you wouldn't want to put this 

behind you.  I'm surprised that you wouldn't want to say to the 

people of Saskatchewan, yes, we made a mistake.  Yes, Mr. 

Taxpayer, Mrs. Taxpayer, out there, I made a mistake; my 

department made a mistake.  We entered into something we 

didn't know anything about; unfortunately it failed.  That's the 

end of the story. 

 

I think it could be left at that, Mr. Minister, if you'd just stand 

up and admit to the people of Saskatchewan that you made a 

mistake, Mr. Minister.  And you know full well, Mr. Minister, 

and you try and get me to apologize for the things that 

happened in the past, try to get me to apologize for the things 

that happened in the past when I had nothing to do with the 

things that happened in the past, Mr. Minister.  And the 

minister laughs from his chair.  He knows full well I wasn't 

elected prior to '91, Mr. Minister. 

 

And there were things that went on prior to '91 that I didn't 

agree with, Mr. Minister.  There were lots of things that went 

on that I didn't agree with, Mr. Minister.  And you know very 

well that that's the case.  Mr. Minister, you know very well that 

that is the case.  There's lots of things . . . I disagreed with some 

of the spending initiatives that the previous administration has.  

And I've said that before, on platforms throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I also disagreed with your spending promises of those 

days, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I also disagree with you 

calling for increased spending in a number of areas prior to '91, 

which you did, and we're getting the quotes on that right now, 

Mr. Minister.  And there were lots of them, Mr. Minister -- lots 

of quotes about you standing in opposition and claiming that 

you 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

would spend more if given the opportunity to govern from '86 

to '91, Mr. Minister. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, you never touched on the 

question that I asked in the previous round of questions about 

the 12,000 people that are . . . number of people that are not 

employed in Saskatchewan that were employed in '91.  I 

wonder if you would just give some explanation, some comfort, 

some comfort to the people of Saskatchewan as to why your 

policies have failed with respect to economic development, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think that things like . . . with respect to 

the Piper Aircraft deal, that Barb Byers, the SFL 

(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour) president, standing up 

and saying that it should be unionized immediately upon 

arriving in Saskatchewan, do you think things of that nature 

have any effect on your economic development initiatives?  Is 

that a concern?  Is your government's policy of union-only 

contracting versus private sector contracting, is that a concern 

to the economic development strategy, Mr. Minister, that you 

have in this province?  Is your labour legislation any concern 

that you have in this province, Mr. Speaker?  Does that help or 

does that hinder the developments in this province, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

(1145) 

 

I wonder if you'd care to take the time to discuss some of those 

issues, Mr. Minister.  Are those holding back, in your view, 

holding back initiatives being brought forward in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? 

 

And you might be interested as well, Mr. Minister, to take a 

look at the news release released yesterday with respect to 

stream flows down the Rafferty-Alameda.  You might be 

interested in reading what you and your government is saying 

is going to happen with respect to that this year.  That might be 

something of interest to you, Mr. Minister. 

 

I wonder if you'd care to touch on those economic development 

concerns, legitimate concerns that the people of Saskatchewan 

have.  Does your party agree with union-only tendering, for 

example?  Is that the reason why we're not seeing economic 

development projects being brought in like you suggested 

would be brought in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to go back 

and just reiterate that he continually attacks the partners in the 

Piper arrangement.  He says, why did you start this?  Now he 

says, why did you start this, going into a deal that you knew 

nothing about?  He says, why did you and your partners go into 

a deal . . . So now he's saying . . . he's changing his tune. 

 

First he started out by saying, you should've went at it, you 

should've went harder.  Now he's saying, do you realize now 

you shouldn't have went in to start a deal that you didn't know 

anything about.  Like I really don't understand where this 

member is coming from. 

 

Let me go through it slowly again for you.  We started 

out with the government as a partner with the Hills and other 

people in the private sector to look at a project to bring Piper 

Aircraft from Vero Beach, Florida, to Saskatchewan.  The 

decision was made by the private sector and the partners in 

government, one, to announce to the public, because of the 

chapter 11 court proceedings in the United States, the fact the 

company was for sale, to let the world know we were going 

after the company.  You can argue whether that was right or 

wrong. That was a decision made by the private and public 

partners. 

 

Then we did the due diligence to see whether or not the deal 

was right and how much money we'd have to pay.  And after 

we did the due diligence, the decision was made jointly by the 

private sector and the public not to go with the deal. 

 

Now why you would continue to argue and at which point you 

jumped off the boat in this process, it keeps missing me.  

Because at one point you say you should've went for the deal, 

now you're saying you should have never started this process 

that you never knew anything about. 

 

Then you say, the big problem is that you shouldn't have had 

the press conference.  Well it was a strategic decision.  Easy for 

you to say in hindsight that you shouldn't have done it.  The 

only point I know, sir, is that when you look at the deals that 

your government made while in government and the hundreds 

of millions of dollars of monies that were spent with little or no 

results to show for them -- in fact in the last term of office, a 

loss of 30,000 people from the province of Saskatchewan -- I'm 

surprised that you'd argue in doing the due diligence, or in that 

we didn't do the project because many of the deals that you did 

should not have been done. 

 

My arguments in opposition were not that you should spend 

more or less, but the misguided direction of the hundreds of 

millions of dollars that you were spending.  And I oftentimes 

argued vehemently from those benches in opposition that your 

government was misdirected when spending $5 million, 

spending and giving to Guy Montpetit  of GigaText, that that 

money could have been spent somewhere else. 

 

You're right on that.  If you're saying that I was arguing that 

more money should have been spent in education, there was an 

argument that rather than giving money away to one of your 

buddies in Montreal -- $5 million . . . to do what?  To translate 

from English to French. 

 

And you remember the press going down after the money was 

spent to see how the machines worked.  And they all went 

down to this building.  Big GigaText sign on the front, a 

Mercedes Benz that was leased for the president of the 

company in the back parking lot, a huge condominium rented 

for that president of GigaText, the company owned by Guy 

Monpetit.  You remember the deal. 

 

Guy Monpetit had this warehouse full of old, used computers -- 

old, used computers.  Now you talk 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

about due diligence and how we wasted money on Piper.  He 

had this old bunch of computers in a warehouse in Montreal.  

You remember that?  You'll remember it, the member from 

Wilkie, because he remembers that.  He was there at the caucus 

table when they started. 

 

And so Guy Monpetit had these old computers in a warehouse.  

And Eric Berntson flew down to Montreal, and the premier, the 

member from Estevan, flew to Montreal.  And they were 

picked up by Guy Monpetit's limousine.  This is all 

documented and the numbers are there, Mr. Chairman.  And 

they picked them up at the airport.  And I can imagine them 

sitting in the back of that limousine, having a cocktail, going to 

look at these used computers. 

 

And they did the due diligence.  Who did the due diligence?  

Did they spend a little bit of money on a company that might 

have known something about translating, a very technical issue 

never done before in the world?  This is not an airplane where 

it has a track record and everybody knew it could fly; this is a 

brand-new technology, never been done before in the world.  

The Japanese have been working on it, the Germans, other 

Canadians.  But the member from Estevan and Eric Berntson 

decided they would do the due diligence along with Guy 

Monpetit. 

 

So they went to the warehouse in the limousine.  They opened 

the door; they looked in at these computers that weren't 

plugged in. They couldn't test them because they'd been sitting 

there for a year.  Why they wouldn't have been working on 

translating laws . . . but they were sitting there.  And Grant had 

a look at them and said, I guess we'll maybe buy these . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, please.  I simply want to 

remind the minister that you're not permitted to use the names, 

proper names of members of the Assembly.  And if I can ask 

for the cooperation of all members as well. The review of the 

Economic Development department will continue for some 

time and all members will have a chance to put their questions 

on the record, and I'll ask for everyone's cooperation in that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Had they gotten even themselves to 

open the books, if they'd said to Guy, look, these computers, 

we're not quite sure whether they work or not.  Can you show 

us where you bought them; how long they have been in use; 

where's the translation they have done?  They would have 

found that Guy Montpetit had already written these computers 

off and they were junkers.  Not for translations but for other 

purposes; that they had already fulfilled a useful duty and were 

worn out. 

 

But they decided to buy them.  How much? -- 5.5 million.  

Let's get them out to Saskatchewan, hook them up. They got 

the technicians out; they gave the new president a new 

Mercedes to drive, and a condominium; and they were ready to 

go to work.  And they called the press in to see how they 

worked.  And one of the press plugged in a question to the 

computer and said, can you translate this from English 

to French?  And the computer smoked a little bit and it burped 

a little bit.  Nothing happened. 

 

And you tell me that you and your people know about 

economic development. And you're sad that Paul Hill and the 

government in partnership did due diligence on a major aircraft 

company known around the world with hundreds of 

distribution centres, and that we shouldn't have spent the 

money.  You who spent that kind of money on this deal with 

Guy Montpetit. 

 

And you know the deal about the trip to San Francisco, and I'm 

not going to go into all of that.  Gracie Sim and the crew flying 

down to San Francisco for a weekend . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well we'll tell you about it because it's in 

Hansard.  No, I'm not going to do it now because, Mr. 

Chairman, I don't want to waste the time of the House. But the 

taxpayers of the province paid for the weekend in San 

Francisco, obviously doing due diligence down there somehow 

connected with these fancy computers. 

 

But don't give me this idea that Paul Hill and the private sector 

partners didn't know what they were doing when they went into 

this project.  That is not fair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that great and long 

answer to the question that I asked, what was no answer to the 

question that I asked.  I simply asked you, sir, if you could give 

us some hope, and the 12,000 people that are less employed 

today than were employed in '91 -- if you could provide us with 

some direction, some hope, as to what your economic 

development strategy is going to be, coming into the future.  

Could you give us that, Mr. Minister -- some kind of assurance 

to those folks who are on the welfare rolls or are on 

unemployment today, if you could provide them with some 

kind of hope, rather than standing up and giving us big, long 

monologues about what happened in the past. 

 

What they're interested, Mr. Minister, is what your plans are for 

the future.  They're not interested in what happened in the past 

any longer I don't think, Mr. Minister.  They're interested in 

what you are going to do in the future.  Are you going to 

continue . . . and the minister nods his head that they are 

interested in the past.  Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think that 

that's true.  I think the people want to know what's going to 

happen in the future to them.  Is their job secure today; is their 

job any more secure today than it was then, Mr. Minister?  Is 

their job going to be eliminated today or is it going to be there 

tomorrow for them to go to work, Mr. Minister?  That's what 

they're interested in.  They're interested in the bread-and-butter 

issues of today. 

 

Money spent before unfortunately is money spent and nothing 

can be done about it.  And I recognize that.  And I wish, Mr. 

Minister, that you would recognize that as well, that there's 

nothing that I can do about the past, there's nothing the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan can do about the past, and there's 

nothing you can do about the past either.  Just as there's nothing 

you can do about spending $656,000 on this project and 

unfortunately . . . and I say unfortunately, Mr. 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

Minister, because we would have liked to be able to stand and 

give you credit for bringing that Piper deal to Saskatchewan, 

but it didn't happen. 

 

So it's our obligation, it is our obligation I believe, Mr. 

Minister, to ask questions about this deal.  It's our obligation as 

the official opposition to ask you and hold you accountable for 

a deal that failed, Mr. Minister.  And I think that's the role of 

opposition is to do exactly that.  You used to do it and we're 

doing it today, Mr. Minister -- asking you questions about 

economic development strategies that haven't worked out to the 

satisfaction and to the benefit of all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, please confine, if you can -- please confine, if 

you can -- your remarks to the 12,000 people that do not have 

jobs today, that did have jobs in 1991.  And please confine, if 

you can, Mr. Minister, your comments to the government's 

policy of union-only tendering.  I wonder if you would want to 

just touch on those two areas. 

 

We recognize and we've gone for an hour and a half on your 

sensitivities towards the Piper deal and how insecure you are 

about your development with respect to that, Mr. Minister.  

And I think it's become painfully obvious to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that you 

don't want to talk about that, Mr. Minister, because it's become 

synonymous with you and your department and your economic 

development strategy.  Please confine your remarks, if you 

could, to the areas relevant to today and not of yesterday. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, there's an old saying 

about societies that don't understand the past are doomed to 

repeat them.  And this is one of the reasons that the public are 

interested in the past.  Because I'll tell you, if you forget about 

those dark days, those dark days between 1981 and 1991, the 

waste and mismanagement, the Guy Montpetits, and the 

absolute waste of billions of dollars of money, billions of 

dollars of money, then they may just go back -- I doubt it -- but 

they may go back and repeat it.  So that's part of it. 

 

You understand that that is the role of government, is to remind 

people of the disaster that occurred during the 1980s.  It's not 

the only role, and I want to talk to you about jobs in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There has been a trend in the last eight or nine years of job 

losses in Saskatchewan.  In your last term of office, between 

1987 and 1990, the job numbers in Saskatchewan went from 

453,000 down to 449 or a loss of 4,000 jobs during that last 

term of office.  This is while -- remind yourselves -- there were 

hundreds of millions of dollars being spent on so-called, in 

quotations, economic development. 

 

Just make sure that we know this; the member from Maple 

Creek may want to write this down: 4,000 jobs lost in that last 

four years.  Then in the period from 1991 to '92 -- that was in 

the first year of our administration before there would be any 

opportunity 

for the Partnership for Renewal strategy to kick in; this is in 

the first 12 months while we were designing it -- the numbers 

went down by 9,000, from 449,000 to 440. 

 

Now you can flip the coin whether that is possibly the 

responsibility of a new government, or that's the tailing off of 

these megaprojects.  Most analysts would say that was the 

winding down of megaprojects.  The false economy that had 

been created by hundreds of million dollars being chucked in.  

Now you've got . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

member from Maple Creek keeps yelling, and it's hard for him 

to listen and talk at the same time.  In fact for him it's hard to 

chew gum and walk at the same time but he . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: -- Order, order.  I would ask the 

cooperation of all members to, as much as we can, refrain from 

remarks about members personally.  I don't know that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about yelling and hollering? 

 

The Deputy Chair: -- Order, order.  I don't think that serves 

the purpose of the committee of estimates to review the 

Department of Economic Development, and I would ask all 

members to . . . when members are asking questions to allow 

them to put their questions and also when the minister is 

responding to allow the minister to respond. 

 

We have had a bit of a tendency here this last little while to try 

and help the question be put and also to try and help the answer 

be responded to.  And I think the committee would be best 

served if we allowed the minister to make his remarks, and 

allow the members to put their questions uninterrupted. 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I just want to go through this again 

because this is really very important, about job loss, because 

the member did ask a very legitimate question. 

 

In the last term of the previous administration, while hundreds 

of millions of dollars were being spent of taxpayers' money to 

bolster up a false economy, the number of people working went 

down by 4,000 -- from 453,000 to 449,000.  Then in the first 

year of our administration, the year 1991, the tail-end of 1992, 

the job numbers decreased by 9,000. 

 

I say again, one can argue how it would be at all possible for a 

new administration to be responsible or not responsible for 

those first few months of their administration other than the 

megaprojects were winding down; the hole had been dug at 

Rafferty; the upgraders with the hundreds of millions of dollars 

of taxpayers' money were completed; and there was a job loss 

as a result of the false economy. 

 

Now what happened last year, after the megaprojects were 

completed, is the job numbers stayed the same.  In 1992 there 

were 440,000 people working; in 1993 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

there were 440,000 people working.  So we have seen the slide 

from 1991-92 -- a big correction as a result of the megaprojects 

winding up; now a flattening off in 1993.  Where is it going 

from here, the member asks. 

 

Let me just read a few headlines of what the business people 

are saying that the future looks like for Saskatchewan: 

 

 . . . having come through four difficult years of Tory 

administration, 1986 to 1991, where we lost jobs, then the 

completion of the megaprojects where we lobbed off a big 

amount of jobs as a result of the removal of the hundreds 

of millions of dollars of taxpayers' spending because the 

deficit had gone through the roof; 1994 business more 

optimistic, chamber survey says. 

 

That's what the chamber is saying.  Now you may not like this, 

Mr. Member from Kindersley, but you asked me for my view.  

I'm going to use other people's view because mine is that things 

are looking better, that we're beginning to turn the corner.  The 

chamber says, "Business more optimistic in 1994:" 

 

 The Saskatchewan business community is entering the new 

year with a renewed sense of optimism according to the 

result of a provincial Chamber of Commerce . . . 

 

 Chamber president Mel Watson said, "an economic 

turnaround is being forecast in the business community.  

That sense of optimism is apparent in our survey with over 

70 per cent of the respondents indicating that they 

anticipate a reasonable to very optimistic economic outlook 

in 1994." 

 

In another article it says, the title, "Sask. blueprint working:  

Business is pleased with economic progress." 

 

 One year after it laid out a blueprint for Saskatchewan's 

economy, the provincial government says . . . (that they) 

are pretty much on the right track. 

 

 Members of the Saskatchewan business community share 

Lingenfelter's assessment. 

 

 "It's our bible," Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

president Mel Watson says of the government's blueprint.  

"We refer to it all the time in any of our dealings with the 

government." 

 

So that's the Saskatchewan Chamber and the president as to 

where he thinks the economy is heading now that we've come 

out of the correction that is the removal of the hundreds of 

millions of the taxpayers' money, which you people believe 

should be putting in -- a levelling off.  And now the predictions 

for the future are that there is an optimistic and bright future. 

"Business upbeat entering '94." This is out of the 

Star-Phoenix. 

 

 Wages, employment, sales and investment will all increase 

in the new year, says a survey of local business . . . 

(people). 

 

This is not the Saskatchewan Chamber, this is the Saskatoon 

Chamber. 

 

 The Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce annual outlook 

survey finds local businesses upbeat about the prospects 

for 1994.  Chamber president Al Johnson says 142 

businesses responded . . . (to the survey). 

 

 "The survey has been pretty much on the mark in the past. 

It's been a good indicator," he said Thursday. 

 

 "The improved outlook for 1994 is hopefully a signal of an 

upturn in the . . . economy." 

 

So there again he's saying that the chamber in Saskatoon is 

optimistic about the future in their area. 

 

When I was in P.A. (Prince Albert) recently for the opening of 

the regional economic development authority -- and one can 

only be excited about what the regional economic development 

authorities are doing for bringing businesses and creating 

businesses in their area -- they are very optimistic about the 

future in the P.A. area. 

 

I was in Rosetown yesterday for the opening of their REDA.  

They are very optimistic that they're going to be able to create 

jobs.  Another article,  "Indicators show Sask. revving up 

economic engine," and it goes on to say: 

 

 If this were a motor race, we'd have the pole position.  We 

should be positively giddy. 

 

Referring to the economy of Saskatchewan.  This is not an 

NDP paper, this is the Star-Phoenix.  It concludes by saying: 

 

 We should feel good about our prospects in 1994.  There 

are plenty of good reasons to support that notion. 

 

Another article:  "Business is optimistic predicting marginally 

better sales in 1994:" 

 

 Outside Regina, farmers have generated optimism by 

diversifying their crop base.  A lot of it where it's coming 

from, is from the diversification of agriculture," Watson, a 

farm machine dealership dealer said. 

 

You look at the financial statements and they're good.  And 

people are tired of being beaten down.  And I might just refer 

that to the member opposite in his continual gloom and doom 

that the chamber of commerce and many other people are 

saying they are 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

sick and tired of those who sit around not being part of the 

solution, but part of the problem. 

 

You say, is there hope for the people who are looking for work, 

the people who were looking for work under your 

administration, the people who need jobs?  I think if you listen 

to the business community -- and that's where the jobs will 

come from.  You have to get this and understand it, that jobs 

will not come from government.  It is not the role of 

government, but the role of business, that business people are 

saying they're going to be investing more, they're going to be 

creating jobs. 

 

They say the unemployment numbers have gone down under 

your administration.  People being unemployed went up in your 

last term of office.  They went up the first year of our 

administration, as a result of the tailing off of the megaprojects.  

They're now flat and level.  All of the indicators are that new 

jobs will be created -- for the first time since you were elected 

back in 1986 -- in the coming year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman.  

And all of that is a result of your administration, you would 

have us believe.  All of those things that you talked about are a 

result of your administration and the good things that you're 

doing, you would have the people of Saskatchewan believe. 

 

And meanwhile, things like the utility rates continue to go up; 

all of those kinds of things that your government is associated 

continue to go up.  And yet you stand in your place, sir, and in 

your nice, calm fashion that you're so famous for, you're able to 

say that all of these good things are a result of the good things 

that me and my department is doing. 

 

Mr. Minister, we're looking at commodity prices in 

Saskatchewan rebounding -- and that's a direct result of you.  

Grain prices are starting to improve, and the minister . . . 

commodity prices, I said, grain prices.  Oil prices are not 

responding very well. And you know that and I know that too.  

They're dropping, yes.  And projections are that they'll continue 

to drop, Mr. Minister, in spite of what you and your 

government are doing. 

 

You don't have the independence in the world to be able to get 

these kinds of things to go up, and yet you stand in your place 

day after day after day and maintain that all of these good 

things are happening because you are the Minister of Economic 

Development.  Interest rates are at historic lows, and somehow 

or another you take credit for that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, and he says that the crop base is diversifying in 

Saskatchewan; there's more farmers growing specialty crops, 

and all of that kind of thing.  Yes, that's true, Mr. Minister, 

that's exactly true.  It's been going on for a number of years, 

and it has nothing to do with you or your government's policies, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder, you still don't seem to want to 

bring yourself to talk about the 12,000 less people that are 

employed in Saskatchewan than there used to be employed in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you said the numbers are starting to level out.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, the latest labour force statistics that I have -- and 

maybe you can provide some additional information on this, 

Mr. Minister -- in January of '92, they dropped off; further 

drop-offs have continued since then, Mr. Minister.  And I 

wonder what you and your department is doing to counteract 

that.  You stand up and you say, there's lots of things going on; 

private industry's doing some work. 

 

Well what are you doing, Mr. Minister?  What is you and your 

department . . . What can the people do in Saskatchewan to 

have some comfort that you're trying to help the situation, 

when we see a government that seems so intent on raising 

utility rates which are a direct tax on business and on 

home-owners and on the general public in Saskatchewan? 

 

Does that encourage business to expand in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Minister?  Does every time . . . a 10 per cent or 15 per cent 

increases in utility rates in one year, does that help?  I don't 

think so, Mr. Minister.  Does SaskTel charges increasing help, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Do those kinds of things that your government is actively 

involved in . . . for example, co-generation.  You say on one 

hand that you're interested in co-generation back in the throne 

speech of '91, and now you pull the rug out from under those 

people last week, Mr. Minister.  Your government did an 

economic development strategy that you said was going to be 

the be-all and end-all and that's why we didn't need AECL in 

this province.  That's what was going to develop all of the new 

job opportunities and invest in this province.  It hasn't 

happened, Mr. Minister. 

 

What we're asking you and what we are trying to hold you 

accountable for is your actions and inactions, Mr. Minister.  So 

I wonder if you would care to touch on those kinds of topics, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Once again, for the people of Saskatchewan, how many people 

more are not employed today than they were when you took 

over?  How many people are on welfare today that were not on 

welfare when you took over?  Give us some enlightenment on 

that, Mr. Minister.  Give the people of Saskatchewan some 

comfort in knowing that you are at the head of the ship of 

Economic Development, even though your first attempt was a 

failure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a little bit 

tough when he says, first of all you're not responsible for 

anything that's happening; but on the other hand, will you tell 

us what you're doing to make things happen?  And that gets to 

be difficult to see the gears kicking and grinding in that mind 

over there, to understand how on the one hand you're not 

responsible for any job creation because it's all being done by 

someone else, but on the other hand what are 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

you doing to create jobs?  And I'll try to make this easy, but it's 

a little bit difficult. 

 

But I want to say that in terms of what is happening in the 

economy, there are some very, very positive indicators.  Retail 

trade is up by 5.9 per cent in 1993 -- that is between January 

and November.  Exports are up by 17 per cent, November '93 

over November '92.  Crop receipts are up by 4.2 per cent.  So 

while he says there's been magnificent increases in commodity 

prices, there's been an increase of 4 per cent.  That's helpful but 

it's not huge, but it's headed in the right direction.  

Manufacturing shipments are up by 6 per cent and crude oil 

production is up by about 10 per cent. 

 

What are the independent forecasts for the province of 

Saskatchewan?  CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) 

indicates that the real growth for 1994 will be about 3.3 per 

cent; Conference Board of Canada predicts 2.5.  The Royal 

Bank says 1.4 per cent increase in employment in 

Saskatchewan, and the Conference Board of Canada says 1.9 

on employment growth in both 1994 and 1995. 

 

So these are some of the indicators of outside people who are 

watching the economy.  I think it's fair to say that they're 

watching very carefully how we bring the deficit under control.  

Because in terms of the long-term stability of the economy, 

running huge deficits, which was the hallmark of the previous 

administration, has been dealt with.  We've continually brought 

it down year after year.  And some of the optimism that is 

building is built around the concept that you have a government 

and a Finance department and minister who understand that 

you cannot continually spend hundreds of millions more in 

government spending than you're bringing in through the tax 

system. 

 

On the issue of utility rates, I say to the member opposite that 

his accusation that we have the highest rates for utilities in 

Canada is wrong, inaccurate, and misleading, and is part of his 

gloom and doom scenario that he should try to change.  

Because the chamber of commerce and sophisticated business 

people know that he is not telling the truth.  Saskatchewan does 

not have the highest utility rates. In fact we have the second 

lowest utility rates in Canada. 

 

(1215) 

 

And members opposite would be wise to memorize that fact so 

that if they want to continue misleading the public, at least they 

know they're misleading and they're not doing it out of sheer 

lack of knowledge of the situation.  The utility rates are 

increased marginally.  We said at the beginning of our term we 

would try to keep increases to the rate of the inflation within 

that industry. And basically we have been able to keep that 

target. 

 

Now he may argue about the 9 per cent increase in natural gas, 

but when you understand, as the member from 

Souris-Cannington will, that natural gas prices 

have gone up by a hundred per cent, he will at least know -- the 

member from Kindersley may not -- but the member from 

Souris-Cannington will know that a 9 per cent increase in gas 

prices, when all around us gas prices are going up much faster 

than that, that within the realm of inflation within the gas 

industry, a 9 per cent increase is very, very reasonable when 

you see the price of gas going from 60 and 70 cents to $2.40.  

There is no easy way of buying gas cheap when there's no 

cheap gas around. 

 

One could make an argument that a fundamental decision was 

made to get rid of the cheap gas when that administration sold 

off the gas fields when gas prices were at one of their lowest 

values in the cycle.  Now when you look at the reason that 

we're increasing gas prices, if we had kept the gas fields which 

we owned instead of selling them for little or nothing, we 

would not in fact have to increase gas prices; in fact we would 

be looking at exporting gas at a very high price and possibly 

even reducing gas prices in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So here again they should be honest with the people of the 

province and say to the people look, we made a mistake selling 

those gas fields when gas prices were very low; and oh, if only 

we could only have them back in order to maintain reasonable 

gas prices.  But even at that, the gas prices in Saskatchewan are 

second lowest in Canada and the rate of increases is well within 

the margin of inflation within the gas industry.  And the 

member from Souris-Cannington surely knows that. 

 

So utility rates are second lowest in Canada.  This is one of the 

reasons Sears is moving to Saskatchewan, why companies are 

looking at Saskatchewan as a good option.  It's not -- as the 

member from Kindersley indicates -- that it's just because 

somehow the businesses are being tricked and they don't 

understand what is here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The reason they're coming here is because we have a very, very 

reasonable tax regime when it comes to families who live in 

our province.  We have a good social program when it comes to 

health care and social programs, and we have the second lowest 

utility rates.  And when you add up those bits and pieces of the 

economy, attracting businesses to Saskatchewan, you do not 

have to hand out hundreds of millions of dollars, which was the 

hallmark of the previous administration. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

am a little surprised that you would stand in your place and 

take credit for so many numbers and try to mix them into a 

great, huge pot and confuse the public about what's happening 

in the world.  Now you've talked about how last year's good 

crop provided us with a 17 per cent export increase, and those 

things that nature does for us and allows to have happen.  

Would you also concede that a lot of the export that we do is 

affected by the fact that we now have a 73-cent dollar and that 

in fact people who buy our products 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

are getting a major steal in the market-place of the world by 

buying our products with our dollar down so low?  And would 

you like to take credit for that 73-cent dollar as Canadians 

begin to wonder about the costs that are going to be related as 

we continue into this cycle? 

 

For example, I think you have some background in the 

agricultural industry.  How are you going to explain to farmers 

that they're going to have to buy all of their repair parts from 

the Americans this fall, having to pay $4 for every $3 worth of 

goods that they get?  Are you going to take credit for that as 

well?  Are you going to take credit for replacement machinery 

like combines starting to cost $200,000 instead of 150,000 if 

the dollar were on par?  Are you going to take credit for all of 

those kind of things as well? 

 

You talk about utility rates.  I'm absolutely amazed that you 

would dwell on the price of gas when in fact you talked a few 

minutes ago about the fact that crude oil has dropped to just 

about an all-time low in recent years, and it has been going 

down, going down considerably.  So I put it to you squarely; 

how can you have it both ways?  How can you ride the fence 

both directions here? 

 

You complain about gas prices having doubled, but you don't 

talk about the benefits of cheap crude oil.  And tell me then, if 

crude oil is going down so much -- and we know that you're 

right there -- why is the price of gasoline to our consumers in 

the province of Saskatchewan still at 50-plus cents a litre?  

Why haven't we seen a reduction in the price of the gasoline?  

Why haven't we seen a reduction in the cost of gasoline to our 

major exporters, which is agriculture?  Why haven't we seen 

some of those things come back to Saskatchewan people rather 

than always have the benefits going out? 

 

You brag about all of the great economic diversification that 

you're doing and how you're building the province, while 

you're increasing the tax load and the tax burden through shifts 

in the Crown corporations so that utility rates do in fact go up 

more than we've ever paid before, nine and a half per cent.  

How do you justify that with inflation rates at 2 and 3 per cent 

on a national level, and then you have nine and a half per cent 

increases in gas at Christmas time?  How do you justify that 

even if our rates are the lowest on a product that we produce 

right here at home, that we have provided by mother nature as a 

matter of fact, natural gas, under The Great Sand Hills of 

Saskatchewan, was put there not by you and not by me but it's 

definitely there and it's definitely an advantage to us.  We don't 

have to ship it very far.  That in itself should mean that the 

price should be cheaper. 

 

And then you criticize the government for opening up that 

industry in the past.  And while I don't defend all of the things 

that past administrations did, yours or ours, I will tell you this: 

that if the government had kept the gas industry under control, 

you wouldn't have the jobs that are out in The Great Sand Hills 

of Saskatchewan, and you wouldn't have the development in 

that gas . . . a large part of that 17 per cent export that you were 

just bragging about a minute ago, has got to be the export of 

natural gas. 

And if that doesn't ring a bell for you, maybe you will recall 

that a week and a half or two back, one of the biggest pipelines 

in the world exploded in the Maple Creek area and lit up the 

skies for hundreds and hundreds of kilometres around, 

significantly pointing to the fact that that natural gas is a 

product that we have here that we export to other countries. 

 

And you, as Economic Development minister, must have been 

aware of the fact that the United States customers were 

extremely worried when that pipeline broke because they might 

not have supply of the product that we were shipping out.  So 

you know very well that this is a major export for us. The 

attention was brought to us by mother nature once again.  So I 

hardly see how you can be taking credit for those kinds of 

things, Minister, when they lay at our back door and we should, 

in fact, have the cheapest inputs of anybody in the world with 

natural energy. 

 

And then at the same time we see companies like IPSCO 

leaving the province, totally disappearing with their operation 

down to the United States; using the home base to make the 

profits necessary to finance a new development for jobs and 

creation in another country.  We can't even hold our own 

industries at home, industries that were built on the backs of the 

taxpayers to begin with.  Great amounts of subsidies going to 

these companies to get them off the ground and keep them 

going over the years and as soon as they start to make a profit, 

they take off. 

 

And what are you doing about keeping them here?  Precious 

little or nothing I'd say.  I can't see any effort at all at trying to 

get the establishment of an IPSCO subsidiary plant at, say 

Estevan or some place along the US (United States) border so 

that they can, in fact, take advantage of that market, if that was 

the need in order to be moving to Iowa or wherever they 

happen to be going. 

 

So perhaps you can enlighten us, Mr. Minister, about the things 

that you are doing to keep companies like IPSCO at home.  

What did you offer them as an incentive?  They've already got 

the cheapest gas in the world -- you just told us that -- to heat 

their plant with.  Surely if they have to ship the natural gas 

from Alberta or Saskatchewan or combine the two, as the main 

pipeline does, ship that gas all the way down the pipeline to 

Iowa, it must cost some money to transport that gas even 

through a pipeline.  Somebody must be charging for that line to 

carry that gas.  How is it that a company like IPSCO can buy 

natural gas in the United States cheap enough to be able to melt 

iron and sell competitively down there, more than they can in 

the province of Saskatchewan where the gas is virtually free, 

for nothing, as you put it?  Just about a give-away, cheapest in 

the world here, and yet they can't afford to stay in business in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What's gone wrong with this whole province?  What's wrong 

with the process here?  Surely that plant could have been 

located at Estevan or North Portal even, if you want to get a 

little closer, and we could have done something about 

trade-offs for cheap gas as compared 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

to some of the trucking that would have to be done from Iowa 

up to the border, which is not all that far away these days with 

the big trucks and the rail networks that we've got. 

 

So what's gone wrong?  Why do we find our major industries 

fleeing this province as fast as they can, picking up whole 

operations and disappearing out of the province?  Why do we 

see companies locating in Calgary and Edmonton, and then 

coming back and contracting for work in Saskatchewan? 

 

You had an example in question period this morning.  A major 

company comes to Saskatchewan and takes on a job in one of 

our cities.  How can that possibly be happening, Minister of 

Diversification?  How can that possibly be happening under 

your administration where you're going to create all of this 

work and all of these great and wonderful things are supposed 

to be happening? 

 

You've got a lot of explaining to do.  I think it'll take you a half 

an hour or so to tell the people of Saskatchewan what's gone 

wrong with this ship.  It's suddenly sprung a lot of leaks.  

Probably just about as many leaks as the eight miles of pipeline 

up at Melfort where there's 22 leaks in eight miles, somebody 

told me.  They say it runs like a sprinkler automatically.  Don't 

have to worry about the lawns by that pipeline; it's getting 

watered on a daily basis. 

 

Maybe you can tell us what's gone wrong with the quality of 

our work and the quality of our jobs and the quality of our 

province, and why nobody wants to come here and everybody 

wants to leave.  Who have you talked to lately that wants to 

come to Saskatchewan? 

 

I heard last year some boasting about 700 jobs you were going 

to bring to this province.  I'm still listening to hear where those 

jobs are . . . or 700 companies, rather, that were going to come 

to this province to create jobs.  I'm still waiting.  I want to listen 

to you tell me about all these 700 companies that are going to 

come to Saskatchewan under all your new progressive ideas 

and these great windfall ideas that you've come up with.  I'm 

sure you must have a research department working on it. 

 

And I'm surprised that you have to fall to the lame-duck 

bragging department of tying your administration to a company 

like Sears who in fact ends up locating a major operation in the 

city of Regina and you'd use that to brag on job creation, when 

in fact rural Saskatchewan saw just as many Sears stores close 

their doors and jobs and businesses lost in rural Saskatchewan 

in order for that centralization to take place, a centralization of 

an industry of business, a major multinational corporation, that 

in fact would not have come here if you hadn't harmonized the 

tax for them and given them major concessions to buy them 

into the city of Regina at the expense of rural Saskatchewan, 

under the guise of using technology that isn't a whole lot 

different from the ones you were talking about, the 

broken-down computers and all the rest, because 

that's the basis of their business. 

 

They get on the telephone, they punch it in a computer . . . had 

the experience the other day, couldn't even buy a product 

because they couldn't figure out how to get it from one 

computer to the other to transfer my address from one address 

to the other.  It's a total, ridiculous sham. 

 

You paid for them, you bought and paid for them to come to 

the province.  And the reality, Mr. Minister, is that you don't 

have any more jobs in the net total than you would have had 

before.  Because the jobs that you lost in rural Saskatchewan by 

closing down the Sears outlets in Shaunavon and Fox Valley 

and all those kinds of small towns all over the province of 

Saskatchewan, while those people were business people that 

are self-employed and have kept on being employed and didn't 

show up at the unemployment market, those dollars that you 

took out of their pockets are no longer circulating in rural 

Saskatchewan, and that means that effectively you have 

destroyed jobs in the circle of the way the process of job 

creation works. 

 

And you know about spin-off; you've talked about spin-off and 

the need for one job to be created in order to have three or 

seven others.  I've heard you make those arguments yourself.  

So what did you do?  You traded a few off in the country so 

that you could have one thing in Regina that you could brag 

about that I say quite frankly, if I were you, I wouldn't brag 

very much about. 

 

So we've got all kinds of raw products that you are shipping out 

of the province and you talk about diversification and 

development.  Why aren't you doing something about putting a 

pasta plant in Saskatchewan instead of letting it go to Manitoba 

or to North Dakota?  Why aren't you doing something about 

getting that durum processed here and ship noodles to Japan 

instead of shipping our grain in grain cars and having it all 

processed some place else in the world? 

 

Why aren't you doing something about expanding the lumber 

industry when we have all kinds of timber up North that is just 

begging for a place to go?  Thousands of jobs -- thousands of 

jobs that you could be creating.  Why aren't you exploring 

some of the simpler things like an expanded fishing industry 

within the province now that there's a shortage of fish products 

in the world, as we watch our oceans being devastated by other 

countries around the world and a need for that kind of foodstuff 

to be produced in other ways?  Where are you doing anything 

that is positive? 

 

(1230) 

 

You'll sit here and you'll argue about 12,000 versus 4,000 job 

losses and try to make a big deal out of that for about 15 or 20 

minutes of our time here today and that's nonsense, Minister.  

Because the reality is that you have not put the brakes on the 

job loss in this province the way you promised in the last 

election you would do.  Another hollow, broken promise.  You 

said before the election that if you got elected, you'd 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

fix this thing.  Well fix it. 

 

So, Minister, I think it's time that you got up and explained 

your position on all of these matters. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

opportunity to respond to the member from Maple Creek 

because he raised a number of interesting issues. 

 

One of them was that he couldn't understand how the price of 

gas was going up when the price of oil was going down.  That 

in itself is an amazing statement about his lack of 

understanding about the industry that he lives in the middle of. 

 

The way it works is there is a commodity market for oil.  Oil is 

not in as great a demand as it has been with the incoming oil 

being imported from other areas of the world where it's 

produced very cheaply.  We've seen the price of oil in the last 

few months go down by what -- 20 per cent?  Approximately 

20 per cent.  That's the oil that's produced in his very area.  It's 

got nothing to do with government.  In fact if you look at 

government policy, even at a time while oil prices were going 

down by 20 per cent, drilling has gone up by about 40 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Eighty per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Eighty per cent.  That tells you 

something about the policy of the government.  It must reflect 

favourably on the industry if you can have an increase of 80 per 

cent in drilling at the same time as the price reduces by 20 per 

cent. 

 

Now the member says: but that should mean that gas prices are 

going down to the consumer.  He is either out of sync, that he 

doesn't understand that gas is not made from oil -- which would 

surprise me greatly that he does not have at least that 

rudimentary understanding of the industry -- or he would not 

understand that the demand for gas, as American consumers 

change over many of their plants and many of their houses to 

gas, has created a great demand for the gas from his area.  He 

should also know that much of the gas in the province is owned 

by the private sector and as the price goes up they demand 

more for it, and the utilities of the pipeline companies that 

distribute the gas have only one thing to do and that is pay 

more for the gas they buy. 

 

I mean after a while you begin to understand why it was that 

that government was in all of the economic problems they were 

because they don't even have the simplest understanding of the 

price of oil versus the price of gas, even though he's a member 

that comes from a constituency where both are produced.  The 

reason that oil is $13 a barrel, as opposed to where it was a few 

months ago at 17 or 18, is because the demand has gone down.  

The reason gas prices have gone up by 2 or 300 per cent is 

because the demand has gone up. 

 

Should the government then get involved and stick its nose in 

and try to regulate and control the price of gas 

which is what I hear you saying.  I think not.  And when you 

consider gas prices that is being produced from under the Sand 

Hills, as you accurately reflect, has gone up by over 100 per 

cent, and gas prices to the consumer have gone up by 9 per 

cent, tells you that somebody is doing a magnificent job of 

keeping the price of gas down to the consumer, not artificially 

inflating it. 

 

This is not tough arithmetic, and if you can't follow it maybe 

you should write it down, but gas prices in the field have gone 

up by over 100 per cent.  To my house or to my friend's house 

it's gone up 9 per cent.  This is not usury being imposed on the 

consumer but somebody doing a great job of keeping the prices 

by averaging out long-term contracts that are being done at a 

lower level.  Great planning by the gas company is the reason 

we have 9 per cent increases versus 100 per cent increase in gas 

prices. 

 

Now the only thing that could have kept that gas price lower 

was a mistake your government made of selling off the gas 

fields.  Now I'm not going to be critical of that, but had we kept 

the gas fields, we would have been in a much better position 

not to have the gas prices going up.  But for you to say that 

because oil prices are low at $13 a barrel somehow that means 

gas prices should be low doesn't tell me much about your 

understanding of gas versus oil, and you really should read up 

on it. 

 

Now you then went on to say . . . and when the gas line 

exploded, the Foothills gas line exploded, it cut off much of the 

shipment of our gas from Saskatchewan.  There isn't an ounce 

of Saskatchewan gas going into that pipeline before the break 

occurred; that's Alberta gas, and you should know that as well. 

 

So I say to you, when you talked then about how we should use 

Saskatchewan gas to fire IPSCO's plants here in Regina and 

that they shouldn't be moving to Iowa because you know better 

on economics, that steel can be produced cheaper in 

Saskatchewan than it can in Iowa for a market south of Iowa, 

going into Mexico. Here again, like your member from 

Kindersley, you know more about business than Roger Phillips, 

of how to produce steel. 

 

This is the problem with you people.  You simply don't 

understand that we've got a business community out there that's 

very sophisticated.  Roger Phillips, not a political ally of mine, 

but runs a steel company that is profitable in the middle of the 

prairie basin, one of the few steel companies that is profitable, 

and does it by employing Saskatchewan workers.  And the steel 

plant in Iowa will not affect one iota the jobs that exist here in 

the city of Regina.  It's not a competitive market.  The reason 

is, is that Mr. Phillips and his board of directors have found a 

new market, somewhere in southern United States.  They're 

going in there and they're aggressively building a new steel 

plant that will mean more head office jobs probably here in 

Regina because this is where the centre of the business is. 

 

This is not, as the member indicates, closing down a plant in 

Regina and moving it to Iowa.  Good lord, I 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

mean read and study and learn about the steel industry.  We 

have just . . . Roger Phillips has just invested in a new 24-inch 

pipe mill in Regina.  They have just announced, in December, 

they're investing in a new finishing mill -- $8 million.  He's not 

moving the plant out of Saskatchewan to Iowa; he's building a 

new plant. 

 

Now you can make an argument, you can make an argument 

that the plant that he's building in Iowa, that expansion should 

have taken place in Regina.  His argument is he's done the 

analysis, he's checked the transportation, most of it in the 

United States because it's only a short distance to get out of 

Saskatchewan.  So don't tell me it's the gas prices or that it's the 

cost of shipping in Saskatchewan, because it isn't, it's simply 

distance. 

 

And he's come to the conclusion -- he and his board of directors 

-- that their best option is to keep the plant going in 

Saskatchewan for Canadian pipe and expand it.  A 24-inch pipe 

mill, a new finishing plant booming, everybody's excited about 

it; your comment is they're shutting the one down in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Where do you get off with that kind of drivel?  First, it's 

inaccurate.  Secondly, it does a disservice to our main steel 

plant in this province and a disservice to the employees who 

work here who might be listening and thinking you understand 

the steel industry. 

 

And it is absolutely impossible to believe that a member of this 

legislature would stand here and say that IPSCO is shutting 

down their plant in Regina and moving to Iowa.  That is not 

fair, it's inaccurate, and does a disservice to the steel company 

and to the employees who work there.  It's not proper. 

 

Either you lack completely in an understanding of IPSCO or 

you're being malicious in your approach to what this forum is 

all about.  I say again, you may make an argument, how the 

plant in Iowa which is being planned with huge incentives from 

the taxpayers there -- I believe $70 million -- how we should be 

giving even more huge incentives to pay for all the 

transportation costs.  That would be $70 million incentive plus 

the extra costs of transportation. 

 

Then it gets back to the argument made by the member from 

Kindersley that at any cost you should make these plants 

happen.  That would mean hundreds of millions of dollars 

added to the deficit of the province to make this happen.  That 

may be your philosophy but it simply does not work when you 

have to run an economy of a steel plant out of the taxpayers' 

purse.  It doesn't work. 

 

And so I say to you, when you talk about companies moving 

out of the province, don't include IPSCO in that.  IPSCO is 

expanding.  They just invested, I say again, in a 24-inch pipe 

mill; they just got a huge contract from Interprovincial Pipe to 

build a pipeline for the loop which will be coming through our 

province.  I met with Interprovincial yesterday or the day 

before for breakfast; they're saying they're going to be investing 

over a hundred million dollars in 

pipeline in this province in the next 12 months as a result of 

IPSCO winning that contract, one of the biggest pipeline 

contracts, as a result of the workers at IPSCO, Mr. Phillips, and 

IPL (Interprovincial Pipe Line Co.) making a deal shortly 

before Christmas. 

 

Now you can try to create a gloom and doom scenario out of 

that if you want, but for what purpose?  To upset the 

employees?  To misrepresent the facts for political reasons?  I 

mean Lord knows, there's enough negative going on in our 

lives without creating a scenario where a very positive situation 

is attempted to be turned around for political reasons. 

 

Now you say that the utility rates . . . again you try to reiterate 

that the utility rates are the highest in Canada here in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Here again, that's not accurate and 

it's not true.  The utility rates are the second lowest in Canada, 

and this is one of the reasons companies look at Saskatchewan 

as a good place to build.  We do have the disadvantage of 

distances and distances have always been a problem for 

manufacturers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You say as well that on the farm issue, that farmers will have to 

buy all of their parts from the United States, and because of the 

exchange rate this is going to be a great problem for farmers.  

Well I say to you that you should go around and check where 

the grain augers are that the member from Nipawin would buy 

or the truck boxes and hoists or the rock-pickers or the swathers 

or the air seeders or the cultivators or the trailers that they haul 

their combines on.  They're all built here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So for you to stand here and say that the farmers are going to 

lose as a result of this because they have to buy all of their parts 

from the United States, flies in the face of the fact that this 

economy has diversified to the point that a good part of what I 

buy on my farm is bought from Saskatchewan manufacturers. 

 

Now maybe over in your area, in that Reform area of the 

province, you have chosen on your farm to slip across the 

border into Montana to buy all your parts.  I don't know that, 

but I would urge you, if you're loyal to your community, try to 

buy Saskatchewan as much as you can because there's a great 

deal of manufacturing for your farm that you don't have to buy 

out of the United States. 

 

And every time you would buy a part produced in 

Saskatchewan: one, you would get a better part because it's 

probably better workmanship; secondly, the prices are 

competitive and your daughter or your friend's daughter and 

son may be able to get a job here in Saskatchewan as a result of 

you changing your habits of buying products out of the United 

States and try buying Saskatchewan.  It's a simple formula. 

 

You say that Sears, the 800 new jobs that are created in Regina, 

came from rural Saskatchewan.  And I want to say to you that 

the 800 jobs at the call centre in Regina do not come from rural 

Saskatchewan.  And I would ask the member to consult with . . 

. I'm not going to go into a great deal of detail, but those 800 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

jobs do not come from rural Saskatchewan.  Most of the Sears 

offices are still open as distribution centres in rural 

Saskatchewan.  I think in my home town of Shaunavon there 

was a Sears office; I think there still is one.  I'm not sure in 

Maple Creek, but I'll check that.  And I'll send you a note to tell 

you whether or not your Sears office closed in Maple Creek. 

 

But I want you to know that the 800 new jobs or so in Regina 

did not come from rural Saskatchewan, as you indicated.  That 

is not true; that's inaccurate.  And I would really like you to . . . 

I mean really you should go over to the Sears call centre and 

talk to Dave Radford and the people who put this deal together.  

Because if you're so confused that you think these are 

computers like GigaText sold to the previous administration, 

you are sadly mistaken. 

 

I am attending a call centre conference in Toronto next 

Monday.  They will be using the technology from Sears Canada 

used in Regina at a symposium that is going to be attended by 

people from all over North America.  Why?  Because the 

technology that they have here and in other call centres is 

technology that many, many companies -- banks, financial 

institutions, insurance companies -- are looking to apply to 

their industry. 

 

(1245) 

 

Believe me, my friend, this is not GigaText technology.  And 

I'm not going to go into that spiel about where those computers 

came from.  But to say and stand in the House and lead us to 

believe that this technology is somehow simply a GigaText 

used computer dug out of a back warehouse, you really should 

go over to the call centre, and I could arrange that for you, 

because we have great contacts and a lot of experience in 

working in setting up this call centre where SaskTel, a publicly 

owned utility, and a private sector, Sears, and the Department 

of Economic Development, have worked together with the 

employees to create a number of hundreds of jobs. 

 

I want to say just in closing, you mentioned the Saska Pasta 

plant, or referred to it.  Why don't we get a Saska Pasta kind of 

plant built in Saskatchewan?  I want to say to you that even 

with the best advice and lobbying that money could buy, the 

member from Estevan being paid by the city of Swift Current 

to lobby the federal government and WDO (western 

diversification office), that even with that high political 

pressure being put on WDO, your colleagues in Ottawa were 

wise enough to turn that deal down. 

 

Why?  Because it didn't have an economic bottom line.  They 

didn't know where they were going to sell the pasta to.  One 

small little glitch in the formula.  They knew how to produce 

the pasta, they had the best durum in the world, but they didn't 

know where they were going to sell the pasta.  One little glitch 

that everybody identified except the member from Estevan and 

your people in opposition. 

 

Now this hearkens back to other deals that you have made 

where you didn't know where you were going 

to sell the end product.  Imp-Pak Packaging in Swift Current 

was a good example where SEDCO invested over $20 million.  

Here they were going to coat paper trays for use in the food 

industry in the United States. 

 

In this instance it was a little bit different.  They built the 

factory; they invested the taxpayers' money.  In this case they 

had the market.  The only thing was, when I was down there 

they would throw in the paper, the used paper into the mixing 

mill.  They'd mix it up; it would turn into a slurry; it would go 

through the screens; it would produce the tray.  It would then 

go along the assembly line to where the epoxy was supposed to 

be put on -- the white coating to keep the meat trays fresh -- 

and the spray came out all over except on the trays.  And they 

tried and they tried and they invested more millions of 

taxpayers' dollars.  But when those trays would get to this one 

point in the assembly line, all heck would break loose.  The 

spray would go all over the plant but none would stick on the 

paper trays. 

 

And so there we sat with another Tory megaproject -- building 

paper trays to be used in a market in the United States.  The 

only problem was that the chemicals to be applied to the paper 

trays never stuck to the trays, and so it was shut down.  We are 

now cleaning up this mess and we're very close to being able to 

make an announcement that a new company has come in.  

We're going to, as taxpayers, take a loss on this deal, but a new 

plant will be established there in the very near future. 

 

So on Saska Pasta, I just want to say, that is one you should be 

a little bit careful of pushing forward any more than it has been, 

because your colleague in the front bench, the member from 

Estevan, I think has pushed this one hard enough and has made 

enough money on the side, in addition to his MLA salary, 

pushing this one along.  And the federal government, your 

former colleagues in Ottawa, have turned that project down. 

 

So having said that, I want to take just a moment to review 

some of the conditions for business growth and I say again, 

when it comes to what is needed to make business work, we are 

told one of the biggest things is consumer demand. 

 

Now in the province of Saskatchewan we had a very, very 

fantastic December of 1993.  I think the raw numbers on 

consumer confidence indicated that consumer spending was up 

by about 8 per cent in the month of December.  This is quite 

phenomenal and obviously difficult to maintain over the long 

haul. But what it does indicate is that consumer confidence is 

beginning to build in the province.  When you ask the business 

people what is needed to continue that to grow they say, 

positive statements being made by business people, positive 

statements being made in the press.  And I'm proud to say that 

many more of the statements that you find on the financial 

pages of the Leader-Post and the Star-Phoenix are of a more 

positive nature. 

 

Some of the radio stations have taken a more positive 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 1994 

attitude to try to build confidence in people.  And the reason 

being is that in Canada, and including Saskatchewan, about 40 

per cent of those working worry about losing their jobs in the 

next 12 months, when in fact statistical analyses show that only 

about 3 per cent at any one time in any one given year, lose 

their jobs. 

 

So we have 37 per cent or more of the consumers in the 

province and in the country worried about losing their jobs, and 

therefore not spending like they should in the economy. 

 

There is a consensus that what we need is a much more positive 

attitude about economic development.  And to that end I have 

talked to the business community, I have met with the editorial 

boards in the province of Saskatchewan, I've talked to the 

Opposition House Leader about a more positive attitude in 

here, I've talked to the Leader of the Third Party about a more 

positive attitude.  And I think some of that's coming. 

 

But today I have to say that I was very disappointed, not that 

you were asking questions.  That's what this forum is all about.  

But when you have a member who is standing in his place and 

saying, why are gas prices going up in the province of 

Saskatchewan when oil prices are going down, tells me that 

there is a sad lack of understanding about that industry, and 

really there shouldn't be. 

 

Questions are going to be asked, they have to be asked, I think 

in a positive, constructive way.  When you talk about IPSCO 

moving out of Saskatchewan, do you think that builds 

consumer confidence in the province of Saskatchewan so the 

people who have good jobs at IPSCO, and there is no threat to 

them, will go out and purchase more in the stores?  Or do you 

think you have a role to play in the scare tactics that you use 

about IPSCO moving out of the province? 

 

And when you say to the manufacturers of farm machinery that 

farmers should go to the United States to buy all their parts, 

what signal does that telegraph to the thousand people who 

work at Flexi-Coil or the record number of people who work at 

Bourgault?  The thousands of people who have worked and 

designed the air seeder, the best air seeder in the world bar 

none, produced here -- not in Canada but in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And a member of the opposition stands and says that all of the 

machinery parts manufactured will have to be purchased from 

the United States.  What does that say to those thousands of 

employees?  Does that help them build confidence that they 

have a job, or do you add to that margin of cynicism and lack 

of optimism that would help build our economy. 

 

So I say that it's very, very important that all of us do what we 

can in our own way.  I say and I give credit to the member from 

Kindersley who in his own way -- and I'm not being critical but 

I'm being positive -- has in his own way been positive in 

building economic development in the Kindersley area.  I think 

even he 

has said positive things about the changes to the oil royalty 

structure in terms of continuing the very high level of drilling 

in a field that has very, very marginal returns. 

 

My only comment is that unless we all get on the positive side 

of economic development and build consumer confidence, then 

it becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy that we are going to lose 

jobs and have a poor economy.  And to that end we intend to do 

whatever we can not to create jobs but to facilitate a positive 

atmosphere for business people to create jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Well 

we've been just, as everyone has seen, been treated to the world 

according to the Minister of Economic Development and 

member from Elphinstone.  His great and masterful way of 

saying how everything is good and everybody that's opposed to 

him is bad.  The same way that he's always done.  He's made up 

a political career spanning some number of years, and he's done 

very, very well at spewing out the political rhetoric -- probably 

the best with the exception possibly of the member from 

Riversdale -- at doing that of anyone in the history of 

Saskatchewan, I would suggest, Mr. Minister. 

 

Everybody is against development.  The moment anybody 

criticizes you, everybody's against . . . you're against us because 

you're against development.  Not true.  Not true.  Not true, Mr. 

Minister.  Everybody is against anything that you're trying to 

do?  Not true, Mr. Minister.  Every time that you have done 

something positive we've given you credit for it.  There just 

hasn't been that many times, Mr. Minister. 

 

Utility costs are up and you want us . . . to give us the 

opportunity to give you credit.  Can't do it, I'm sorry.  Utility 

rates are up, fact of life.  Co-generation is done, fact of life; you 

did it in.  You said on one hand in '91 that it was going to be a 

positive thing, and then you killed it, Mr. Minister, and your 

department . . . or the Minister of Energy and Mines killed it, 

Mr. Minister.  And somehow or another we're supposed to say 

that's a positive development. 

 

Crop Insurance parties being held in Regina this weekend, and 

somehow or another that's supposed to be positive, Mr. 

Minister.  We can't say it's positive.  Job numbers are down and 

yet you say we're being negative when we point that out, Mr. 

Minister.  And you know that that's not true. 

 

And when we get back to Crop Insurance for a moment, and 

the Minister of Agriculture is with us this afternoon, he knows 

very well that the farmers of Saskatchewan don't want this, Mr. 

Minister.  He would rather have it not hosted, my guess is, if he 

had a second thought at it for a moment.  Maybe, Mr. Minister, 

you could hold it out in your new mansion.  I think the people 

of Saskatchewan would rather see it held out there than pay in 

for the big shot downtown that's going to be spent this 

weekend, Mr. Minister. 



March 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

Mr. Minister, you've built a great political career out of doing 

what you do and you do it very, very well.  And we recognize 

that, Mr. Minister.  But you tramp on anyone and everyone that 

gets in your way.  Just ask the Barry Dixon's of the world some 

of the ways and means that you get to . . . the end always 

justifies the means as far as you're concerned, doesn't it, Mr. 

Minister?  Just ask the people that you bought memberships for 

to get the nomination in Elphinstone.  Doesn't matter.  The end 

always justifies the means with you, doesn't it, Mr. Minister? 

 

No matter what you do, it always comes back to the one final 

thing; it always means I get my way; the rest of the people have 

to suffer.  Too bad.  Isn't that the motive behind everything you 

do, Mr. Minister?  Everything you've done in your entire 

career, it's been with that selfish attitude of me first, the rest of 

the people too bad.  That's been your attitude right from the day 

you started in the political world, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, we recognize what you are trying to do this 

afternoon: rally the troops up.  You've been beaten up all week 

long with things like co-generation, Sask Crop Insurance.  STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) is going to host a big 

party out there.  Health care reform is still burning.  And yet in 

spite of all of that, Mr. Minister, you have to stand and tell us 

about the past.  That's your view of life, tell everyone about the 

past, Mr. Minister.  But you know very well -- you know very 

well -- that this might be your Waterloo in the Economic 

Development department. 

 

And you're so concerned, you're just a heartbeat away -- just a 

heartbeat away -- from being the premier of this province, and 

you're so concerned, so concerned, Mr. Minister, that that 

might never come to fruition; isn't that right, Mr. Minister?  

Just a moment away, the most machiavellian person I have ever 

met in my entire life, sits in that chair over there -- the Minister 

of Economic Development -- go to any length to get what he 

wants, and yet has not been able to accomplish the ultimate 

manipulation, Mr. Minister, haven't quite been able to do that. 

 

And he is so afraid, Mr. Chairman, so afraid that this might be, 

this might be the final thing that he isn't able to accomplish in 

his illustrious political career.  Hasn't quite made it to the top, 

the pinnacle.  Right, Mr. Minister?  Hasn't quite eclipsed the 

member from Riversdale; has never been able to quite 

out-manipulate that member. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that's why you have such a difficulty 

talking about failed economic development initiatives that you 

and your department are responsible for.  That's why, Mr. 

Minister, that you don't like talking about this.  You'll go to any 

length -- go back to '82 or '86, whatever it takes -- and talk 

about anything and everything.  You don't want to talk about 

today, Mr. Minister, because your projects are failing.  Your 

strategy is failing, Mr. Minister -- 12,000 less jobs in 

Saskatchewan today, Mr. Minister.  The record high number of 

people on welfare, Mr. Minister, since your government took 

over. 

And you and your department, even though you were going to 

provide Saskatchewan with such illustrious and glorious 

opportunities, have never been able to accomplish that to date, 

Mr. Minister.  And that's why, Mr. Minister, you do what you 

did today, and stand and give the people of Saskatchewan your 

history according to the member from Regina Elphinstone, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

It's unfortunate that you have to resort back to that sort of old 

political rhetoric, but I know that, as a member like yourself, 

there's no other answer to it.  Whenever you get into trouble, go 

back to the past.  Whenever there's a problem, say someone 

else was worse. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 1 o'clock, the committee will rise 

and report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


