




















































Hansard: April 22, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1759 

 April 22, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

be able to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly three visitors from the Saskatchewan 

Abilities Council that are located behind the bar on the main 

floor. 

 

I'm doing this for the member from Regina Dewdney and I 

know he regrets that he's not able to make a visit with them, 

and I'd be delighted to meet with them and answer any 

questions and have a good visit and drinks with them in room 

218 around 11 o'clock. 

 

So I ask all members to join with me in a warm welcome for 

the members from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- In my enthusiasm, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to 

mention and forgot to mention that they are with their teacher, 

Ms. Lynn Demeulle, and Mr. Darren Olson is the chaperon as 

well as Ms. Tricia Lolacher.  And I also welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Assembly on behalf of my colleague, the member from Biggar, 

a group of students in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Swanson 

Christian School in Delisle.  They're visiting the legislature this 

morning with their teacher, Mr. Ginther, and some parents and 

chaperons. 

 

And I'll be able to meet with them following their visit to the 

Chamber at about 10:30 in room 218 to answer any questions 

that they might have about this morning's proceedings, which I 

hope you will join me in welcoming them to, and that they 

enjoy their visit this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

this morning I have the great pleasure of introducing to you and 

to the members of the 

Assembly some very important and dedicated people who work 

to serve the people of Regina and Saskatoon.  In the west 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, are representatives from the Regina and 

Saskatoon Public Library board.  And they are attending the 

Saskatchewan Library Trustees' Association and the 

Saskatchewan Library Association conference here in Regina 

this weekend. 

 

I would like to introduce to you Bonace Korchinski, who is the 

chair of the Saskatoon Public Library board.  He is a retired 

teacher and has six years on the board.  Jim Biss, who is 

vice-chair.  Jim is a lawyer in Saskatoon and has been on the 

Saskatoon board for four years.  Lynne Agnew is Saskatoon's 

newest board member, and she has a nursing background. 

 

For Regina, we have Merrilee Rasmussen, chair.  She has a law 

degree and of course she is no stranger to this Assembly.  

Gloria Mehlmann is deputy chair of the Regina board and 

represents . . . she is a director of the Indian and Metis 

education unit for Sask Ed.  She has served the board for six 

years. 

 

Ken Jensen is chief librarian and secretary of the board of the 

Regina Public Library.  And we also have Sandra Anderson as 

chief librarian and secretary of the board for Saskatoon, and 

Maureen Woods who works for our department, is the 

Provincial Librarian. 

 

These people represent for Saskatchewan some significant 

achievements, because in the Places Rated Almanac that was 

released this year, Saskatoon is the number one and Regina is 

number four in reading communities in North America.  And 

this achievement was recognized on the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) radio programs of Morningside and 

As it Happens and The Afternoon Edition, as well as an 

article in the Globe and Mail.  And it's through the work and 

dedication of people who serve on the public library boards in 

Regina and Saskatoon that this achievement has been noted. 

 

And I would like to congratulate them on behalf of the people 

of Saskatoon and Regina and the province, and ask all members 

of this Assembly to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased today 

to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly, on behalf of my colleague from Shaunavon, 22 

grade 12 students from Eastend School.  They are accompanied 

by their teacher, Mr. Zandbergen, and Ms. Dahl and Mrs 

Koester. 

 

And I will be meeting with them after question period to 

receive their impressions of their experiences here today.  And 

I'd ask all of you to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

members from Saskatoon, I want to join with the member from 

Melfort in welcoming our librarian from Saskatoon and the 

members of the library board from Saskatoon.  I hope they 

have a very pleasant stay in the city of Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Earth Day 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The earth is 

our one and only home.  As we speak there are over 4 billion 

people roaming its oceans, cities, islands, mountains, and 

fields.  As citizens of this fragile planet, each one of us holds  a 

great responsibility to take care of the earth for future 

generations to enjoy. 

 

We must learn to respect our planet and all forms of life within 

its atmosphere.  This is why I am pleased to announce to the 

Assembly that today, April 22, has been declared Earth Day.  

From its beginnings 24 years ago, Earth Day has appealed to 

the masses.  In 1990, the 20th anniversary of Earth Day, an 

estimated 200 million people participated in Earth Day.  This 

became the single largest peacetime demonstration in history. 

 

People of all races, colours, and religions from over 141 

nations will join together for this special day to celebrate the 

earth.  People from all over the world will participate in tree 

plantings, educational seminars, community clean 

_ups, awareness projects, ecology fairs, and other projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that our government is working 

on initiatives which will ensure that Saskatchewan will 

continue to be among the cleanest places in the world.  We all 

can have a positive difference in our world, and I ask that 

everybody in this province make a commitment on Earth Day 

'94 and take an active part in securing the future of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, today is Earth Day 

and it is indeed significant to Saskatchewan. 

 

This province has evolved from the land, the water, and the 

sun, and our province is dependent upon those precious 

resources.  We are dependent on agriculture and oil as our 

number one exports, products to keep our economy rolling.  

We depend on coal, oil, sun, wind, and water to generate our 

electricity and, hopefully, nuclear in the near future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people depend on the earth for our 

very survival.  We cannot take our resources for granted.  

Instead, we must do our part to 

ensure that Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada is kept clean, 

that our resources are protected and cherished. 

 

Earth Day is a day to celebrate the people of Saskatchewan and 

to remind all of us how precious our world is.  After all, the 

steps we take today we are taking for our grandchildren and our 

great grandchildren.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Peace Hills Trust 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to announce an important financial development in the 

town of Fort Qu'Appelle, which is in my constituency. 

 

Peace Hills Trust, a corporation owned by the Samson Indian 

Band of Alberta, is opening its second Saskatchewan branch in 

Fort Qu'Appelle.  For its location, Peace Hills Trust is leasing 

the handsome old post office building from the Star Blanket 

Reserve, which is located near Balcarres.  Star Blanket has 

already begun renovations and Peace Hills will do more before 

they begin operations in the fall. 

 

Members will remember that Fort Qu'Appelle and the Star 

Blanket Band recently negotiated an arrangement that allowed 

the band to convert its town property to reserve status with due 

compensation to the town.  This announcement is evidence that 

the agreement is a good one for all involved. 

 

We have here, Mr. Speaker, economic expansion for the town 

of Fort Qu'Appelle, a financial institution that will offer a full 

range of services to all clients.  We have an example of the 

vibrant and growing aboriginal business community in Canada 

as shown by the acumen of both the Samson and Star Blanket 

bands.  As Harold Smith of Star Blanket said, this is a sign the 

Indian community is moving into the '90s.  We have an 

excellent example of cooperation and understanding between 

all the interested parties.  I congratulate them.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rose Valley Rural Diversification Show 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to announce to 

the Assembly that the Rose Valley rural diversification show is 

being held on April 22 and 23 in the Rose Valley arena.  Being 

that it's both Volunteer Week and Earth Day, I would like to 

take this time and congratulate the Rose Valley rural 

diversification committee and all the other volunteers and 

school children of Rose Valley for their volunteer work related 

to the show. 

 

This year's show was organized and run by a strong team of 

local volunteers.  Specific recognition is deserved to the 

members of the Rose Valley rural diversification committee 

who are as follows:  Grace Rachkewich, Shannon Lindsay, 

Donnella Hanson, 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

Sharlene Hanson, and Cheryl Vilness.  Their hard work and 

dedication is admired by all who are involved in the show.  I 

would like to also notice the people of Rose Valley who have 

volunteered their time and talents to help out with various 

aspects of the show. 

 

Since today is also Earth Day, it is also interesting to know that 

the school children are doing special Earth Day posters to 

initiate environmental awareness.  This kind of involvement by 

our children is very encouraging and important news that the 

children of Saskatchewan are concerned enough about our 

environment to become involved in its cause.  It should be an 

example we all should follow. 

 

Congratulations and recognition goes out to all the fine 

volunteers of Rose Valley for their great efforts.  I am also 

encouraging everyone to come to the Rose Valley rural 

diversification show this weekend.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Tae Kwon Do Championships 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to congratulate all the participants in this year's CTFI 

(Canadian Tae Kwon Do Federation International) National 

Tae Kwon Do Championships held in Regina. 

 

I'm also proud to say that Saskatchewan fared extremely well at 

this year's event.  Saskatchewan ranked a strong second overall 

in the entire tournament.  And in fact two Saskatchewan gold 

medal winners, Quinten Palmer and Sid Talukar, will go on to 

represent our country in the junior world games slated for 

November 1994 in Spain. 

 

I want to congratulate all Saskatchewan medal winners, but in 

particular a group from my area of the province.  Quinten 

Palmer, who I just mentioned, a grade 11 student, not only won 

the black belt gold medal, but is the instructor of a tae kwon do 

club in Riceton.  Many of his students also were medal winners 

including Andre Boutine-Maldney, Matthew Schmeling, 

Amber Zolc, Laura Zolc, Colin Zolc, and, Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud to report, my son, Jesse Bradley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- It was an excellent showing for a small rural 

club at a national event.  Over a thousand competitors from 

across Canada came to Regina's Fieldhouse to take part in this 

championship.  Over 300 of the athletes were from 

Saskatchewan.  Many people came out to see the tournament.  

The events included sparring, patterns, board breaking, and 

team events. 

 

Tae kwon do is a very ancient and cherished discipline.  "Tae" 

stands for the technique of the legs; "kwon" for the technique 

of the hands; while "do" means the philosophy or way of life.  

Many argue that 

tae kwon do is not so much a sport as it is a way of life.  A 

large aspect of tae kwon do's philosophy . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Midget "B" Hockey Tournament 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today it's my pleasure 

to report to the Legislative Assembly about the best Midget "B" 

hockey tournament of 1994. 

 

Last weekend the western Canada midget B championship 

tournament was held here in Regina. The Saskatchewan 

provincial champion team from Notre Dame, coached by Terry 

O'Malley and assistant coach Mr. Shiebel, won the tournament.  

The team from Airdrie, Alberta, placed second.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm very pleased to report to you that a team from the 

north end of Regina, the Regina Hawks, the host team, placed 

third in this prestigious tournament. 

 

Players, coaches, parents, scouts, and spectators were all 

impressed by the outstanding quality of the tournament.  My 

congratulations to Candace Ross, the chairperson of the 

tournament, and the close to 100 volunteers that worked so 

hard to make this championship tournament the success that it 

was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower Employees Conference Attendance 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this morning are for the minister responsible for 

SaskPower or his designate. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell this House how much it cost to send 

32 SaskPower employees to the Canadian Electrical 

Association's four-day conference at the Harbour Castle Westin 

Hotel in Toronto last month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll take notice of that question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your 

government approved spending thousands of dollars to send 32 

SaskPower employees to this conference in Toronto, and we 

wonder whether your government even knew about it.  Or does 

Jack Messer even consult with you on these kinds of decisions, 

or does he just waste this kind of taxpayers' money entirely on 

his own? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I had taken notice of the earlier 

question which certainly would have covered that accusation. 

 

I want to make a statement in this House about the personal 

slandering of public servants.  Members here have a forum in 

which to make the accusations; public servants have no similar 

forum in which to respond.  And I would have hoped that the 

member from Kindersley would have measured his words a 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

little more carefully before he makes such comments in here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

understand registration for this event was between $375 to 

$400 per person.  Hotel rooms in Toronto are going to cost you 

probably in the neighbourhood of $100 a night for four nights.  

And flights to Toronto cost several hundred dollars.  So this 

conference in Toronto must have been at least $1,500 a touch 

per person, not counting salaries for the days.  Multiply that by 

the 32 people and you have about a $50,000 bill for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  I guess SaskPower didn't want to 

be outdone by Sask Crop Insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, was it really necessary to spend that much 

taxpayers' money and send 32 people from SaskPower to this 

conference in Toronto? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I indicated to the member earlier, 

we will get the details of this of which we have none at the 

moment. 

 

Let me say though generally with respect to conferences, they 

do have a place.  SaskPower is part of a national power system.  

And there is a place for these conferences and there is a place 

for people to attend.  And the suggestion that anything spent on 

these conferences is a waste is really I think beside the point. 

 

And I will give the member one undertaking: we will not be so 

uncharitable as to pull out the expense accounts of the PCs 

(Progressive Conservative) when they were in office.  We 

won't be that uncharitable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, just days 

before you hiked power rates in Saskatchewan, SaskPower 

drops 50 grand or so of taxpayers' money on a conference in 

Toronto.  And you say conferences are important.  Well indeed, 

they are. 

 

We checked with the office of the minister responsible for 

Manitoba Hydro, as a comparison.  And they informed us that 

Manitoba Hydro sent four people to this conference -- four, Mr. 

Minister.  That seems like a more reasonable number. 

 

But here in the land of Jack Messer, we've got to do things in a 

big way.  Big power rate increases, big money to be spent on 

conferences in Toronto.  Manitoba sends four people; we send 

32 people.  Why do we do that, Mr. Minister?  Could you 

please provide us with a list of the 32 SaskPower employees 

who went to this exposition and their positions within 

SaskPower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I expect that the minister will do so 

with relish, because generally the accusations made by the 

member of Kindersley have little to do with the facts.  And I 

suspect when the facts are 

available and the minister's here, he'll respond with relish. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, what was 

so important about this conference in Toronto that you had to 

send 32 people?  We'd be interested also in the details of what 

the conference was about, Mr. Minister.  We wonder whether 

there was a symposium on how to justify power rate increases 

four times the rate of inflation.  Or was there a workshop on 

nepotism and its role in awarding government contracts? 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't there a more cost-effective way of getting 

this information to SaskPower workers?  Did you really have to 

send 32 people to Toronto at a cost of over $50,000 to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That is not a new question.  It is not a 

question at all.  In fact it is an accusation.  We will take that 

accusation and the others and respond.  And as I say, I feel 

relatively confident that the facts will be very different than 

you assume for the basis of these accusations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canada-United States Trade Dispute 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

ask a question of the Minister of Agriculture.  As you are 

aware, Mr. Minister, and as are many farmers in this country, in 

this province, and as are many of the farming organizations, 

aware of the fact that today is the deadline set -- the arbitrary 

deadline -- set by the Americans for a resolution to our 

agricultural trade dispute.  There's one bright spot on the 

horizon, Mr. Speaker; I understand that the silos have been 

closed once more. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, many Saskatchewan farmers are worried 

about seeing these important markets being cut off.  And they 

are counting on you, and they are counting on our federal 

Minister of Agriculture to help them out and to protect their 

interest.  Mr. Minister, can you give us a status report on these 

negotiations, and what is being done to ensure that the United 

States does in fact not impose those quotas that they are 

threatening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to answer that 

question on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture and on behalf 

of the government.  I want to tell the hon. member opposite that 

we very much are concerned with the American actions and the 

American statements since from all of the information we have, 

none of the proposed decisions which they are going to be 

making and taking conform to the facts. 

 

In 1990 for example, the United States International Trade 

Commission found that transportation subsidies -- something 

which the Americans have got in very much a bee in their 

bonnets about -- are not a factor 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

about competitiveness.  Last month a bilateral U.S. (United 

States)-Canada panel found that out of 105 durum wheat 

contracts, 102 of them were in full compliance with all of the 

trade agreements 1989 and 1992.  Consumption of durum, 

production in durum, in the United States has increased . . . 

consumption has, but the production has decreased.  And we're 

filling the vacuum, the natural vacuum. 

 

And I might add, one of the other things which is disturbing is 

that they return back to us, once they get our durum, much 

more processed foods and pasta and the like, all of which to 

which Canada has not complained. 

 

This is not a justifiable complaint by the Americans.  It is not 

justifiable by their studies, by joint studies.  The federal 

government has taken a very strong position saying that they 

oppose this action.  We support the federal government. 

 

And I guess the one message I'd like to leave as I take my 

place, Mr. Speaker, to the Americans if they're listening, is that 

this is an action which is condemned widely by Canadians 

everywhere of all political stripes.  And as far as this 

government is concerned, in fact this legislature is concerned, 

by virtue of the fact of our resolution a few weeks ago, we say 

to the Americans:  you can act in conformity with the facts, 

cease and desist.  And so far as I know, the negotiations are still 

in that position where the Canadian government takes that 

posture, and we support our Canadian Prime Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And thank you to 

the Premier for that answer.  I think your response was actually 

quite good and I concur with a lot of what you said when it 

comes to the countervailing measures that the Americans are 

taking on many of our so-called subsidies which we know 

better; they don't. 

 

And I think it underscores the significance of the FTA (Free 

Trade Agreement) where under the Free Trade we now do in 

fact have a trilateral dispute-settlement mechanism that is 

standing the pork industry in good stead time after time after 

time.  So we do have to talk sense to the Americans, and from 

that perspective, Mr. Premier, I agree with you. 

 

Grain Car Shortage 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I want to go to another issue, and the Premier 

is welcome to answer instead of the Minister of Agriculture, if 

he so chooses -- but I want to talk a little bit more about the 

trucking program recently established by the Canadian Wheat 

Board, which I might add to you, Mr. Minister, is just a 

knee-jerk reaction to the problem of railcar shortages. 

 

The Wheat Board is forcing producers to truck their grain to 

two centres in the province -- AgPro centres in Saskatoon and 

in Moose Jaw -- and that is substantially increasing the trucking 

cost for the 

producers who live a fair distance away from those two 

terminals.  I want to know, Mr. Minister, do you support this 

Canadian Wheat Board policy?   And if not, what discussions 

have you had with the federal minister to explain to him the 

additional increased costs that the Saskatchewan producers are 

facing as a result of his policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the member raises 

an important point.  However, I'd want the member to keep in 

mind that one of the key arguments of the Americans is the 

question of our WGTA (Western Grain Transportation Act) 

and the subsidization by rail transportation.  They also 

peripherally and, I argue, unfairly, challenge the concept of the 

Canadian Wheat Board into all of this. 

 

Therefore, into this mix -- although the 1990 International 

Trade Commission found that there was no justification for 

their concern -- has got to be taken into account a variety of 

factors for transportation to clearly disprove to the Americans 

that transport is somehow being unfairly a matter of benefit to 

the Canadians to the disadvantage of the American producers. 

 

The American producers, as the hon. member knows as well as 

I do, have had their exports subsidized by the export 

enhancement program, EEP, and they have in effect cut out us 

from international markets, creating a demand domestically.  

And so when our farmers fill their domestic demand under 

supposed free, but I would think fair -- although it's 

questionable whether it's fair -- trading arrangements, they 

don't want to allow that either. 

 

Well the Americans can't have it both ways.  They can't preach 

free trade and practise protectionism.  They simply cannot do 

that.  And in our position the Government of Canada, the 

Canadian Wheat Board -- you may disagree on some of the 

elements that are being part of the mix -- are making the proper 

responses to demonstrate factually and politically and 

internationally that Canadians cannot and will not tolerate this 

kind of trade embargo. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now it's my turn to 

be confused.  I was asking a question about railcar shortages.  

And I thought that the Premier would take the opportunity to 

address the federal Liberal knee-jerk reaction rather than 

continuing on the American bashing, which in this case I again 

do not disagree with.  But that was irrelevant to the question 

that I asked. 

 

So I'm talking about railcar shortages, knee-jerk reaction by the 

federal Liberal government in handling a very significant, 

important issue.  I asked you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, do 

you support that action of having the Canadian Wheat Board 

assigning the inland terminals of the AgPro, the Wheat Pool 

AgPro terminals, two of them, Saskatoon and Regina?  That's 

what I'm asking you, if you support that. 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

And why were those two terminals singled out, Mr. Minister?  

What about the Weyburn inland terminal?  What about the 

Rosetown terminal?  What about the elevators that are sitting in 

Davidson?  What about the north-east terminal?  These are the 

questions that I want you to answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Or do you support the position of the Western Canadian Wheat 

Growers that other elevators should be allowed to handle this 

grain -- elevators that are capable of having 50 cars?  What's so 

magic about a hundred cars? 

 

Mr. Minister, will you express your position on this issue; and 

if you do not agree with the Canadian Wheat Board on it, say 

so, and what are you prepared to do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 

member opposite for that question.  It certainly opens up a 

whole area of concern. 

 

We have a very serious backlog of grain moving to port.  We 

have something like 40 ships sitting out in Vancouver, on 

which we are paying demurrage.  I was at Saskatoon this week 

where the Vancouver port association, or Vancouver Port 

Corporation held a meeting in Saskatoon at which they invited 

all the stakeholders.  There are some people who blame it on 

the railroads, people who say there's a car shortage.  Railroads 

say there is no car shortage; it's because of what the elevators 

are doing.  And management blames it on labour and labour 

blames it on management. 

 

Our message to all the parties and all the people involved in 

this is to sit down and work this out.  We've got to get our 

Saskatchewan grain moved as quickly as possible. 

 

The Wheat Board is doing, I assume, what they think is best 

and cheapest to move as many cars out there and get as much 

grain through the system as they can.  And they've decided that 

100-car spots at certain terminals are the best way to move that 

grain out there.  I'm not a good judge of which is the best 

system.  All I've been saying to all the players involved is let's 

move as much of that grain as quickly as we can and keep the 

system moving, because it is costing Saskatchewan farmers 

money when there's hold-ups in the system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Local Housing Authorities 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the minister responsible for Sask Housing.  Many 

communities in Saskatchewan have local housing authorities to 

administer their senior housing projects. 

 

Madam Minister, can you explain who chooses the members of 

the local housing authority, and how it is done to ensure 

support of the community? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

thank the member for that question.  The Saskatchewan 

housing authorities have been in existence since about the 

1950s.  And there has been a policy that there is a local 

nominating committee made up of the mayor, a representative 

of the federal government, and a representative of the 

provincial government, who will select people who are 

interested in serving on that board of directors in support of 

their local community. 

 

So we try wherever possible to make sure that there is equal 

representation and that the people they choose are people who 

are dedicated to serving public housing in the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, the citizens of Radisson feel that there has been 

considerable interference in the process of choosing their local 

authority. 

 

A clear majority on the selection committee agreed on their 

choices for the housing authority, and the brand-new provincial 

representative overruled them and submitted three entirely 

different names, and your department approved those choices. 

 

Is it the policy of your department to ignore a majority decision 

by the local selection committee? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, Sask Housing operates the 

local housing, public housing programs in Saskatchewan.  And 

wherever and whenever possible we strive for consensus when 

we look for nominations to the board of directors.  But in the 

end, as has been the policy since the 1970s -- and certainly it 

was exercised in the 1980s to a high degree -- the provincial 

representative who represents a provincial government has the 

power to finally select those people when there is no consensus 

between the other two representatives. 

 

So by virtue of the fact that, one, the housing authorities 

represent the extension of management and operations under 

the Department of Municipal Government housing division, we 

want people who serve on the board who are dedicated to 

serving the interest of the community as well as cooperating 

with the provincial government. 

 

And the provincial rep is an extension of our department and 

they have a fair influence on deciding who finally sits on the 

local housing authority.  This is nothing new; it's been a policy 

that has been in practice for the last 20 years.  And there are 

very few occurrences where there is any dispute. 

 

Occasionally some dispute does arise.  I can tell you that when 

I was mayor of Melfort and I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I do 

find this very curious, Madam Minister, because what you're 

saying is, the local mayor and 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

the federal representative who achieved a majority and they 

decided on three names jointly that they were completely 

satisfied with, as many people they had consulted; but when the 

brand-new provincial rep disagreed, she got to choose three 

entirely different names and you decided to approve them. 

 

This community, as you've said, has gone for far more than 20 

years being totally happy with their process.  No problems at 

all with any form of government interference in the past. 

 

Madam Minister, all they want is something very simple.  Will 

you agree to let the local members in Radisson choose their 

own board based on majority vote? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, again I want to say that we 

strive for consensus and in most cases where there is good will, 

consensus can be achieved.  The provincial representative 

brought forward one name that was not approved by the other 

two.  The other two names that was brought by the provincial 

representative was changed in respect to the opinion of the 

other two members who sit on the nominating committee. 

 

So there was a consensus.  There was an attempt by the 

provincial representative to find a way of solving this dispute.  

She did change two of those three names.  There was one name 

that couldn't be agreed to, and by virtue of the fact that this 

person represents a provincial government and has, in the final 

authority, the power of veto, that one name was approved. 

 

And it is unfortunate that the member opposite wants to make 

this a political issue.  It is not a political issue.  The people who 

serve on this board are dedicated, all of them, and they can do a 

good job as long as politics stay out of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker.  You've just placed yourself 

in a very difficult position, Madam Minister, because there's 

only one person, one government, that's made this a political 

issue.  It's never been a political issue for these people.  And it's 

a far more serious, it's a far worse situation than what you're 

allowing this Assembly to understand.  As a result of your 

interference in the local selection process, the manager of the 

seniors' villa complex has been relieved of his duties as of last 

Monday. 

 

The seniors who live there are very distressed, distressed to the 

point where they're saying they want to move out.  They have 

petitioned you to honour their choices, Madam Minister, and 

you have chosen to ignore them. 

 

Now can they have your assurance that you will let them 

choose their own housing authority and that you and their local 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) will stop 

meddling in their affairs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well once again, Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite has her facts quite confused and she's 

distorting the truth quite dramatically.  And this is where 

politics come into it.  The local people are working to solve the 

solution.  All those people who serve on the board, including 

the one that was nominated by the provincial rep, are good, 

solid citizens of the town of Radisson. 

 

And it's not the provincial government and it's not this minister 

that is interfering.  There is a process by policy and through 

legislation that has been in place for 20 years.  The provincial 

representative has, in the final analysis, the authority to make 

the final nominations.  And this is something that has been here 

for many years, including when the last Liberal government 

was in power. 

 

And what you are doing, Madam Member from the third party, 

is interfering politically in something that can be solved at the 

community level.  That's where the political interference is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trade Union Vote Procedures 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question this morning is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I have a 

very basic and fundamental question for you this morning, and 

I hope that you will answer it fairly and without political 

rhetoric or commentary. 

 

Mr. Premier, do you and your government fully support the 

principles of democracy, particularly the principle that in any 

vote the majority should rule and that voters should enjoy 

anonymity? 

 

Could you give us your comments on that, Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, does the member expect 

me to get up and say that no, I do not believe in the principles 

of democracy and I do not believe in anonymity and I do not 

believe in any of the rules in general terms? 

 

I know you're trying to get at The Trade Union Act or Labour 

Standards Act, which is an entirely different situation, but as a . 

. . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is and it was -- it is and it 

was when you managed The Trade Union Act, the same 

provisions there; when the Liberals managed, the same 

provisions there.  Absolutely explainable. 

 

But I think I'm as good a democrat as you are, sir.  In fact you 

are such a democrat and you exhibit such independence, I note 

the number of times you've continued to vote against your 

caucus on their positions.  And I commend you for that 

independence that you display there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, I want 

to congratulate you for the answers 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

that you gave earlier today, and you are following right in that 

mode and I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Premier, certainly the principles of democracy are 

supported worldwide.  They are a fundamental guide to the way 

that we govern ourselves and should be applied to every 

situation.  Unfortunately this is not the case in Saskatchewan.  

When it comes to the unions, they get special status.  The rules 

of democracy are replaced by the rules of survival, because 

under strict democracy the unions couldn't survive. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Premier, why have you not extended the 

principles of the secret ballot in the certification votes held by 

unions?  You have fundamentally and unilaterally shifted 

significant power to the unions in this province.  And with that 

power you have given them a blank cheque. 

 

Mr. Premier, very simply, why shouldn't democracy apply to 

unions as it does to everyone else? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. 

member -- I say this delicately and I say it generously of the 

hon. member -- I think he needs a little bit of a primer on the 

functioning of trade unions.  Because the allegation that is 

made by him that the trade unions are not democratic 

organizations, the premiss of his question -- he said that in his 

question -- is absolutely wrong. 

 

They elect their officers; they manage their affairs according to 

constitutional provisions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not by secret ballot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- That's right.  They do it in a variety of 

ways, which is as democratic as any organization on the 

employer side that may take place. 

 

And the notion that somehow this is an undemocratic 

operation, I think either belies a large degree of ignorance on 

the part of the trade unions and how they operate by the 

member opposite, or in the alternative, is again an attempt to do 

some sort of union bashing on the, I think, misplaced belief that 

this is a popular thing to do. 

 

Look, The Trade Union Act is a special Act which seeks to 

limit areas of conflict between employers and employees.  Ever 

since the Wagner Act in the United States upon which The 

Trade Union Act of Saskatchewan is based, that has been the 

theory behind it. 

 

Every amendments which are introduced periodically, unless 

you come at it from a right-wing approach, is intended to 

minimize the conflict; it is intended to maximize cooperation.  

This is not a court of law; this is a court of tribunal which seeks 

to harmonize and to make relations between trade unions and 

employers work efficiently so we have a better and healthier 

economy. 

 

That's what these amendments are all about.  And 

once we get into the actual clause by clause of the Bill, you'll 

see the explanations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1045) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure this morning to introduce a 

group of 60 grades 4 and 5 students.  They are from the town 

and school in Langham and -- which is in the south-west corner 

of my constituency -- and these students are in your east 

gallery, accompanied by the teachers Debby Dear, Arleen 

McKone, Heather Dack, and Evelyn Kasahoff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think these teachers are to be commended for 

the effort that they put into it on a yearly basis.  They are here 

presenting their students to the Assembly so that they can learn 

a little bit more about our democratic process, Mr. Speaker.  I 

look forward to meeting them later on this morning and I would 

ask all members now to help me welcome these students and 

teachers from the Langham School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you and I thank my colleagues in the 

Legislative Assembly.  It's my pleasure today to introduce to 

you 32 students from M.J. Coldwell School seated in the west 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a working crew.  They actually did the first part of their 

work on March 16, when they went through the waste-baskets 

of the Department of Energy and Renewable . . . Department of 

Environment.  And they did the second part this morning when 

they went through and audited individual waste-baskets, and in 

the turnaround of fair play, they left report cards. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming these students from 

M.J. Coldwell as well as their principal, Charlotte Henryk, and 

teacher Phyllis Mulvenna. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

Bill No. 41 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 41 -- An Act to 

amend The Registered Psychologists Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we would 

like to thank the House for allowing us time to examine this 

Bill more closely, and that's been given.  This is a very short 

Bill and we will try to keep our remarks on it similarly brief. 

 

As we understand it, this Bill makes no significant changes to 

the current legislation.  The term psychologist is already 

rightfully used by master's-prepared psychologists throughout 

the province.  The main rationale for this Bill, as we see it, is to 

remove the possibility for conflict in the use of the title that 

might come from the devolution of powers and responsibilities 

for the provincial government to the district health boards. 

 

We have stated in the past our objections to the government's 

implementation of the district health boards and the devolution 

of parliamentary responsibility, and I will not go into length 

about these objections at this time.  However, we agree that at 

the very least no professional should suffer from any 

inadvertent oversights the government may have made in 

formulating this policy.  We encourage the government to be 

diligent in attempting to further difficulties . . . to any further 

difficulties that its health policy may incur. 

 

The second thing this Bill does, as I understand it, is to extend 

the professional title to master's-prepared psychologists 

employed at the University of Regina.  Since the existing 

legislation already covers psychologists at the University of 

Saskatchewan, this is simply a matter of academic equity.  

Obviously we have no objection to this move, and we 

congratulate the government for attending to this oversight in 

the wording of the original legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have very few questions and very brief 

questions on this Bill and we'll raise those in the Committee of 

the Whole.  But at this time, we are satisfied to allow this Bill 

to pass second reading and move into Committee of the Whole.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 42 -- An Act to 

amend The Physical Therapists Act, 1984 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, again we 

have no objections to this Bill.  It has been 

done, as we understand, in consultation with the physical 

therapists and physicians and we congratulate the government 

and the minister for that.  And it is in line with the practices in 

other provinces, as we understand it. 

 

It could represent significant savings to the government by 

eliminating an unnecessary step in receiving care.  It will also, 

as we understand it, benefit the people needing physical 

therapy by allowing them more direct access to the care needed 

and removing potentially harmful delays.  Physical therapists 

have more than adequate professional training in ethics to be 

able to assess the needs for services on their own without the 

intervention of a physician.  In the event that patients either 

need or desire further consultation or services of a physician in 

addition to a therapist, that option still is open, as we 

understand it. 

 

On the whole, Mr. Speaker, we believe this is a progressive Bill 

that eliminates waste and duplication and provides better 

service to the patients that they have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we have a just a few brief questions that 

we'd be planning on raising in committee.  So we have no 

problem with this Bill moving to the committee stage and 

passing second reading. 

 

The Speaker: -- Could I ask members . . . I have a very 

difficult time to know who wants to speak with so many 

members standing at their desks. 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do want to speak; I 

wasn't just standing at my desk. 

 

But this is kind of a frightening situation for me, Mr. Speaker, 

because I find myself in complete agreement with everything 

that the member from Kindersley said.  And it frightens him 

even more.  But I want to say a few words about this Bill and 

this concept, because I had the opportunity for several years to 

work fairly closely with the College of Physical Therapists, and 

this happens to be an issue that as a member of the legislature I 

have done some work on. 

 

As the member from Kindersley said, physical therapists are 

well trained.  They're all university graduates from programs 

accredited by the Canadian Physiotherapy Association. 

 

And direct access to physical therapy is not some radical 

concept.  I think it's long overdue.  We've had direct access to 

other health care professions such as massage therapy, athletic 

therapists, dieticians, speech and language pathologists, 

dentists, psychologists, occupational therapists, and 

chiropractors.  So why not physical therapists? 

 

This is a position that has been advocated since 1978 by the 

Canadian Physiotherapy Association.  It is the position in many 

other Canadian provinces.  I think soon other provinces will be 

joining.  And in the United States I believe it's the position in 

24 of the United States, some of them going back to 1957.  So 

in 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

that sense we're 30-some years behind. 

 

I believe that direct access to physical therapy is important 

because it is part of what I would term a multi-disciplinary 

approach to health care.  In other words, that we have to 

recognize that the health care system is not driven by one 

health care profession in particular; it is driven by a team of 

health care professionals which includes physical therapists. 

 

I believe that this change will mean earlier treatment of people 

requiring physical therapy, a greater freedom of choice for the 

health care consumer, reduced costs because it will not be 

necessary to go to a physician to be referred to a physical 

therapist, and I think better preventive health education. 

 

This concept was endorsed in June 1991 by the Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Association.  It is also consistent with what the 

Murray Commission said.  The Murray Commission said that 

freedom, and I'm quoting here, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Freedom of choice means that within appropriate limits a 

consumer has the right to seek out health care in a way that 

does not limit him or her to a prescribed place or kind of 

treatment. 

 

 Today, accessibility means that each citizen is able to achieve 

quality care appropriate to his or her legitimate needs with a 

minimum of inconvenience. 

 

And of course in a province like Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

which is sparsely populated in some areas, it's very important 

to have direct access because you don't always have both a 

physician and a physical therapist on the scene.  It will improve 

accessibility in all parts of the province if we have direct 

access. 

 

And it's very consistent with the wellness concept, which both 

embraces a multi-disciplinary approach and the preventive 

aspect of health care, and also consistent with the idea that 

when you convert some of the former hospital facilities into 

wellness centres, we will be able to have travelling health 

professionals go to those centres, whether podiatrists, 

chiropodists, physical therapists, occupational therapists; 

services that people in rural Saskatchewan need. 

 

And I think as we see this system come into place, we will see 

better access to physical therapy and other services.  The 

ultimate goal of physical therapy, of course, is to achieve the 

highest possible level of activity for people, and I think that this 

is very progressive legislation. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, that it has been endorsed by the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' 

Association, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and 

several user groups, such as the multiple sclerosis society, the 

head injury association, the cerebral palsy association, not to 

mention the member from Kindersley.  And the member from 

Idylwyld, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But in closing, I just want to say that I believe in the wellness 

concept and I believe in what the government and the health 

districts are trying to do in terms of changing our health care 

system to a preventive system, a multi-disciplinary approach, 

and having a better look at rehabilitative services.  I think that 

part of this is involvement of the expertise of physical 

therapists as primary care-givers. 

 

I am very, very pleased that the Associate Minister of Health 

has taken this approach and introduced this legislation.  I think 

it will mean good things for the health of our public, especially 

in rural Saskatchewan.  So I will certainly be very pleased to 

support this legislation.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 43 -- An Act 

respecting the Licensing and Operation of Medical 

Laboratories be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, again we 

have no substantial objections to this Bill.  In spite of what the 

title may suggest, this Bill does not affect in any way the issue 

of private versus public laboratories except that it contains the 

implicit acceptance of the idea that private laboratories can be 

licensed.  Obviously a public lab wouldn't need to be licensed. 

The government doesn't need to license itself to do something, 

I understand. 

 

Although the changes are quite significant they amount to 

technical changes to the licensing procedure.  The licensing 

procedure has been simplified from a slow and cumbersome 

board approvals type of system to a licensing office within the 

Department of Health. 

 

(1100) 

 

The more extensive elements of licensing, regarding the 

assurance of standards, will be taken over by an accreditation 

committee to be operated by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons.  This will make the licensing procedure less 

bureaucratic and more directly controlled by the people who 

use the laboratories, namely the doctors. 

 

There is some concern that the licensing office will be within 

the Department of Health, will have very extensive 

investigative powers 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

in order to enforce quality control.  This could be reflective of 

the government's general trend to enhance the intrusive 

police-style powers of the bureaucracy. 

 

However on the other hand the investigative powers of the 

department will not be substantially different than those 

previously held by the licensing board as we understand it.  

Furthermore, given that public interest is served by having very 

strict quality control of health facilities, these provisions are 

probably quite justifiable. 

 

Also the legislation is quite careful to exclude private 

residences and activities by private individuals from the 

investigative powers of the department. 

 

A further area of concern on the topic of investigative powers is 

that, unlike with the previous licensing board members, there 

are no provisions in the legislation to define the qualifications 

of the department's director of licensing, or in other words, 

there is nothing to say that he or she needs to be a doctor, a 

medical technologist, or any kind of health care professional 

whatsoever. 

 

This may be set out in regulations and I assume it will be.  In 

any case this should be kept in mind in the Committee of the 

Whole.  It should be mentioned in second reading that the 

legislation could have gone further to include participation of 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons in the selection and job 

description of the department's director of licensing.  And we 

would ask the minister to consider that in the future. 

 

There will be a number of technical areas where we will want 

clarifications in the Committee of the Whole, but again, Mr. 

Speaker, we see no reason to oppose this legislation in second 

reading and we'll ask any questions that we may have in 

Committee of the Whole and we would agree to moving it to 

that committee now. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 44 -- An Act 

respecting Chiropractors be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed an unusual 

day in the legislature here today.  We again have no general 

objections to this Bill either.  The four Bills that have been 

placed before us today have all been Bills that we could agree 

with, and this is just another example of that. 

 

Although we do have some concerns about the clarity and a 

possible amendment for Committee of the Whole.  The 

legislation empowers the government to appoint two members 

to a five-person board.  It is our understanding of chiropractors 

that one of these two was a lay person rather than a government 

official. However the legislation is not clear on this, and we 

will want some clarification on that point. 

 

The Act brings the legislation surrounding the 

chiropractic profession up to date.  Previously the disciplinary 

committee had very little leeway for dealing with members.  If 

the member was found guilty of misconduct, the committee had 

only the options of either taking away the person's licence or 

levying a relatively inconsequential fine. 

 

Since the committee was understandably reluctant to revoke 

licences over small offences, offenders often came off virtually 

scot-free.  By providing for fines of up to $15,000, the 

legislation allows for more meaningful, effective, and 

enforceable discipline actions. 

 

The legislation also makes both the association's board and the 

disciplinary committee more directly accountable to the public.  

A member of the public will sit on the permanent board.  A 

member of the public will also sit on the disciplinary 

committee.  As well, the complainant in a disciplinary case is 

now able to sit in on any disciplinary hearings affecting his 

case, and we think that's important. 

 

Accountability for the profession is also enhanced by requiring 

the association to submit an annual public report, and again 

that's important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The province's chiropractors were closely consulted in the 

drafting of this legislation and are, as we understand it . . . and 

have letters in support of the legislation. 

 

There are, however, a large number of chiropractors, as 

compared to other health care professions, who are faced with 

disciplinary action.  For this reason there will be some who will 

be opposed even to the most apparently non-controversial 

elements of the legislation.  These chiropractors' rights 

however are protected by provisions allowing disciplinary 

actions to be appealed to the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

As earlier noted, we'll want to raise a number of detailed 

questions later in the Committee of the Whole, especially 

regarding the details of the regulations surrounding this Bill.  

However, Mr. Speaker, we see no particular reason for holding 

it up in second reading and would be asking any further 

questions we'd have in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yesterday as we 

were discussing this at the close of the afternoon, I was raising 

some questions about the additional cost as it relates to the 

employer and the employee in dealing with the benefits.  I want 

to continue in that vein, Mr. Minister, and ask a couple of 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

questions about that. 

 

From the information that I have been able to get from 

individual agencies, independent insurance agents and brokers, 

there are some very significant points that need to be raised in 

our discussion.  And we have to deal with this in two fronts, I 

believe, Mr. Minister.  One is the area of the cost to the 

individual who is an employee and the cost to the individual 

who is the employer. 

 

In my reviewing this, the premiums, in a general sense, will 

have to go up because premiums are based on risk and the 

volume of risk and it's reflective in the premiums that it's going 

to cost. 

 

Now who is it going to cost?  Is it going to cost the employer or 

the employee -- or both -- in the cases where these benefits 

have to be provided to the individuals who are part-time 

employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It will depend upon the arrangements 

which are in place with respect to full-time workers and will 

vary from case to case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  Where it will be a part of the 

employee's responsibility to provide that, it will be a reduction 

in take-home pay for that individual when that individual may 

not, in fact, want to have it. 

 

I'll give you an example.  If that individual on part-time is 

earning 5.50 an hour, if it costs him 50 cents an hour to do that, 

that's 50 cents less per hour that that individual will have in 

take-home pay at very little significant benefit to him, if it's 

considered on a prorated basis as to a full-time employee.  A 

full-time employee is considered to have a 40-hour week and a 

part-time employee with 17 hours will have the risk curve 

increase in light of that.  And it may even go up to 75 cents or a 

dollar in order for him to cover that cost. 

 

Now in the normal circumstances, that individual will only be 

getting somewhere in the neighbourhood of $4.50 take-home 

pay.  So he's going to have another 75 cents taken off in order 

to get benefits that he is not necessarily going to be wanting. 

 

Top that off with, Mr. Minister, an employee who is a high 

school student working at a McDonald's or a fast food outlet, 

that individual will probably . . . if that individual is in his 

parent's home, will likely have an opportunity to have coverage 

in all of those areas in his benefits package that accrue to the 

family that he is a part of; and that, Mr. Minister, is going to 

cost him 75 cents in order to do that.  When is the break-even 

point in this individual's work going to come, when he's going 

to say, it doesn't pay for me to work.  There are more people 

living off of me than I am able to earn . . . the money that I am 

able to earn. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is a concern that we have on this side of 

the House because I believe those premiums are going to go up 

beyond the capacity of the individual to meet the requirement. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the information we have is to 

the contrary, and that is that the cost will simply be 

proportional. 

 

I would also point out that all of the problems the member 

raised with respect to benefits for part-time workers arise when 

benefits are given to full-time workers, and the same solutions 

will be put in place to resolve them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- But, Mr. Minister, the people will have to go 

to be included.  Okay, this McDonald's has 40 employees -- 

some part-time, some full-time.  The full-time employees get 

benefits at a certain rate.  What will those employees have to 

pay in addition in order to have that whole fast food outlet 

become involved in a benefits package for those employees?  

They will all then have to perhaps pay more.  Is that right?  Or 

only those individuals who the benefits are going to accrue to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is our information that where 

benefits are extended to part-time workers on a prorated basis, 

the increase in the cost of premiums will simply be 

proportional to the increased risk and no more. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right.  And that is part of the problem, Mr. 

Minister.  Any person who has a part-time employee is going to 

have to pay more because the risk is higher, proportionate to 

the amount of dollars he takes in and the time he spends.  And 

that's what we're trying to tell you. 

 

Can the employee afford that increased risk cost?  Have you 

done any analysis to understand that the increased cost in these 

benefits is going to give him the benefit without destroying the 

capability of him to earn a living, or her to earn a living, from 

the money that they receive on a part-time basis?  Or are they 

going to say to themselves, what's the use; I'm paying more to 

have these benefits than I think they're worth.  Has any analysis 

been done to show that that isn't going to happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I've told the member this several 

times; the member isn't normally this obtuse.  And I'm not sure 

whether this is a way to fill in time or whether we're engaged in 

really a legitimate conversation. 

 

I've said this several times.  We have contacted insurance 

companies and we've contacted brokers, and the information 

we have received is that in large part these benefits can be 

provided at a cost which is no more than proportional to the 

increased risk. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the problem is that you 

haven't told me how much that cost is going to be.  That's the 

problem.  You haven't told me what that cost is going to be.  

And that's the part that I'm trying to tell you.  You can't push 

these people to do it.  And what you are by this legislation, you 

are driving these people to force them to do what they don't 

want 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

to do.  That's the part of the problem. 

 

Other areas of concern that are just as important as that one, 

they deal with the small businesses that have part-time 

employees.  Fathers and mothers and children who have a small 

business and then have to have part-time employees work in 

that small business.  If you have five or less employees in this 

business and those employees have to have the benefits 

accruing to the full-time employees, every one of those 

individuals will have to get a medical.  That's a part of the 

rules. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you can't avoid those rules.  Are you going 

to put it into your regulations that they cannot be required to go 

get a medical as well to have that insurance policy?  And that's 

a rule, Mr. Minister.  I didn't make it.  The insurance companies 

in order to protect their liabilities have to have that in place.  

And you are saying to me that it doesn't matter.  Just pay 

according to risk.  Well, Mr. Minister, the cost in risk is what 

I'm talking about. 

 

Now I haven't even mentioned the fact -- I've been dealing with 

the employee side -- the costs to the agreements that you have 

on the employers' side, when you change that so that that 

individual who is earning 5.50 an hour and you add 75 cents 

cost to that individual for employer, is that going to make a 

significant difference?  And say to the employer, I can't afford 

this any longer and I'm not going to have it.  And I am going to 

refuse to have those people increase the cost of me doing 

business. 

 

And then, Mr. Minister, you go back to what I said yesterday, 

you have 82,000 people on welfare today, 12,000 less jobs in 

this province -- real jobs in this province -- than you had two 

years ago, and you're going to say that with this coming in, that 

there is not going to be a change?  And I say, Mr. Minister, it's 

going to go up.  Welfare is going to go up and job opportunities 

are going to go down.  And that is very, very serious.  And 

that's what we want to try and protect in this Assembly and in 

the province. 

 

That's my job, to hold you accountable for that.  And don't say 

that I'm obtuse or whatever.  I can tell you I can say a lot about 

you that wouldn't be parliamentary in this place too, and that is 

a fact.  However I'm not going to do that.  What I'm going to 

ask you is you have to be held accountable some place in this 

Assembly, some place in the province for the things that you're 

doing and the impact you're having on business and employees 

in this province.  And I don't think you have even begun to 

assess or analyse any of this in relation to the kinds of things 

that you're proposing here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have said on other occasions, I think 

I've said here, but in any case, I shall repeat the comment about 

thresholds which I've made, and that is that, with respect, we 

anticipate putting into the legislation . . . into the regulations, 

rather, a number of thresholds.  We anticipate that an employee 

is not an employee, for the purpose of this discussion, unless 

they have worked 10 hours a week. 

If they don't work 10 hours a week, they're outside the system; 

we don't worry about it.  It's also anticipated that before an 

employee is an employee for these purposes, they must work 

120 days or four months or they're outside the system. 

 

With respect to benefits, we also intend to put in the 

regulations, subject to whatever is said by the commission that 

we intend to set up of management and labour, it is our 

intention, however, that there would be a threshold of 20 

employees so that a firm doesn't have to worry about prorating 

benefits unless they have 20 or more employees. 

 

And with respect to the other clause, which makes the 

additional hours which are available, available to employees on 

a seniority basis, it is our intention to recommend to Executive 

Council that there be a threshold of 50 in this.  So if you have 

50 fewer employees, you don't need to worry about it.  So there 

are all these thresholds. 

 

I point this out because the member, I think genuinely, the 

member commented if you had five people in a firm, it might 

be very awkward.  That firm would be below the threshold for 

which you'd have to worry about benefits. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well now we're getting to the nub of the 

problem.  The problem, Mr. Minister, is this:  that you haven't 

given us in this Assembly an opportunity to see what those 

thresholds should be.  You haven't told us what we're supposed 

to be doing and what we're supposed to be looking at.  And if 

you would bring those forward then we probably would be able 

to move along in a very expeditious kind of a way.  But you 

haven't done that. 

 

And people are asking us over and over and over again.  We 

have piles of letters.  In fact I haven't had an issue come 

forward that has had as much intensity as this one has.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is significant.  And if you would come clean 

with all of the information, then we may be able to deal with it. 

 

I'm going to go back to this item dealing with the benefits part 

because I think that's very significant. 

 

I know that there are some agencies and they are probably the 

ones that handle the most . . . and I don't know whether I 

should name the different independent companies in this 

province that would handle it but there are some that handle 

more of this than any others -- and those companies will have a 

great deal of difficulty dealing with anything less than 20 

hours.  A great deal of difficulty, Mr. Minister. 

 

In fact there are very few that go down as low as 17.  The 

majority of them will not go below 24.  They will not go below 

24.  Do you have a threshold in . . . you said 10.  Is that the 

limit on the threshold?  And if that's the limit, then you won't 

have anybody in Saskatchewan that is going to do that.  And I 

have a list here of at least 15 companies that will not go below 

17; in fact will only go down to 24.  And that is the significant 

problem that we have to talk about. 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

And we need to have some comfort and so do these employers.  

The employer is asking the question.  How many times do I 

have to ask you that question on that threshold before you give 

me an answer?  Because they cannot provide that.  They don't 

have an agency to provide that to them, and that's the 

significant problem that we face. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think two comments are germane 

here.  One is that they've never had a market before for 

part-time employees of this sort.  The markets have never been 

there; there's been no real demand for it.  Our conversations we 

have had with insurance companies is that given now the 

increased market, they can design a product which will meet 

that market. 

 

I'd also point out to the member one of the reasons why this 

whole matter was left for regulations rather than being put in 

the Act is because we will need a good deal of flexibility.  And 

we anticipate there may be benefits which cannot be prorated, 

and there will be policies in some areas where companies 

simply won't prorate them.  And we anticipate that might be the 

case. 

 

Other alternatives are open to the parties.  They may pay a 

lump sum equivalent; they may pay a monetary equivalent; 

they may make other arrangements.  I pointed out some of 

those the other day.  So we anticipate that not all may be 

prorated, but other arrangements may be put in place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The other difficulty, Mr. Minister, is this: that 

many of the people who supply the insurance for the benefits 

do not supply all of those benefits.  I'll give you an example of 

that.  You could have Blue Cross supplying the benefits as it 

relates to medical, you could have Sun Life provide the life 

insurance, you could have Zrich supply the dental benefits, or 

you could have a cross-section of this coming from all of them. 

 

Now in order to have that happen, you have to have some 

consistency.  Now you have many employers with different 

kinds of circumstances; you have many employees who have 

also different sets of circumstances.  Put that into place with the 

employer who has people with disabilities and you have 

high-risk problems that those individuals are going to have to 

face. 

 

And I am trying to understand from you that the people who 

are going to insure are going to understand what the risk is 

because they will want to know absolutely and they will then 

curve that risk to the kinds of medical problems that there are, 

or dental problem, or any of the others. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is where the problem comes in.  And 

individuals are going to have to know, because the employer 

has certain criteria that have to be met, the employee has 

certain criteria that are going to have to be met as relates to 

threshold, and so will the people who are going to provide the 

benefits. 

Now in that three-ring circus, you're going to have to have a lot 

of flexibility.  And I say we need to know on this side of the 

House where you're coming from and the people in the 

province need to know because if they're going to pay, they're 

going to want to know what the benefits are. 

 

And that is where we come to the place and say, if it's too high 

then it's going to cost more than I can afford and therefore it 

will be no more.  And that's the problem we face.  And so we 

need the thresholds on the employer side, we need the threshold 

on the employee side, and the threshold on the insurance side.  

And we need to be provided that so that these people can 

understand that. 

 

And I think you need to bring those regulations forward so that 

we can see it, so that the public can see it.  And I don't believe 

I'm asking for anything out of order or out of line.  And that is 

why we need to discuss this clearly and completely, and that's 

why we want to have you give us the answers as to why you 

can't provide those regulations for us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I feel somewhat awkward about this 

because I can recognize the legitimacy of the member's 

demand.  In a sense, you're being asked to buy a pig in a poke 

here, so I'm sensitive to the conundrum the member feels. 

 

The other side of the equation though is that the parties with 

whom we spoke did not want to have their hands tied by 

regulations which were tabled in the Assembly, and their 

concern was, once they're tabled in the Assembly they're a fait 

accompli.  So I recognize the conundrum the member has in 

that.  I can tell you what I think the regulations are going to be, 

but that may not be how they are. 

 

On the other side though, as I say, those with whom we spoke 

about this -- some preferred that legislation not go at all, some 

were quite enthusiastic about it -- but both sides of the question 

preferred the regulations not be tabled and that they be given 

the maximum freedom to deal with them when they get them.  

So I offer that as a reason, and I also offer to the member my 

sympathy. 

 

With respect to the benefits for part-time workers, it has always 

been anticipated that some things may not be possible to be 

prorated.  We think that is much overdone and that the majority 

of them will.  Because the majority of cases, it's extra business 

for the insurance company if they can so arrange their affairs.  

Our understanding is most of them think they can arrange their 

affairs if there's a market. 

 

But if they can't be prorated, there are other options open to 

them.  Employers could work out arrangements where 

employees get compensation in lieu thereof, I suppose.  They 

could also work out arrangements whereby employees . . . 

Some actually, at least one major retailer in the province now 

has this system whereby part-time workers can take one of a 

number of benefits available to full-time workers.  Depending 

on the hours they put in, they can pick one 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

off the shelf and that's theirs. 

 

So those are two options in dealing with this problem of 

benefits which can't be prorated, which we've always 

recognized.  So we think when people of goodwill get together, 

which we hope happens both at the committee stage and later in 

the workplace, to resolve these issues, we think they will be 

able to resolve them in all cases. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the employee be able to refuse a benefits 

package in his workplace if there is one offered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think most employers do not allow 

that.  That would be up to the employer.  We certainly wouldn't 

prohibit an employee from refusing. 

 

I think most employers, however, would prohibit . . . It's my 

understanding most of these plans -- I've never been in one -- 

but it's my understanding most of these plans require all 

employees to participate.  And that is factored into the cost of 

them. 

 

So I think that's a decision to be made in the local workplace, 

not a decision which we'd make.  Certainly we have no 

objection if somebody doesn't want to join.  They'd have to 

work that out with the employer and with the insurer.  My 

understanding is that's not how most of them work. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's correct. 

 

Now take that part-time employee who works three hours . . . 

no, 10 hours a week in McDonald's. He goes down to the 

service station and works 15 hours a week and then he goes to 

another service station and works another 15 hours a week.  

That's a 40-hour week he's got covered, and he's working at 

5.50 an hour.  One employer says you get benefits, the other 

says you get these benefits, and another employer gets those 

benefits.  And this is what's happening, Mr. Minister.  I know it 

is, because I know individuals who are doing that. 

 

So you have different employers dealing with those three 

different areas that I talked to, with three different insurance 

companies, with three different employee relationships and 

then there is supposed to be some prorated basis to deal with 

this.  And I think you have very significant problems that are 

going to accrue. 

 

And that's why I go back to the premium costs in relation to 

this.  Because the higher the risk that that individual is, and the 

demand that the employer makes on the individual to cover that 

cost, if the employer is not going to cover that cost, the 

employee is going to be hurt.  Because his volume of 

take-home pay, with the increased risk cost, is going to 

substantially decrease his take-home pay.  And he is living, 

probably, as part-timers work, he's living on the edge already 

and you're going to take some more 

out of it on benefits that he cannot afford.  Or that he's, perhaps, 

willing to defer -- put it that way.  He's willing to defer it to 

another time. 

 

And that is what the problem is.  If you go with life insurance 

in each one of these cases, how can you prorate life insurance 

in dealing with a company or an individual that has three 

different places he works at and is prorated on the basis of the 

insurance that he has, that he has to take, if the other employees 

are going to take that? 

 

And you have to give us some assurance that this isn't going to 

negatively impact on this employee dealing with the employer's 

work and the fact that the employer is going to have to say -- 

this is way too massive, the premium is too high, I can't afford 

to have this guy working here so I'm going to have to make all 

these people permanent employees and I disregard all the rest. 

 

The part-timers will have to go.  I will only take those who will 

work full time.  And that, Mr. Minister, is going to cause some 

of the problems, as I suggested to you earlier.  And I don't want 

to stand in the way of people earning a living when that is a 

part of the problem. 

 

I think you need to give us some assurance that there would be 

an opportunity for these people to not participate; that they 

have the freedom not to participate in this kind of program.  

And I believe you're right that the insurance companies will not 

allow it.  So if you have an employee base that is 40 per cent 

part time and 60 per cent full time, these part-timers are going 

to slide into the full-time . . . on completely full time.  So you 

go to a 70/30 relationship and the 30 is gone.  Because the 

other 10 per cent takes that full-time employment space up, and 

that 30 per cent is gone.  Where do they go look for jobs?  

That's part of the problem, Mr. Minister, and that takes those 

people who can least afford it -- least afford it -- and puts them 

into a no-win situation. 

 

And I can see it happen, because I know that those insurance 

companies will not provide that.  They won't.  And you tie that 

in with individuals who have medical problems to start with -- 

asthma, heart conditions, any one of the others -- and you will 

not get medical coverage for those individuals. 

 

So the best thing to do for these part-timers would be to plead 

that you have a medical problem so you wouldn't have to get 

insurance.  And that is, in my view, not the correct way of 

doing it.  And I think we need to have some very legitimate 

discussion about these kinds of problems or we're not going to 

come to any kind of a conclusion on this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I'd have more concern, I think 

I would be more likely to share the member's concern, if it 

weren't for the fact that enlightened employers are doing it 

now.  There are enlightened employers which have a lot of 

part-time workers which pay benefits to them. 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

An Hon. Member: -- They don't pay it under 17 hours; I know 

that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the member says he knows that 

as a fact.  You may know it as a fact.  We discussed it with 

insurance companies and with brokers who felt that 

arrangements were possible, given the presence of a market.  

So I just say to the member opposite that we think the problem 

of prorating benefits is overrated. 

 

Let us take the example of insurance.  In almost all cases, 

group life is based on salary.  And you contribute a percentage 

of your salary and you're insured for that amount.  And in most 

cases, it's our understanding, the insurance companies are 

prepared to extend that to part-time workers, given certain 

conditions that are I think readily available. 

 

So I think the problem . . . it is our view that the problem of 

prorating benefits is much overrated, given the fact that most of 

them are provided by the private sector; given the fact that if it 

can be made to work there's a new field going to open up here 

for . . . new market going to open up.  It has been our 

impression that most of the companies are anxious to service 

the market.  They're not anxious to straight-arm them. 

 

We've got exactly the opposite impression.  We've got a good 

deal of interest from the companies which provide these 

benefits, and they're interested in meeting the market because 

they think it's a growing market. 

 

Let us suppose . . . let us assume, which is an assumption I 

share, that there will be some benefit you can't prorate.  As I've 

pointed out, there are other alternatives. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well can I get some indication from you, Mr. 

Minister, that there would be some thresholds that could be met 

on the basis of . . . You gave me the 10 hours per week and 

then there's the threshold of the volume of employees.  Is there 

a threshold on the part of the employee that he does not have to 

take it if he does not want to?  Is that going to be given to him 

as an opportunity, or will he have to go look for an employer 

who isn't going to provide that and then have to quit his job and 

go look some place else for that job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't think I can extend that to the 

hon. member because that would be an arrangement to be 

worked out between the employee, the employer, and the 

insurance company.  We're not part of the circle.  So I don't 

think I can give you that.  We just don't get to make that 

decision. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One other area I want to touch and that is the 

time that you have to provide, and the lead time that you have 

to provide for part-time employees to change a schedule.  That 

is extremely onerous, extremely onerous. 

 

And I'll give you an example in the tourism industry. 

In the tourism industry alone, in dealing with this . . . And I see 

this.  Next to my office we have a big Bonanza Restaurant.  

Tour buses come in there; they stop and they have their meal. 

 

Now how is that Bonanza Restaurant supposed to operate if he 

has to give a one week's schedule notice to his employees when 

he finds out yesterday that they're coming in today?  And how 

does he do that in substantially dealing with the problem that 

you think that he can?  And I'd like to know from you how is 

he going to handle that on a regular basis, because that happens 

all the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- One of the House amendments . . . 

It's quite possible the member has not had an opportunity to 

review the House amendments which we intend to move and 

which we've filed. 

 

One of the House amendments does cure that, which I think 

may have been a bit of a problem in the existing legislation.  

We'd always anticipated that where there were unforeseen 

circumstances, the notice requirement would be waived. 

 

In one of our tours, a restaurateur, a hotelier really, from 

Saskatoon gave me an example of a situation where I gather 

one of my colleagues had booked a banquet.  He said it was 

me.  He said, it was you, but it wasn't me; it was someone else.  

But I gather it was one of my colleagues in Saskatoon booked a 

banquet; called him up Saturday morning and said, how many 

tickets did I say, how many people did I say?  He said 200. And 

the person on the other end of the line said, oh, he sold 275.  

That's not a problem is it, George?  He says, no, it's not a 

problem if I ever want to see you again, but I've got to get some 

people in right away. 

 

So we'd always anticipated that where unforeseen 

circumstances arose, the notice would be waived.  Now I admit 

the legislation doesn't exactly say that.  It says that notice 

needn't be given where there's an emergency, which isn't quite 

the same thing.  If you get a restaurant and they're overrun with 

business, that's not emergency -- it's exactly why they were on 

the side of the road -- but it's unforeseen. 

 

And so we're amending by House amendment, we're amending 

the exemption from notice from an emergency circumstance to 

an unforeseen circumstances.  I think most business people I've 

talked to agree that that does cover the problem. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You gave me one example of what would be 

unforeseen.  Do you have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . a 

million of them, Mr. Minister, and you'd have a pretty long set 

of regulations.  We'd have to probably take the forest in the 

North to make the paper to put that together. 

 

But the real concern that I have is the threshold that you 

perceive to bring forward so that employers know what that 

threshold is in relation to those kinds of issues, and they are 

very important to these people.  Because what may be 

perceived on the one hand to be 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

unforeseen, may not be in the Department of Labour nor in the 

part of the employee.  And so therefore it has to have some 

threshold in dealing with that in the area of the employer and 

the employee as well.  And I'd like to know from you what they 

are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well there are some industries more 

than others are plagued by this problem of the inability to 

predict peak loads.  Restaurants have that problem; the tour 

bus.  You gave an example. The example was given to me last 

Friday when I met with the restaurateurs in Saskatchewan is the 

Grey Cup game.  And you get a bus, a whole big bus with 60 

people stops in front of a restaurant which seats 100.  You have 

a little bit of a problem. 

 

There's any number of such examples, mostly in the retail 

trade, but I think not exclusively, not necessarily exclusively in 

the retail trade.  The service industry may also have unexpected 

spikes in their load, and the amendment simply says where an 

unforeseen circumstance arose, the notice will be waived. 

 

We wouldn't attempt to define all those unforeseen 

circumstances.  The language speaks for itself.  While it's true 

in the first instance it may be officials in the department which 

interpret it, ultimately the interpretation is placed on it by a 

Queen's Bench judge so that I think our interpretation has to be 

reasonable.  But I think we've got that covered off, although I 

would admit to the member it's not covered off in Bill 32. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the restaurant business, are you going to 

categorize the different kinds of businesses that there are, in the 

construction side, or in the food business, or in different areas 

like that?  Are you going to put them into a category and then 

say, these in a broad sense cover the unforeseen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In sort of a way.  I say to the member 

from Morse, we are, in a distant sort of a way.  What we're 

going to do is . . . I think I spoke yesterday of the sectorial 

committees for the regulations.  We're going to have . . . and 

perhaps not everybody who is glued to their television sets this 

morning watching this riveting discussion may have heard 

yesterday's, so let me just very briefly revisit that. 

 

It is our intention to set out regulations in the broad, the broad 

stroke.  And then we intend to take the regulations and give 

them to a series of committees, more or less one for each 

industry, composed of lay people, two management, two from 

worker side, chaired by an official in the department. 

 

We used this model successfully with the occupational health 

and safety regulations.  And so the regulations will be 

fine-tuned by that industry.  And each industry has its special 

needs and its special problems. 

 

I don't think they would set out the exceptions.  I would expect 

they would just leave the exemption, the unforeseen 

circumstance, alone.  But it may need a special twist. 

One can imagine in the construction industry, for instance, it 

may need a different twist where work is often weather-related 

-- what they can do depends upon the weather.  And so they 

may need to put a special twist on that for construction.  Those 

sectorial committees give them the option to put the twist that 

they need on there, on the regulations.  So we're going to 

fine-tune these industry by industry, so in a sense that 

opportunity will arise. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That area that you raise was one of those that 

I was going to raise.  Because it's not only weather-related, but 

it is also availability of other agencies to be a part of the 

construction process.  So you have the general contractor, you 

have subtrades, and each one of them is dependent on another 

in order to provide that, and they may not have the ability to 

pull those people in in a time line that you've suggested.  And 

that is very serious. 

 

And I don't want to have people lose jobs in order to just meet 

some criteria that's maybe going to benefit 60 per cent, or 30 

per cent, or 20 per cent.  And that's my problem in dealing with 

that. 

 

(1145) 

 

I would hope that when you talk about this that you go and 

think about it long enough that you deal with that. 

 

And the other thing that I would suggest is that when you come 

close to that decision . . . I know the regulations are put 

together by the agencies, whoever you're going to do that, and 

then they're put through cabinet.  And is there a possibility that 

before they go to cabinet that you would give us an opportunity 

to look at them and even discuss with you in a private kind of a 

way, an opportunity for us to take a hold of it and see where 

you perhaps have overlooked something or where we could add 

something to that?  Would you be prepared to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Actually I'm not sure what the vehicle 

for that would be, but it would be very useful.  It would 

actually be very useful if that could be done.  A vehicle just 

doesn't spring to mind.  The Regulations Committee I guess 

could be called intersessionally, perhaps by telephone. 

 

But I think that might be useful if the . . . I think that actually 

might be useful if a legislative committee had a review of some 

sort, had a review of those regulations, to have a look at them.  

I think it would be useful.  It doesn't spring to mind, the 

vehicle. 

 

But I tabled the other day, in response to a question of the 

member from Maple Creek, the Code of Regulatory Conduct.  

It does provide the warning, the lead time which I indicated to 

the member. 

 

Certainly I'll undertake, as soon as we have the the first pass at 

it, to share the regulations with the members opposite so that 

you can have a look at them and convene whatever is needed to 

convene to complete a review process by elected members. 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

There may be some merit in your suggestion. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'd be particularly interested in 

the side that deals with the benefits and the costs and the risk, 

in those kinds of regulations dealing with that.  I'd be 

particularly interested in it, knowing that there is a great deal of 

concern on the part of those three groups that I mentioned -- the 

employee, the employer, and the insurers -- on this issue. 

 

And I have no problem with people getting access to a business 

opportunity in relation to the insurance side.  I have none.  But 

I find it very difficult to believe that there is going to be an 

opportunity there that won't be able not to be met. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let's just agree then -- and I give the 

member my undertaking in this Assembly -- that as soon as 

these regulations are in a form in which we can discuss them in 

the public, we'll circulate them to the members and invite your 

comments.  And you may then have some suggestions as to 

what, if any, follow-up should take place.  But I'll give that 

undertaking to the member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, you just 

alluded to the paper that you sent across to me, and I want to 

thank you for that.  It is enlightening, and I am happy to see 

that there is some modest coverage of the problem in what you 

say. 

 

Unfortunately what I found when I read this was that there isn't 

any specific timing at all.  It could be two minutes, two days, 

two weeks, or two hours.  What the business community has 

said to you is that they want 60 to 90 days.  Now we're talking 

two to three months.  We're not talking two days or two 

minutes.  We're talking a fairly substantial length of time here 

that they want to have to consider these regulations before they 

go into effect. 

 

Because, quite frankly when you pick up this document, it's a 

pretty hefty Bill that you're dealing with here and there's an 

awful lot of stuff in it.  And I think what they're saying to you 

is that the regulations are going to be very significant and that 

there's going to be a lot of them; that they will have a 

tremendous impact and that it's going to take more than just a 

few minutes to be able to go through this all to assess the 

impact on themselves as business people, and of course for 

others in the community to assess what the impact will be to 

the province. 

 

So, Minister, how do you square using this document in place 

of a commitment to 60 to 90 days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They were going to be actually be 

using both.  We're going to have the commission, the 

labour-management commission, which I expect to be 

appointed as soon as the Bill is passed.  Fairly shortly after this 

Bill receives third reading, I expect the commission -- the joint 

labour-management commission -- to be appointed. 

 

I would not finalize this but I would anticipate they 

would complete their work in the early fall.  I would anticipate 

the sectorial committees would be given a further length of 

time -- perhaps late fall, mid or late fall -- to complete their 

work on the regulations.  And then the Code of Regulatory 

Conduct which, my memory is, provides a 60-day period in 

which to react, follows that.  So they've got all of these stacked 

up and I think they'll have a very lengthy period of time to 

react. 

 

It's also my understanding that in discussions with the business 

community and the trade union community, they're interested 

in having ministerial meetings ongoing during the spring and 

summer around the province.  They want to hold a series of 

regional meetings.  I have encouraged the staff who are 

involved in that to cooperate with that process and facilitate it.  

And if they want to hold regional meetings around the province 

with business people, I would be delighted to attend. 

 

And so I think these periods are all stacked up and so they've 

got all of these periods to react.  I think that they've got enough 

time to react.  I mean they're concerned about what they are 

going to have to react to, but I think they've got enough time to 

react. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, once again what you think 

and what they think seems to be somewhat different.  They 

think the fact that you won't commit in a very meaningful and 

standing-up-in-your-place way, the fact that you won't commit 

to absolutely for sure giving them a specific amount of time, 

they believe that when you don't make that kind of 

commitment, that what you're doing is hedging and that you are 

in fact saying without words that you probably won't allow 

that. 

 

So why don't you simply stand up in your place today and say, 

we absolutely guarantee you that we'll give you two to three 

months to consider the regulations before we make them law, 

and that you will have some meaningful and genuine input into 

those regulations and a real opportunity to bring their concerns 

to you and to the department with some meaningful input into 

changes where they can demonstrate to you a realistic hurt to 

the job base or to the community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I can certainly give the member 

the undertaking that the sectorial committees will be given draft 

. . . I can give the member the following undertakings.  

Sectorial committees will be set up as soon as can be done after 

this session is completed.  I expect they'll be rolling . . . I'd like 

to think it be the end of May but maybe it'll be June.  Those 

committees will then be given draft regulations with which to 

begin their work.  They can be circulated immediately 

throughout the . . . and I'm sure they will be circulated 

throughout the business community and the labour community. 

 

And at the same time the commission, the single joint 

provincial commission will begin its work hopefully earlier.  I'd 

like to think that might be going by early May.  And they'll 

have the draft of the regulations, I 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

would expect; that is at least what we have in mind.  And that 

will then be circulated. 

 

And I certainly assure the member that that won't be completed 

before September 1.  So they'll have all that period of time in 

which to react to it. 

 

I've asked Mr. Parr, who is with us, to go make a telephone 

call.  It is my memory that once regulations are ready to be 

gazetted, you then have to give 60 days notice.  This Code of 

Regulatory Conduct requires 60 days notice.  Now I admit this 

document doesn't say that, so I've asked Mr. Parr to go and 

check on that.  But I think once the committees are finished, the 

commission is finished, it's my understanding they've got 60 

days then before the regulations come into effect.  They've got 

60 days to react before they're gazetted.  So I can give you 

those assurances. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I'm sure that people in 

the business community who are watching today will be as 

quick to be checking out what you say as your runner is going 

to be quick to go and find out exactly where we're at. 

 

Now you've alluded in your discussion to sectorial committees.  

How many of these committees would you envision that we 

will have and how many people will be on those committees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We are still fine-tuning that.  The 

deputy minister and I have had some discussions about that.  It 

looks like it's in the 15 range -- 12, 15 range.  It may be higher, 

but that's the range. 

 

We want to try to strike a balance here.  We would like one for 

each industry, but if you've got too many committees you've 

got an unmanageable process.  So we're balancing: a smaller 

number of committees, which makes the thing easier to 

manage; a larger number of committees, which makes the 

process more sensitive.  And we're balancing that.  But let's call 

it 12, in round numbers, say.  I think if it varies from that, it 

will be more rather than fewer. 

 

And we're sensitive to people who say, we need a special 

committee for our industry because we're different than anyone 

else.  Now sometimes that's the case; even though they're not 

very big, they are different.  Let's call it 12 committees or so. 

 

Then we will . . . on each committee we envision four people 

plus the chairperson.  The chairperson will be a member, an 

official from the department in all cases, or most cases.  And 

we'll have two from management, two from labour -- so a 

balance.  So that's the make-up of the committees and that's 

how we see them being organized. 

 

We don't see them -- to clear up any more confusion that may 

arise -- we don't see the committees holding public hearings at 

all.  These are working committees which work on the 

regulations and which fine-tune the regulations for their 

industry.  It's not a committee which goes around the province 

and holds hearings; these are working committees. 

And I'm pretty much describing how the occupational health 

and safety system worked, except that they had more 

committees.  They had around 20 committees.  And nobody's 

hung up on this, but I think the feeling of the people involved 

was if they erred, they erred on the side of having too many 

committees rather than too few.  And perhaps a smaller number 

of committees might have been a more effective system. 

 

So that's my comment on that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you've got a whole host of 

really scary problems coming into this as you outline this 

process.  Two members from labour, two members from 

management, and one member from the government that has an 

absolute, definitive affiliation to the labour unions.  By the very 

definition of your political party -- and I'm not going to be 

partisan; I'm just going to give you history -- the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) was a coalition, as I read in some documents 

the other day, a coalition of the old CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) and the labour movement. 

 

That coalition, having formed a new party called the NDP 

which your government is, then absolutely assures that the 

government chairman will be pro-union.  So you will have two 

union members, a pro-union government member, and two 

people from management, which means of course that the two 

people from management will always be outvoted on every 

issue, on every regulatory thing that's considered.  So it's 

absolutely out of balance and it's absolutely and totally unfair. 

 

And the fact that this commission won't be going around the 

province tells me that they won't have the input then from the 

community that you're trying to imply will be there when you 

suggest that you're going to have committees going around the 

province. 

 

So who is the committee that's going to go around the 

province?  Is that just yourself that's going to go on this tour 

that you're talking about?  Or how will the input from the 

community get to this regulatory body that will in fact, the 

sectorial committees, that will in fact be making the rules?  

How will that information get to them of what the community 

thinks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't want the member to read too 

much into the hearings around the province.  This is a very new 

idea; I just heard about it myself this morning.  I gather there 

were some people in the business community expressed some 

interest in some regional meetings at which I would attend and 

answer questions on this whole process. 

 

I simply encourage them to proceed and do that, subject to my 

schedule, and I told them I'd be delighted to participate in such 

a process.  And that's about all the detail there is actually.  It 

was a short conversation this morning. 

 

(1200) 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

You asked how the community would have input.  The 

community would have input because they would have 

representatives, in a sense, on the committees, which would 

work.  In the various groups which I have met -- and it's just an 

endless number of them -- I have always made the comment to 

them that the most important decision you're going to make is 

who you have on this committee,  and I want you to think very 

carefully about who you're going to put on the committee. 

 

My impression has been most of the groups with whom I have 

met have given that very careful consideration.  And I see them 

talking and huddling as I leave the room.  And I think that's one 

of the things that they're talking about, is who they should put 

on these committees. 

 

You mentioned the question of the impartiality of the 

chairpeople from the department.  While I admit the perception 

which the member relates, I'd point out to you that the public 

servants who will be on this are long-time public servants who 

have been with the department, most of them, for a lengthy 

period of time, were there when the former government was in 

office and were thought to be sufficiently impartial that they 

retained them in their position. 

 

So I just want to point out to the member that whatever the 

biases you ascribe to the government in office, they're generally 

not shared by these long-term public servants who have a 

different view and a longer view of the world. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you saying, Minister, then that the 

chairmen of these different 12 committees, or 15, will in fact be 

those bureaucrats that are now in your service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, that's correct.  These will be 

career public servants.  I don't anticipate . . . and I say here, as 

I've said in any number of times, that I recognize in the past 

there have been occasions when the name of this department 

were treated as if it were the department for labour.  I've 

pointed out to any number of groups that if that was the case in 

the past, it's not now.  It's the Department of Labour.  The 

preposition "for" or "of" makes all the difference.  This is the 

Department of Labour.  It is equally there to serve management 

and the workers. 

 

And we have sought, I think with some success, we have 

sought to introduce some professionalism into this department, 

which it has at times lacked -- under various governments, I 

think.  But we have sought to introduce a professionalism into 

this department and even-handedness and a balanced approach, 

and I think we're having some success. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you supply us with a list of the names 

of the bureaucrats that are currently working in your 

department that would be available to be placed into the 

chairmanships? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we haven't . . . They'll be the 

people in the labour standards branch.  We 

haven't exactly fingered these poor people.  This is not an 

assignment which they rush forward to clutch readily to their 

bosom.  This is not an easy job. 

 

We haven't exactly fingered the people who will be doing it.  

They will be the people in labour standards.  I'll give you that 

as soon as it's available, certainly.  We haven't exactly 

fine-tuned that yet; finalizing that awaits the passage of the Bill 

actually. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you've kind of confused me here, 

Minister.  A few minutes ago you said to the community at 

large and you were talking to the community at large that you 

have no fears.  The chairmans of these boards are from the 

bureaucratic service of long-time standing who are not partisan 

and cannot be connected in any way with any partisan 

positions. 

 

They will definitely be doing an impartial job is what you said, 

and they will be the people that are going to be chairmans and 

there won't be any imbalances there whatsoever.  Don't worry, 

everything's fine.  Trust me, we've got it all under control.  

We're okay here.  That's what you said. 

 

Now you say to me that you can't give me the names of those 

people who are so comforting to everybody.  This doesn't wash, 

Minister.  You're pulling my leg, quite frankly.  You're pulling 

it so hard that it's starting to hurt.  You're ripping us off here 

really.  Come on now. 

 

In all fairness, I thought we had a reasonable discussion going 

on here with some honesty starting to show up in how we were 

going to do this.  And now you're telling the people:  write us 

another blank cheque; trust us; after the legislation is in, we'll 

tell you who the bureaucrats are. 

 

If you've got them, then tell us who they are.  And then let the 

business community assess those people for their impartiality.  

If you're so sure that everybody's at this high comfort level, 

let's see it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We haven't fine-tuned the number of 

committees; we can hardly have fine-tuned who's going to 

chair which, so I can't actually give you the chairpeople. 

 

What I stated was . . . First of all, a general observation about 

the department -- that most of the people in the branch are 

long-time public servants who have worked under governments 

of different stripes and performed more than adequately. 

 

It was also really a statement of government policy, that the 

type of people we're looking for are people who are . . . the 

type of public servants we're going to be asking to do this are 

going to be those who have . . . those whose reputation is 

beyond question.  But we don't actually have the names. 

 

Really what I stated was an observation about the branch and a 

comment about what our policy is going to be in finalizing our 

choices. 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, you really are trying to string me 

along here today.  All I asked you for is a list of the names of 

the bureaucrats who are available to you to be picked from.  I 

didn't ask you which bureaucrat is going to be the head of 

which specific chairman's position on which particular 

management board or sectorial committee. 

 

I want to know the list of the names that you have available to 

choose from.  You might have 40, you might have 50. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sit down. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And the member at the back wants me to sit 

down, and I will in due course. 

 

But I want to read to you, Minister, exactly why we have a 

problem here.  Because I know the member from the lucky 

department wants to know why we are so concerned here.  

Here, Minister: 

 

 Another battle appears to be looming between the NDP 

government and the business community over -- you guessed 

it -- labour legislation.  There are rumblings that the 

province's major business groups under the banner of the 

business coalition are preparing to go to war over the 

government's new Labour Standards Act. 

 

And the reason they're willing to go to war with you, sir, is 

because you keep telling us one thing and manipulating it 

around without actually answering the question.  So give us 

that list. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will give you my undertaking I'll 

provide you the list as soon as it can be gathered together, 

which should be within a couple of days.  I didn't understand 

the member's question.  I thought you wanted a list of 

chairpersons.  If you want the list of people who are available, 

we can give you the roster from which you'll be choosing them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- There is some benefit to this process, I know 

there is.  And we will anxiously await that list so that the 

business community and the workers of this province can 

assess exactly who their fate will be in the hands of.  Because 

whoever these chairman are, they will absolutely control the 

regulations and the way that they're going to be put into place. 

 

There is no question in mind whatsoever now that we have 

turned this entire piece of legislation over to the hands of some 

bureaucrats who will be given the powers of judges and final 

arbitrators with no recourse and no appeal and no access to a 

court-like process within our province.  We have a dictatorship 

now being set up with bureaucrats who are going to run the 

province, who are going to run labour legislation, and who are 

going to dictate what labour legislation will do. 

 

So we now have established at least who the dictators are going 

to be.  We will of course have that list of 

names to determine which ones of them might be available for 

what jobs, and we'll probably be doing some guessing at that. 

 

But what we do know is that you have put the power of 

controlling our province into a certain few hands now and we 

will at least have some idea of which hands that dictatorship is 

going to be in.  It is very, very obvious now why the business 

coalition was formed and very, very obvious to me why they 

are prepared to go to war with you, because this is an absolute 

travesty of democracy in the fullest, fullest way. 

 

Now Minister, as I grow more and more agitated with the 

process that you are invoking, we do need, I think, to ponder it 

more carefully to find out if there is some semblance of sanity 

left in this whole government or province, so that we can in fact 

perhaps have some basis to build this province on rather than 

just simply have it exited by everyone, except the union 

leaders, and close the doors behind as we all leave. 

 

The ministerial meetings that you're going to perhaps conduct 

now -- earlier today we were absolutely going out on a road 

tour and we were going to have a lot of input.  Now we're not 

so sure if we're going to have it or not because you hedged on 

that once again as you pulled my other leg. 

 

Minister, these meetings that you're planning, how do you 

propose that you will get the information that you gather from 

yourself to these new-found dictators in the Public Service 

Commission that you're going to pick to be the heads of these 

sectorial committees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Frankly, I did get the comment about 

the new-found dictators, which I think perhaps ranks with your 

description of the member from Rosemont as being a left-wing 

communist dinosaur.  I may say he was forever relieved you 

didn't call him a right-wing communist.  That would have been 

the ultimate insult and I think it ranks with your description of 

myself as a TV evangelist.  I really thought that was the 

cruellest cut of all.  That really was the lowest blow. 

 

I'm not sure whether the public servants will be understanding 

when you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, Jimmy 

Swaggart Shillington.  I'm not entirely sure the public servants 

are going to understand when you call them new-found 

dictators.  They're often frustrated that they don't have enough 

influence. 

 

Anyway, all that being said, we will be ensuring that they 

understand, and I think they will.  But we'll be ensuring they 

understand that the success of this process will depend upon 

everybody being comfortable with it.  We want the process to 

work for obvious reasons and everybody else wants the process 

to work as well.  It's only going to work if it's even-handed.  If 

it's not balanced and even-handed the process simply won't 

work. 

 

So I think we have every incentive, as do the public servants, as 

do the new-found dictators, to make the 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

whole process work. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, a few minutes ago you talked 

about the labour-management commission and then of course 

you alluded to the sectorial committees.  Could you tell me the 

difference and what the labour-management commission 

consists of in your mind and who is going to comprise that 

commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're still fine-tuning the 

composition of the commission.  I foresee it being . . . it's a 

provincial commission.  I foresee it being -- don't 

misunderstand this term -- something of a blue ribbon 

commission in the sense that I foresee the people being on it 

having standing in their community such that they can speak 

for their community.  So I see it being something of a blue 

ribbon committee, both on the working side and on the 

management side. 

 

The function of the commission, the provincial commission, is 

to consider the provisions with respect to part time so far as 

they relate to benefits and the most available hours clause.  

Undoubtedly, it will make whatever recommendation it wants 

on any other aspect of the Bill, but its mandate will be 

specifically to consider those two items. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Let's pursue just a little further this 

labour-management commission.  Now you're talking about 

blue ribbon people.  Are we talking about people like Garf 

Stevenson perhaps getting another political plum? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know if you've noticed, but 

he's already engaged. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well he was already engaged on two or three 

other boards before you put him on this last wheel of fortune 

where he hit the jackpot at 500 bucks a day at the expense of 

the taxpayers to deliver a message that is pre-concluded, which 

has to be that he says no to health board elections.  And if he 

doesn't answer the skill-testing question right, he'll probably get 

fired and won't get his jackpot.  So there's only one answer he 

can come up with and that's the right answer -- the answer that 

you've provided.  He has to say what you want him to say at 

$200,000 expense to the taxpayer. 

 

So that didn't stop you the last time you gave him a political 

plum, so I'm suggesting to you that you better tell us what you 

consider a blue ribbon person in each community to be, or 

they're all going to presume it's going to be Garf Stevenson and 

a host of those kinds of people who you owe debts to from the 

last election. 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Not because he isn't thoroughly able, 

but if the member's making a serious comment -- it's sometimes 

hard to tell -- if that's a serious question, Garf Stevenson is not 

being considered for the position.  Well I don't want to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who is? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Kindersley asked 

what is really a valid question: who is?  I do not want to get 

into a public discussion of that until I have discussed it with the 

members involved, and that's kind of the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Have you got a short list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Kindersley asks 

another decent question.  Do we have a short list?  Actually we 

do.  We are down to the point where we have a short list . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, it's longer than one.  I would 

hope that we are . . . we have an unordinarily suspicious 

opposition this morning.  I'm not sure what's feeding such 

cynicism. 

 

But we do have a short list.  If everything goes as planned, and 

nothing seems to go as planned, but if everything went as 

planned I would hope the commission would be up and running 

by the time the session's over in early to mid-May.  So I see the 

commission being operated that quickly.  As soon as this Bill is 

passed I would like the commission to get started without 

waiting for the session to end. 

 

So I would hope it would be a subject of a ministerial statement 

in here within a relatively brief period of time after the Bill gets 

third reading. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, how about if we ask you for 

the short list. Will you give us that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think I really would have to 

demur on that.  The process of finding people for these 

commissions is delicate and the comments that are made to us 

are delicate.  I don't think they would want nor would I want it 

public knowledge that we had approached them.  So I think I'll 

have to decline on that simply as a matter of . . . simply out of 

respect for the privacy of the individuals involved. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well we would naturally have to assume then 

that they've got to be on the thousand dollar membership list, 

probably no less than that? 

 

Because quite frankly, Minister, here now, I do want to get 

serious for a minute.  You've got a labour-management 

commission that you by your own definition now, have said 

will be dealing with part-time benefits and the available hours 

problems that we see under the jurisdiction of labour 

legislation. 

 

You have refused to give us the criteria under which people 

would be picked other than political partisanship.  You've 

called them blue ribbon people.  We have no idea what it takes 

to be a blue ribbon person in your opinion.  I do suspect that it 

has to be someone high up in your party ranks.  You can 

correct that; I'm going to allow you that opportunity. 

 

These people again appear to be somewhat placed into the role 

of being dictatorial in that they will have the authority of judges 

to make decisions where there will be no recourse for those 

who are affected, either the workers or the business people; no 

recourse either 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

by recourse to a court system or recourse to some kind of 

tribunal perhaps, or some kind of other entity to hear 

complaints. 

 

This is not going to be acceptable in the community.  And I can 

see as we go into this why at first it seemed as though 

amendments to The Labour Standards Act were so welcomed 

by the press and the media, and the folks quite generally in the 

province.  And then as they looked at it more carefully, they 

begin to see that there was a sinister side to this particular piece 

of legislation and that in fact it was so sinister as to be totally 

different and exactly opposite to what people thought. 

 

And in the first days, as you will recall, Minister -- and I will 

refresh your memory -- when you brought forth this Labour 

Standards Act, people were almost praising your government 

for finally making some decent changes to labour standards in 

our province.  Everyone was sort of applauding a bit, saying 

yes, we've got some updating to do, we've got some . . . I even 

stood up and kind of said the same thing, that yes, it's good that 

we're taking care of some of these problems that have arisen as 

a result of our changing times.  And then all of a sudden we 

found the business community saying, whoa, wait a minute 

here, something doesn't look good. We smell something rotten 

in Denmark, I guess is the old statement. 

 

And then all of a sudden somebody said, well, it's not 

something rotten in Denmark, there's something rotten in this 

legislation.  It's going far, far beyond the simple process of 

trying to help workers in our province.  We now have a 

communist style take-over in the labour movement.  We have 

state control, state ownership philosophy forging its ugly head 

forward in such a way that I've never seen except in the Regina 

Manifesto. 

 

So, Minister, can you honestly say that when you have a short 

list of people who might have those kind of arbitrary powers, 

can you honestly say that the business community should not 

be concerned, that they should trust you to put these people into 

those kind of positions after the legislation is passed?  Why 

would they stand in their place in this society and not demand 

to know who the people are that are going to dictatorial control 

their businesses and their lives.  This is not reasonable, sir. 

 

And so I say to you again, will you reconsider and give the 

business community and the workers of this province the list of 

people's names who will be, as you call them, the blue ribbon 

people that will determine the destiny of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We will give you that list as soon as 

its . . . we'll give you the people as soon as it's available.  And 

as I say, I hope it would be available shortly after this Bill gets 

third reading.  The commission should be up and functioning as 

soon as it can be. 

 

I know that the members opposite will take this comment with 

some cynicism -- probably enormous 

cynicism -- but we really want this whole process to work.  We 

want this legislation to work; we want this process to work.  If 

the commission is going to work, the people on the commission 

must be seen as legitimate representatives of their community. 

 

In that context, party affiliation has played no part in the 

discussion as to who should be on it.  I know that members 

opposite will never believe that, but that has been the case.  

Party affiliation has played no part in their appointment.  And I 

think when you see the committee, I think you'll agree that 

party affiliation didn't play a part in their appointment.  The 

people who are being considered are not people about whom I 

would want to venture a guess as to what their politics is, 

actually. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I would be willing to stick my 

neck out and venture a guess to what their political affiliation 

will be.  It certainly won't be anything other than an affiliation 

to the trade union movement. 

 

Now, Minister, you've said that you're going to give us that list, 

and I'm glad to hear that.  And you say that you will give it to 

us in due course.  You've also said that by June 1 or July 1, you 

expect that these boards, the sectorial committee, at least that's 

what you were referring to, that you would have those into 

place.  I think you're suggesting that you would have this 

labour-management commission in place by that time as well.  

Could we say maybe that by June 1 you would have this board 

in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Is the member referring to the 

commission?  Yes, I would hope it'd be functioning before 

then, but then perhaps I'm being a little overly optimistic.  But I 

would hope it'd be functioning before June.  I'd like to see it 

meeting right away. 

 

One of the things that we asked the people who we're 

appointing to it is what are your time commitments over the 

next few months, because this is going to be intensive and 

you'll need to be able to set some time aside over the next few 

months.  That's one of the questions we have asked them 

actually.  Anyone who is not available immediately for a 

reasonable period of time is not available for the committee. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I suggest to you that you 

might as well give us that list now then, because unless you're 

prepared to use closure on this Act, we intend on staying here 

until June 1 until you give us that list, or July 1, if that's what it 

takes. 

 

And we can talk about this for weeks and months, whatever it 

takes.  Because quite frankly, when the left-wing component of 

your party is about to show us how to take over our province 

and make it into a state controlled entity within the middle of 

North America, we're quite prepared to stay here for as long as 

it takes, and we will talk about this issue for as many months as 

it takes for you to get your list out.  So we're prepared to stay 

here. 

 

I want to know, Minister, if you will be prepared to 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

give us a draft of the regulations that you talked about a few 

minutes ago.  You alluded to those regulations and the fact that 

you have draft regulations in place that you're going to be 

giving to the sectorial committee to study and to research and 

to use as a guideline.  Could you give us a copy of those drafts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I can simply repeat my 

comments, that the wish was expressed that we not do that.  I 

can simply repeat those comments of the people with whom I 

spoke. 

 

I can describe them for you.  However, when we table them in 

the House, they assume a certain permanency which I would 

just as soon they didn't have.  I'd just as soon the committees 

had more freedom with which to work.  And that thought has 

been expressed, and that is not a thought which originated with 

me; it originated actually with the business community.  But I 

kind of share it.  What is tabled in here assumes a certain 

authority that I would rather these draft regulations didn't have. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would you be prepared to commit yourself to 

giving those drafts to the business community immediately, 

even though you don't table them here in the Assembly?  And 

perhaps you could allow us to have a copy of those drafts in a 

non-committed way outside of the House, perhaps on my desk 

in my office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I have no problem with that at 

all.  Indeed I can tell the hon. member that my ideal would be 

to have this joint commission have its first meeting on May 1.  

And that obviously depends on a lot of things, including the 

progress of this Bill. 

 

I would foresee the commission at its first meeting having a 

draft of the regulations.  And I'd certainly make them available 

to members opposite, indeed all members of the Assembly. 

 

I'm just a little reluctant to table them in here.  But I see the 

regulations being available to the commission at their first 

meeting.  My ideal is to do it May 1.  And as soon as that . . . 

certainly I would make them available to all members of the 

House.  And I have no problem in making them available on a 

private basis to you; let you know what we're thinking. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now I'm wondering, Minister, in that spirit of 

cooperation, why we would have to wait till May 1.  I find 

myself with a few days next week where I could spend some 

time reading these materials over.  What would be wrong with 

having them next week? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well part of the thinking here is that 

they haven't been entirely finalized.  We have the broad brush, 

but I have found out with respect to wording, you need to 

review the wording of these things with extreme care to ensure 

that the wording expresses what you mean.  And this legislation 

is nothing if it isn't a lesson in being careful with use of the 

English language. 

So that while we know what we want to do, we are still in the 

process of ensuring that the draft regulations express what we 

want to do.  So they're not entirely finalized, although our 

thinking is fairly complete on them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, I don't think I have to explain to you 

that once again my leg is starting to feel pretty long and pretty 

pulled.  Drafts are drafts.  That means that they aren't 

fine-tuned.  That's why you would give them to me and to other 

people, is so that we read them over and find out what's wrong 

with it so that we can point that out to you. 

 

I mean if you were going to have it perfect, why would you call 

it a draft?  Why wouldn't you just throw it on the table and say, 

here's your regulations; like it or lump it, that's it. 

 

These are drafts.  That means that a draft is something you 

work on.  You improve it; you correct it.  So why not share that 

with us and we'll attempt to in all honesty make it work, as you 

put the term.  And we'll all sit down and we'll try to make it 

better.  And of course you still have the final say so you 

shouldn't have any fear of that. 

 

So how about if you show us the drafts and we'll help you 

fine-tune it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Because nobody will treat it as that.  

The relationship in this whole area is so layered with conflict 

that nobody will do that.  This area is so . . . the atmosphere 

here is so poisoned, nobody will do that.  There is very little 

trust and very little goodwill.  And each side will ascribe the 

vilest objectives and the vilest ends to anything we do. 

 

We simply can't do that.  We simply can't put out something 

and say, what do you think?  Because they're going to say: aha, 

I knew all along, I knew all along; I knew all along there's a 

communist in office here, I knew all along;  and in fact I wish 

the member from Maple Creek would ask the Premier if he 

believes in democracy.  That will be the way the conversation 

will go. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And rightfully so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well you say rightly so.  Okay.  But 

then you're making the argument against me sharing the 

penultimate draft of the regulations with you. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I take a little offence, Minister, at your 

suggestion that you can't trust me, when you've this morning 

said to us that we should trust you.  You want me and the 

business community and the workers of this province to trust 

you with a blank cheque.  You want us to trust you with the 

ability to set up boards with judicial powers -- a dictatorship in 

labour matters.  You want us to trust you with the entire future 

of this province, the entire ability of this province to ever create 

a job base. 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

And yet you won't trust us to see a draft of your regulations that 

would by the very word, draft, mean that they would be 

changed and that we would have to try to improve them, or at 

least we should.  Because if it isn't that way then it's not a draft; 

it is the regulations.  And if they are, in your words, so 

poisonous that you fear that kind of a reaction, then I say all the 

more reason why we would have to stand in our place and fight 

this legislation for as long as it takes. 

 

You have shown no comfort whatsoever; in fact you have 

thrown gasoline into the fire of scepticism on your labour 

legislation.  In fact you now have a prairie fire burning out of 

control in this province because of the way that you're handling 

this. 

 

Either you are extremely nave or else this legislation is going 

to be, without a question, the most devastating thing that has 

ever happened to the province of Saskatchewan.  The fire you 

have poured into this controversy, the fuel that you have put on, 

the gasoline that you're throwing into this fire shows us that it 

is going to be an absolute wreck out here when these 

regulations come forward. 

 

If that's not the case and if you are being genuine about this 

being legislation that's simply going to help, then you have an 

obligation to put that forward and to correct this situation 

immediately.  Because what you're doing is you're causing the 

entire business community to mount their forces in a very 

costly way.  The whole-page ads that we saw in the paper must 

have cost somebody thousands of dollars.  You can't buy 

newspaper space, full-page ads, for pennies. 

 

And you're saying to the business community this morning and 

to the workers of this province, you're telling them we've got 

absolutely poisonous regulations that are going to be coming 

out because we're afraid to show them to the opposition, even 

outside of the legislature.  We're afraid to show the business 

community because it's so absolutely destructive that it will 

cause such an uproar that we just can't take a chance on that. 

 

What you're saying to the business community is that you'd 

better get out and start spending more thousands of dollars 

campaigning against this.  Is that really what you want?  Is that 

how you're going to create employment in this province -- is by 

agitating one side against the other so that they mount massive 

ad campaigns against you and against one another and come 

out in public meetings and that sort of stuff?  Is that what you 

really want? 

 

I can't really believe that that's the kind of confrontation that 

you want in this province.  And yet, that's what you're saying to 

people. 

 

So I'll give you another opportunity, Minister.  Start with the 

very simple, basic thing.  Commit to giving us these draft 

regulations -- not regulations -- draft regulations; a suggested 

proposal of where we might be going in this province outside 

of the House with no 

commitment whatsoever that they will be the regulation. Give 

us those and give us the short list of the names of the people 

that will be in control of the labour-management commission.  

Will you commit to that, Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member should understand that 

the commission is advisory only.  They have no power to make 

any decision, only to advise government.  The member should 

understand that, that this is not a dictatorial commission.  They 

can't dictate anything.  This is simply an advisory committee. 

 

I've already made my comments with respect to giving you the 

list of people whom we're considering.  I think that's not a 

feasible suggestion. 

 

With respect to the regulations, I've also made my comment 

about that, that I would like to see the commission up and 

running immediately, and we will be sharing the regulations 

with you at that time.  They're not finalized right at the 

moment. 

 

And when I say there is a poisonous atmosphere here, in which 

what we say tends to be misinterpreted, and you say that I 

referred to poisonous regulations, frankly, you give me little 

comfort in your good faith.  I mean you cannot have believed I 

actually said that.  You are too intelligent a person to make that 

mistake.  That has to be an intentional twisting to what I said. 

 

I said the atmosphere is poisoned; I did not say the regulations 

were poisoned.  And I really suggest the member elevate the 

debate to where it was a few moments ago. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

are no doubt aware that the introduction of this Bill and Bill 54, 

An Act to amend The Trade Union Act, in conjunction with 

combinations of legislation that have passed recently -- last 

year on The Workers' Compensation Act and The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act -- put together as a package, as you have 

described, are moving the pendulum in terms of the 

relationship between business and labour. 

 

And if you put them all together as my colleague says -- and 

I'm sure as you've heard -- it frightens people about the 

objectives and sort of the overall purpose of your 

administration.  And I'm going to certainly be raising these 

questions with the Premier. 

 

But one of the comments I've heard, and I'm going to raise it, is 

that it appears -- and I don't think it's favourable, and I'll say it 

at the outset, and it's not to be partisan -- but it appears as if the 

NDP administration in Saskatchewan is trying to keep up with, 

or now move ahead of, the Bob Rae administration, the NDP 

administration in Ontario.  Sort of like it's: well I'll show you 

really how to do this.  Okay?  We'll be on the forefront.  We'll 

be on the frontier of labour legislation and we'll really show 

you, you know, what it all means. 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

Now the reason I raise that, Mr. Minister, is that when the NDP 

in Ontario tried to do this and got through some of it and so 

forth, they had an awful time.  And in this province we've had 

people out front of the legislature on various Bills.  And in 

Ontario they had the business community, who don't organize 

well together; are not sort of the big cooperative movement 

because they tend to be more independent and entrepreneurial.  

They came out -- I believe it's fair to say -- in hundreds if not 

the thousands and picketed in front of the Bob Rae 

administration and the NDP government.  And they said, this is 

nonsense because we're trying to create work and jobs.  And 

we're going to just kick them into the United States.  And we 

can be on the forefront if we like, but frankly it will frighten 

people who invest, who create economic activity. 

 

And I'm sure, as you've said and the Premier said and others, 

the private sector should generate most of the jobs because 

government can't afford to do that.  Your colleague, the 

Minister of Energy, has said the whole energy strategy here 

from the government point of view -- if I can take him at his 

word -- is that independent businesses will create the jobs in 

Saskatchewan in the energy sector.  That's what he said.  So if 

that's true, and I believe that you would say that most of the 

jobs . . . small business, which I'm sure you endorse, co-ops 

and others, said it comes from the small business and the 

private sector to create this work. 

 

When this kind of legislation was passed in other jurisdictions, 

all those people who we all acknowledge in a non-partisan way 

who create the jobs, when they come out and say, this flies in 

the face of doing that.  I'm going to move my office to North 

Dakota, or I'm going to get it out of Ontario; I'm going to move 

it some place else.  And you've seen it and you've heard it. 

 

Now if that's the case, then what the business community asks 

me, and will ask others, is why in the world are you doing this?  

Is it a claim to fame, you know, an NDP administration 

supported by labour has got to do this so that we have the 

courage, you know, to do it? 

 

Fair enough; I'd understand that.  But the question that comes 

back time and time again:  what are the consequences of you 

doing this, and if you really know the consequences, why are 

you doing it? 

 

And believe me, Mr. Minister, we'll have pages and volumes of 

legitimate, honest concerns and fears about a combination of 

pieces of legislation like you have here in Bill 32 before us.  

And they're serious questions. 

 

People who pay payrolls, they've got 100 people on the payroll, 

20 people on the payroll, they have part-times, they have 

full-times -- they're worried.  They said, it's just too expensive.  

It will be too frightening and I wouldn't encourage other people 

to come in here. 

 

So my question to you is:  do you agree that business 

creates most of the jobs, number one?  Number two, do you 

agree that when pretty, if you will, aggressive labour legislation 

has been introduced in other jurisdictions like Ontario, you 

know, it was really difficult for the business community and 

they organized and they, you know, they've ended up where the 

NDP administration there is not very popular, maybe for some 

other reasons too, but that was one because that's the industrial 

heartland.  And they said, for Heaven's sakes, don't ship them 

into the United States.  So do you agree that that's taken place? 

 

And number three, if you do agree that business creates the 

jobs; and two, it's been difficult to other jurisdictions; then 

three, could you try one more time to explain how in the world 

this will design a business-labour environment that you believe 

in -- I think you believe in, I hope you believe in -- that will be 

conductive and induce investors to come in here, investors to 

come in and work in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Because we're going to give you all kinds of names of 

companies and participants who've got money to invest and 

create work.  And unless you can convince them, unless your 

minister can convince them, unless the Premier can convince 

them that this is a good idea, they're going to: number one, 

campaign against it; number two, not invest here. 

 

And certainly the reputation of the NDP in Saskatchewan, the 

reputation as being middle road, reasonable, progressive 1990s 

New Democrats, as opposed to 1950s and '60s democrats, 

nationalizing and you know way off to the left, if you want to 

be in the middle, you're going to seriously impact that image -- 

and I'm sure you must know that -- seriously impact it. 

 

So those three questions.  It's happened before and it's been 

seriously . . . you must acknowledge it, I ask.  And two, don't 

businesses create most of the jobs?  And then three, if that's the 

case, then what other comfort can you give the business 

community or the image makers and the spin doctors and 

others that are going across the country and saying, what in the 

world happened to the Romanow or to the . . . pardon me, the 

NDP administration here?  What happened to it?  Did the 

pendulum go like this?  They were kind of showing us that they 

were middle-of-the-road and they were reasonable and they're 

going to do all this stuff.  And it's gone way off road.  Could 

you address those three questions? 

 

And I can get into specifics on the Bill.  But I just want to 

know, I mean, where you're coming from to see if it's even 

worth getting into the detail.  Because the detail just digs the 

hole deeper and deeper.  And as I've looked at it, it just 

strengthens labour's position until people say, I don't want the 

hassle. 

 

So before I get into those specifics, your overall view of how 

the Bill fits into the other Bills, that have either been passed or 

before the House, would be very helpful to the investment 

community. 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Before the member entered, we had a 

discussion on the purposes of the Bill.  I had said that the 

primary function of this Bill is not to create investment.  This 

government does that in different ways.  That is not the primary 

purpose of this Bill. 

 

The primary purpose of this Bill is to rectify some real 

injustices -- injustices which most fair-minded people admit 

exist and need to be tackled, although they may not agree upon 

the means we have chosen. 

 

Having said that, there is no evidence beyond the wild 

assertions of certain people that this is going to destroy jobs.  

There is no statistical evidence to that effect; there is no 

anecdotal evidence to that effect; nothing beyond these cries of 

alarm.  And neither history nor a glance around the globe 

suggests there's any truth to that. 

 

Economies around the globe which are high wage, high 

productivity, are economies which by and large provide 

reasonable protection to their workers.  And North America is 

not in the forefront.  No jurisdiction in North America, 

including this one, is in the forefront of providing protection to 

workers in a world context.  Nobody. 

 

I say to the hon. member opposite, we do this because there is 

an injustice which needs to be rectified.  There is no evidence 

to suggest we're going to be destroying jobs, and what evidence 

exists suggests that progressive labour law is an essential part 

of restructuring. 

 

(1245) 

 

The analytical basis for that is that we are not interested in 

producing a low wage, low productivity economy -- we're not 

interested in that.  You can do that if you want, but that's not 

where we're at.  We are at providing, at building a high wage, 

high productivity economy.  The two go together. 

 

High productivity generally involves new technology.  That 

involves the active cooperation of workers or it doesn't work.  

It's more likely to work if you give them a reasonable . . . if you 

give workers a reasonable degree of protection.  If they believe 

they're going to share the benefits as well as the risks of the 

technology, they're much more likely to adapt to it and to work 

with it.  That's the basis for our argument that progressive 

labour laws are an essential part of economic restructuring.  

That is the response to your question. 

 

We believe that this labour legislation, which is progressive, 

isn't designed in Ontario. It's not a Quebec solution, it's not a 

B.C. (British Columbia) solution, it is a Saskatchewan solution; 

the product of extensive consultations in this province, the 

product of lamentations by workers that they're having very 

serious problems in this atmosphere and discussions with 

employers as to what they want to see the 

solution to be.  Make no mistake about it --  most employers 

want the problems resolved. 

 

Let me read for you just before I take my seat, the results of the 

CFIB questionnaire -- Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business.  They sent a questionnaire to their members. 

 

The results were as follows: 86 per cent supported an 8-hour 

break between shifts; 61 per cent supported a meal break after 4 

hours; 56 per cent supported giving qualified part-time 

employees with the most seniority more hours of work. 

 

Did you hear that?  I wonder if the member from Estevan heard 

that last comment -- 56 per cent support giving qualified 

part-time employees with the most seniority more hours of 

work, and a full-time job when that becomes available; 65 per 

cent support the parental leave needed for unemployment 

insurance; 60 per cent supported sick leave for all employers. 

 

My experience in going around the province has been that the 

vast majority of business people in this province are caring, 

compassionate people who take a pride in their relationship 

with their employees.  They're proud of their relationship and 

they treat them well.  The problems tend to be focused in the 

much, much larger businesses where there is no such 

relationship. So do the incident of part-time workers tend to be 

focused in those very large businesses where there's no 

personal relationship. 

 

But when you talk about what the business community in this 

province want, there it is.  It's not necessarily who gets ink in 

the media, but I think it is an accurate reflection of where 

people are, and this reflects my own impression as I travelled 

around the province. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I have a great deal of 

respect for business managers and investors, and what they're 

telling me is they don't necessarily need you, with respect, or 

new laws and regulations or government appointed supervisors 

to tell them about their business.  So that they're saying, of 

course we want to treat employees and hire as many employees 

as possible. 

 

But the question that they run into is that when you start going 

into the provisions of the Bill and provisions of other Bills 

here, that you've gone way beyond that.  And you selectively 

pick off, oh yes, businesses want to be fair and they want to do 

this and they want to give more time for lunch breaks, and on 

and on. 

 

Mr. Minister, sure they do.  More important than the lunch 

break, and they'll tell you and you should know -- and you 

didn't really address this question; I'm going to get to it -- is the 

fact that they have a job to go to and then have a lunch break.  

And you have admitted that this has got nothing to do with 

creating jobs -- it's not part of the Bill. 

 

What you haven't admitted yet, and I think that you 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1994 

will, is that this will do not just nothing, it will hurt the creation 

of jobs.  And so all those people you are trying to protect, 

you're actually going to end up hurting because they won't have 

a job to go to.  And they're worried that there won't even be a 

lunch break; they're on welfare or they're on unemployment.  

And you say this is the Saskatchewan solution.  Just for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, one, we compete against other jurisdictions and money 

will flow where there's economic opportunity.  That's number 

one.  Number two, let's just take a look at Saskatchewan.  

We're not overflowing with new investment and new 

companies coming in.  You know we have 80,000 people on 

welfare, with 30,000-and-some unemployed.  Big time. 

 

And you say now is the time to correct these ills because we're 

creating so many jobs and there's so many opportunities; going 

to make sure all these people are going to be looked after.  I 

don't see any justification for you fixing something that ain't 

broke here.  If it ain't -- you know, I'm sure you've heard -- if it 

ain't broke, don't fix it. 

 

There's not a clamour coming forward that's saying we've got 

all this investment and all these people and we've got all these 

dynamic situations and we'd better have new rules to protect 

them and give them lunch breaks and give them more power -- 

no.  Most of them are on welfare or unemployed.  So your 

timing is at best, suspect, and particularly when you say, this is 

not about creating jobs.  Well what is it about?  It's correcting 

old wrongs or correcting  . . . rectifying problems. 

 

Well the biggest problem, I'm sure you admit, is jobs.  Right?  

It's the number one problem.  That's the biggest thing that 

you've got to deal with is jobs.  And this has nothing to do with 

it.  If this can hurt job creation, then we've got to say, why did 

you bother to do that?  What's the point? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, as you know, you'd like to see middle-sized 

companies, larger companies, that could employ 100, 200, 300, 

400 people coming in here and working.  Most of those are 

unionized; most of them are well protected.  And you've gone 

out of you way to even strengthen those that have jobs to make 

it more onerous in keeping them. 

 

So your argument that says, well we want high wages and high 

productivity and therefore we need these rules to make sure 

these low people . . . you've got some big industries here and 

you could have more come in that are very well protected, and 

you're even making it more difficult for them. 

 

I mean you could give -- I'm sure you know; you know enough 

about politics -- you can give one barn-burner of a speech at a 

board meeting or some place else when you take all your 

legislation, put it together and say, compare this to any other 

jurisdiction in North America, and say, fair enough.  It might 

be popular among labour leaders and it might be popular 

among the hard-core NDPers in cabinet 

and some other places, but for the general public looking at 

creating jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, whether you're a 

Liberal, whether you're sort of a left-wing Liberal or a 

right-wing democrat or whatever it might be -- let alone 

Conservative -- they're going to say Saskatchewan is out of 

sync.  This is not the time to put the brakes on and to come up 

with a bunch of new rules and regulations and powers for the 

minister and government and Labour Relations Board people, 

when we're trying to get jobs and compete and build. 

 

I mean the minister of Economic Diversification and 

development has enough on his plate trying to create jobs in 

this competitive environment without this.  He'll get blistered, 

I'm sure, if he goes to a business meeting or if he goes to the 

meetings that are held or if he's hauled out in front of here, or 

across Canada -- can you imagine taking this legislation across 

Canada and say, come to Saskatchewan, it's going to be fine. 

 

And the last thing I'd mention before I ask you to go back and 

comment about if it is business that creates the jobs. 

 

You see the problem with Saskatchewan -- you seem somewhat 

proud of it -- this is a Saskatchewan solution.  The NDP may 

have, and the CCF, some political credibility in health care 

historically; but it's questionable, and I think it's fair to say, 

whether you have a great deal of credibility when it comes to 

creating economic activity and jobs . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And the members don't like that, but well let's look at that.  

Let's look at that.  The member from Swift Current and the 

member for P.A. (Prince Albert) don't particularly agree, but 

it's a fact. 

 

Your reputation is one, internationally and across the country . . 

. Where do they nationalize mines?  Where do they nationalize 

mines?  Where do they take over businesses?  You see, that's 

your legacy.  And people said, gosh, where was that?  Where 

did they start to do that?  Oh yes, one of the first jurisdiction 

that was socialist in North America was Saskatchewan -- that's 

where they nationalize potash mines.  That's where they 

nationalize oil companies.  That's where they do some other 

things. 

 

Now if that's your legacy, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well he says, dj vu.  I'm bringing it back 

because on top of your history, you're introducing these kinds 

of legislation.  And people said, I knew it.  I thought they were 

coming on to be middle-of-the-road.  But that's the same bunch 

that nationalized mines, that became so unpopular, as you 

recall, in the way they took utilities -- so unpopular because of 

what you did in economic activity and so unpopular what you 

did with Crown corporations that you lost miserably.  The truth 

is you lost miserably. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think I've got their attention.  We're finally 

getting to the quick of this, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, my point is -- and you know that I'm right 

because you're responding and your colleagues are responding 

-- your reputation and your Premier's 



April 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

reputation and the NDP's long history of what you've done, 

which is the foundation of this legislation, is an awful tempting 

story to tell by business when they find out in detail what 

you're up to. 

 

And you will hurt Saskatchewan's opportunity for growth, and 

you know it and I know it.  And your colleagues know it or 

they wouldn't be speaking from their seat. 

 

I'll tell you, and it's the truth, it's the absolute truth, the way you 

treated Crown corporations in the late '70s and early '80s got 

you into the trouble.  And you're right back at it again.  You're 

milking them for all the profits you can take.  It's a tax 

collector.  Right? 

 

Watch that.  Okay?  You watch that.  And you watch how the 

public think about it.  You ask the public today: are the NDP 

managing utilities, taxing us fairly?  And they'll say, no they're 

not.  They're using it as monopoly profits to rip off the public 

just like you did in the '70s and early '80s. 

 

And they'll ask you . . . You ask the average public: what are 

they doing now with labour legislation on top of that?  Is it the 

right thing to do?  And you're going to find out not only here 

but across the country, they're going to say, they shifted way 

back to the left.  Your so-called modern image is out the 

window with this legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I raise this because I want to know, and I'm 

going to ask other front-benchers when we get into this, how 

you square that circle, how you think that, number one, it's 

broken, it needs to be fixed. And two, how you're going to sell 

the business community in years to come, not just right now, to 

invest in the province. And three, what do you say to all those 

people that are unemployed and on welfare?  What is it? -- 

81,000 people on welfare; 30-some thousand people 

unemployed.  That's over 100,000 people.  That's like 9 out of 

the 12 cities in the province of Saskatchewan are unemployed 

or on welfare, and you're introducing legislation to make it 

more difficult to create jobs. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I think and I believe that the business 

community and all those that are unemployed need a better 

justification than saying this happens to be "a problem." We 

need to rectify some old problems. 

 

Now I think there's more behind this.  And I know you well 

enough and I know your colleagues well enough that there is 

more behind this.  Because it doesn't make any economic sense, 

and frankly doesn't make any image sense across the country, 

and you've been trying to change that.  So it must mean that 

you're under sufficient pressure politically, locally, that you've 

got to do this to save your hide. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if that's the only reason and we get it out of 

you or out of your colleagues that this is the bottom line, that 

you've got to do this to shore up a certain group of people who 

said oh, you've moved too far to the right, you're looking too 

moderate, 

you're looking too reasonable, then we have to say, is that 

responsible? 

 

Is that responsible when you've got 81,000 people on welfare 

and 30-some thousand people unemployed in the province of 

Saskatchewan, you want to encourage economic development, 

and you're bringing in rules and regulations like this at a time 

when we are in desperate needs of economic activity and jobs. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if all you can say is this is to rectify some 

past problems, it's got nothing to do with jobs, you won't find a 

single business in the province of Saskatchewan who will say 

this combination of legislation doesn't hurt job creation.  So 

that means you're prepared to put more people out of work or 

keep them unemployed longer, or people on welfare longer, if 

you can just have this legislation passed so you can say to your 

key supporters, labour leaders, that you passed this piece of 

legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I think that is very poor if that's the only 

justification you have.  And after my colleague has questioned 

you and you say this is to rectify some past problems.  With all 

of the larger consequences and the history that you bring to 

bear on this House, the history that . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It now being 1 o'clock, the committee 

will rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:01 p.m. 

 


