




















































Hansard: April 19, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1661 

 April 19, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'd like 

to present more petitions dealing with the underground tanks, 

and I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any considerations of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the cost 

involved with digging up underground storage tanks and 

replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have proven to 

be leaking, cost sharing or other alternative agreed upon by 

all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Atwater, Bredenbury, 

Esterhazy, Bangor, Stockholm, over on the eastern border; 

Melville, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton; some from Regina, 

Lloydminster.  I so present. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages of petitions dealing with the same subject.  And as the 

prayer has already been read into the record, Mr. Speaker, I 

won't do that.  But this also covers a wide area.  It goes from 

Waldheim, Caronport, through to Laird, and up to Rocanville, 

and places all across the province, Mr. Speaker.  And an 

ever-increasing amount of these are coming in. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well 

petitions on the same subject, which I'm happy to present 

today, from the communities of Calder, Yorkton, looks like 

Watson, Regina, and Paradise Hill and North Battleford.  So all 

around the province.  And I'm happy to present these on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have been 

asked to lay upon the Table petitions on the issue of replacing 

underground storage tanks.  And the people . . . from my papers 

here, there's a couple of pages of individuals who have signed 

from MacNutt, Mr. Speaker; others from Yorkton -- a fair 

number from Yorkton -- Calder, a couple of pages of 

individuals signing from Cando, Sonningdale, Mosquito 

reservation, as one individual has signed, and Saskatoon as well 

as Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it gives me pleasure at this time to lay these petitions upon 

the Table.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

regarding storage tanks.  They come from all over 

Saskatchewan -- Yorkton, Biggar, Swift Current, 

McMahon, Neidpath, Lafleche, various parts of the province.  

And I want to provide the petitioners an opportunity to make 

their points of view known to the public and the Assembly 

today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

today to table in the Assembly concerning the issue 

surrounding underground storage tanks and all of the problems 

that individuals in our province today are having with that 

issue.  Today I have citizens from the community of Plunkett, 

from the city of Saskatoon, community of Watrous; 

communities of Humboldt, Porcupine Plain, Mr. Speaker, 

Tisdale, Ceylon, Saskatchewan; Ceylon.  A lot of people from 

the southern part of the province today, Mr. Speaker, who 

obviously will . . .  oh Radville . . . take issue with this, and I 

would like to present these on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

with respect to the underground storage tank issue that seems to 

be of concern to a lot of people in Saskatchewan. 

 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, come from Aylesbury, Yorkton, 

Craik areas of Saskatchewan; Saltcoats, and a number of other 

communities.  And I'm pleased to present them on their behalf 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions as well 

to present to the Assembly.  And I'd be pleased to read the 

prayer of the petitioners: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I notice there are signatures from individuals from across the 

southern part of the province -- from Wapella, Fleming, 

Moosomin, Whitewood, Yorkton, Bredenbury, Saltcoats, Mr. 

Speaker.  Even from Wroxton and Ryan, Dubuc and Russel, 

Manitoba; Pembroke.  Mr. Speaker, petitioners who are 

genuinely concerned about their small communities, and I'd 

like to present these petitions. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of Saskatchewan praying the Assembly may be 

pleased to urge the 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It is a very real pleasure that I introduce to members of the 

Assembly, 24 students from St. Michael's Community School.  

They're accompanied by their teachers, Lorne McDonald and 

Teresa Cardinal.  I hope the students find the session 

interesting, and I shall look forward to receiving their 

impressions of the Assembly when I meet with them at 20 after 

2.  I invite all members to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatoon Regional Science Fair 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This past Saturday I 

had the pleasure of visiting the 18th annual Saskatoon regional 

science fair as a guest, and I want to comment on the 

outstanding presentations that were made at that science fair. 

 

Saskatchewan has actually lost a lot of its science culture in the 

last years, the innovation that happened with the pioneers on 

the farms, but there is a resurgence of that in the last number of 

years.  In 1989 there were only two science fairs in all of the 

province; there are now 11. And there are some 30 different 

organizations and individuals that helped to sponsor the 

Saskatchewan regional fair. 

 

I want to recognize the support, the encouragement, and the 

assistance that has been provided by parents and by teachers.  

One of the parents commented on the after-hours work they put 

into their daughter's project. 

 

I also want to congratulate all the participants of the science 

fair, and not just the winners.  The winners are fortunate 

enough to go to Guelph next month for the Canada-wide 

science fair; but the real winners are all of the young people 

who participated in this fair, those who sponsored and 

encouraged them, and of course the people of Saskatchewan 

who in the years ahead will see a developing science culture as 

a result of the science fairs that take place around the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Persons Living with AIDS Network 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It was my pleasure the 

other day, on Sunday, to attend an open house held in 

Saskatoon by the Persons Living with AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) Network, which is a volunteer, 

non-profit, charitable-status organization founded in 1987.  

This is a group of volunteers, many of whom are HIV-positive 

(human immunodeficiency virus) or 

infected with the AIDS virus; men and women and their 

families. 

 

They are providing help to people in our province who need it, 

in the form of support and counselling and advocacy and 

hospital visits.  They're sharing medical and treatment 

information.  They're providing food and nutritional 

supplements.  They're providing accommodation, 

transportation, and help with medical supplies and alternative 

therapies.  And they do it all, Mr. Speaker, through their own 

fund-raising efforts and activities.  And some of these people 

have been devoting countless hours over six and seven years 

toward helping people. 

 

And what I saw when I went to this open house was a group of 

people who are caring about other people, and extending a 

helping hand to anyone who needs one.  And I think they 

should be commended for the good work that they're doing.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Newly Published Book: Breaking New Ground 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, last 

Thursday PIMA (Prairie Implement Manufacturers 

Association) chairman, Robert Hawkins, presented a recently 

published book called Breaking New Ground to the Minister 

of Agriculture and the Minister of Education. 

 

 Breaking New Ground r is a history of 100 years of implement 

manufacturing on the prairies.  It takes us from breaking 

ground with ox and plough through the many innovations 

created to address the challenges facing farmers on the prairies, 

right to today's high-tech computerized machinery.  To help us 

all understand how things have changed, PIMA is giving a 

copy of this book to each of 800 high schools in western 

Canada for their use in social studies and economics 

curriculum. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the cooperative effort between 

PIMA, Fifth House Publishers of Saskatoon, several provincial 

government departments, and of course the authors, Don 

Wetherell and Elise Corbet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian prairies have a proud record of 

producing top-quality farm machinery that is today being used 

in many countries around the world.  A bouquet of thanks goes 

out to all of those who have had a hand in putting the Canadian 

prairies on the map with their regard to farm machinery 

manufacturing, and especially to PIMA for their efforts in 

documenting this history in the newly published book, 

Breaking New Ground.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Organ Donor Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I 

would like to make the Assembly aware that the week of April 

18 has been designated Organ Donor Awareness Week.  

Residents of Saskatchewan are 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

joining people all over North America this week in focusing 

both public health and professional attention on the vital need 

for organ and tissue donation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Coalition for Organ Donor Awareness or 

SCODA, are responsible for putting together the programs set 

out for this important week.  Some of these programs will 

include:  media spots, mall displays, Mediacom billboards, and 

a story on The Provincial.  This government is pleased to 

support SCODA for their efforts in enhancing awareness of the 

vital need for organ donation and in giving people an 

opportunity to enhance their lives through transplantation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can be proud that certain 

transplants are being performed right here in our province.  

However, we should also be aware that there are currently 60 

residents of our province waiting for a kidney transplant alone.  

This proves that the need for greater awareness and 

understanding is of extreme importance. 

 

Once again I would like to remind all people of our province 

that the week of April 18th is Organ Donor Awareness Week.  I 

would also like to say that our government encourages the 

worthwhile efforts to promote Donor Awareness Week.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Heimlich Manoeuvre 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  My colleague, 

the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, once more has made a 

very moving and important statement on a Monday and he 

stimulates me to make a plea for the use of the Heimlich 

manoeuvre in cases of drowning. 

 

This manoeuvre, introduced by Dr. Henry Heimlich, is well 

known for the treatment of choking, commonly called "cafe 

coronary", sir.  But it is not realized that it is impossible to use 

mouth-to-mouth resuscitation effectively on a person whose 

lungs are full of water. It only takes half a cup of water to fill 

an adult's breathing tubes and even less for a child.  It has been 

known for an unconscious person to drown while lying face 

down in an inch or two of water in a gutter and suicides have 

known to have taken place by simply immersing the person's 

head in a bathroom vanity.  Therefore the lungs must be 

emptied of water first, and this can be done very easily using 

the Heimlich manoeuvre. 

 

And with the swimming and boating season fast approaching, I 

think this is an important matter to raise in the House today.  

And I would appreciate the opportunity to show this simple 

skill to all of my colleagues in all parties, and even you, Mr. 

Speaker, sir, on the grounds that the saving of one life would 

make this worthwhile.  Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yorkton Lions Club 19th Annual Indoor Games 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure this afternoon to extend my congratulations to the 

work of the Yorkton Lions Club and the many volunteers who 

hosted this past weekend the 19th annual indoor games. 

 

Over the two-day period, more than 1,000 young athletes from 

Yorkton and across this province took part in 168 carded and 

uncarded events.  It is most rewarding to witness the look of 

victory when young athletes cross the finish line just ahead of 

their competitors, or when an athlete clears the high jump bar 

as two Lions Club members stand on chairs to get the bar back 

in its place. 

 

Without the commitment and sponsorship of the Yorkton 

Sunrise Lions Club, this event would never be possible.  The 

club's motto, "to serve", is most appreciated by young athletes, 

coaches, and spectators from across the province. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the work 

of Mr. Lorne Yeo, the president of the Sunrise Lions Club, and 

Mr. Peter Baron, the meet director, for their leadership in 

making the 1994 games the most rewarding and memorable 

experience for lots of young athletes and spectators.  Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Underground Storage Tanks 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

are for the Minister of the Environment.  I would like to ask the 

minister these questions on behalf of the 200 people that met in 

Davidson last night, and since the minister didn't have the 

courage to show up and meet with the people there and defend 

his destructive policies. 

 

Mr. Minister, the guest speaker at last night's meeting was Dr. 

John Blatherwick, of the city of Vancouver, who told those in 

attendance that digging up underground tanks is not only a 

waste of money but is actually harmful to the environment.  He 

said and I quote:  Digging up oil tanks in the middle of 

Saskatchewan makes no sense whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you not attend the meeting last night, 

and why do you continue to push ahead with a policy that is 

destroying businesses and communities all over Saskatchewan 

in return for extremely questionable environmental benefits? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the member 

opposite has ever tried drinking gasoline-contaminated water, 

or for that matter, those people whom he quotes.  And I wonder 

if the member opposite has ever been exposed to an explosion 

resulting from that kind of leakage.  I hope not.  I hope 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

not.  These are life-threatening experiences and I hope the 

member does not become exposed to that kind of terror that 

other people have experienced. 

 

The goal -- as the member opposite ought to know because 

their government introduced the policy in 1989 -- the goal of 

this policy is to remove tanks before they leak, before people 

are exposed to these kinds of risks, before they're exposed to 

the additional costs resulting from clean-up.  It's just good 

business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister may try and 

spread his scare tactics around, but he didn't have the courage 

last night to come and meet with those people that wanted to 

talk with him.  Mr. Minister, you might have learned something 

had you shown up.  You might have learned that the 

environmental dangers of underground tanks appear to be 

greatly exaggerated.  You might have learned that there are far 

more pressing environmental concerns you could be dealing 

with, without destroying the businesses and communities of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you might have learned that the cost of digging up these 

tanks is simply going to be too much for many service station 

owners to bear, and that this is going to lead to even more job 

losses, tax losses and economic hardship in this province.  But 

you weren't there.  You weren't there to listen; but then again, 

you never listen. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you want to dig up something, you could start 

by digging your head out of the sand and listening to what 

these people have to say who's  businesses you're destroying. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you sit down with the owners, listen and act 

on their concerns?  And will you consider whether this policy is 

really necessary given the enormous costs and the highly 

questionable environmental benefits? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, a number of the members 

opposite had the courage to admit, at their Progressive 

Conservative convention a couple of months ago, that they had 

been wrong in visiting the waste upon Saskatchewan that they 

as a government had done in their previous administration.  

And I'd like to acknowledge that the member from Maple 

Creek and the member from Kindersley had the courage to say 

that about their own administration. 

 

The members opposite ought to have the courage to 

acknowledge that they also began this process.  Now the fact 

that they may have messed it up; the fact that they may have 

started on the wrong foot; the fact that they may have not 

talked to anybody before they got involved in it, is not of my 

doing.  You ought to have the courage to also acknowledge 

publicly that you screwed up one more time. 

But what I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that I have been 

meeting regularly with these people.  I established the advisory 

committee, Mr. Speaker, on which Mr. Botting, on which Mr. 

Alberts sits.  I met with Mr. Botting and Mr. Alberts two days, 

three days ago.  I asked them to take their concerns to the 

advisory committee.  We've established an advisory committee 

to clean up the messes you created when you established the 

policy in the first place.  And I've got the word of the 

committee that they're going to be working urgently to make 

recommendations, to make changes to the mess you already 

made, like Gass made recommendations to the financial mess 

you made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

it's plainly clear that you didn't have the courage to show up 

there last night and defend the policies that you're doing -- the 

regulations and the implementation of the Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, I've been reviewing your government's 

Partnership for Renewal document.  And this document sets 

out the following goals: to lower the cost of doing business in 

Saskatchewan; to emphasize employment in the small-business 

sector; and to improve the regulatory and administrative 

requirements on businesses in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, your underground storage tank policy runs 

completely counter to each one of these goals, and could you 

explain how this policy meets any of your government's 

economic objectives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

had bothered listening to my points a minute earlier, he's just 

made the perfect admission of the mess they made in this 

regard.  Maybe the member opposite ought to answer the 

question of why it doesn't fit any of his sense of what business 

ought to be. 

 

Because what I'm telling the member opposite is that we've 

established an advisory committee that's examined the 

question, that has examined the question of the upgrading 

standards that for the most part acknowledges that it is just 

good business sense to establish a time for replacement of tanks 

before leaks occur and before you get into the business of 

adding additional costs and public risk from the leaks.  Now if 

the member opposite doesn't see any good sense in that, let him 

explain himself to the public that's put at risk by that. 

 

But on the other hand the committee has now committed itself 

to looking at the upgrading standards; at looking at the 

contamination levels; looking at the environmental liability, 

and if the member opposite would get onside with trying to 

repair some of the messes they made instead of pointing 

accusatory fingers at others, we might get on with the 

cooperative business of fixing up the mess you made. 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, your trade union and 

labour relations Act are a one-two punch for small-business 

investment and job creation in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday in this House you finally admitted that these Acts 

were not designed to promote job creation or a better 

investment climate for Saskatchewan.  That's interesting, 

because your government's Partnership for Renewal plan has 

as one of its main objectives, and I quote: to "Rejuvenate 

labour market policy" and "Promote economic development 

. . ." 

 

The partnership plan was to, and I quote: "Establish a 

cooperative, fair labour relations climate . . ." 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, business and employers are telling you that 

it was neither cooperative nor fair.  And by your own 

admission it is doing nothing for job creation or investment. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you take the advice of your own economic 

development plan?  Will you scrap this legislation and bring in 

one that will be cooperative and fair, and will help rather than 

hinder job creation and the businesses of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, that was not so much a 

question as a bare-bones attempt to comply with the rules of the 

Assembly in giving what was a long statement about the effect 

of this legislation. 

 

The answer to your question is the same as it was two weeks 

ago.  We intend to proceed with this legislation.  And the 

response to your comments about this legislation destroying 

jobs, is that there is no evidence of that. 

 

You and others may do what you want to attempt to frighten 

people -- and I recognize you're trying to do that -- but you've 

not provided any evidence.  And one would think after this 

length of time you'd feel some sense of responsibility to 

provide some kind of foundation for your allegations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Interprovincial Trade 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, your 

much-touted Partnership for Renewal plan strongly advocates 

export markets and trade as one of the ways your government 

was going to help develop our economy.  Your plan stated that 

one of the primary objectives was, and I quote: to aggressively 

pursue markets outside Saskatchewan and to reduce barriers.  

And we applauded that 

objective, Mr. Minister, when it was announced, and we 

applaud it to this day. 

 

But I'm afraid it's more a fiction of your PR (public relations) 

department over there, sir, than it is reality.  Instead we find 

that instead of reducing trade barriers, we see the Deputy 

Premier busy posturing to get into a trade war with Alberta.  I 

wonder if you could explain, Mr. Minister, to this Assembly, 

how closing the borders to Alberta jibes with the Partnership 

for Renewal.  Can you tell us that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to answer a question on trade, after this many days 

in the House to have the first question on trade, when we are 

very much a trading province.  In fact if you look at the great 

trading countries of the world -- Japan and Germany -- 

Saskatchewan on a per capita basis trades more than either of 

those two countries outside their borders. 

 

Obviously the member opposite, the former minister in the past 

Conservative government, is unaware of the new 

announcements of uranium mines in northern Saskatchewan, 

all of which will be exported from the province; recent 

announcement by Cameco of $34 million for a new gold mine. 

 

Sir, I think you only need to look at the statistics on exports 

from this province to realize that the business people in this 

province are doing an excellent job in improving our position 

as an even increased exporter over what we already are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, obviously you don't know what 

your cabinet colleagues are up to, because you didn't answer 

the question.  The question was dealing with Alberta and the 

statements made by the Deputy Premier.  Now, Mr. Minister, 

already there's been a response.  Alberta's deputy minister said, 

and I quote: 

 

 If Saskatchewan says Albertans can't bid on work on Crown 

corporation projects, we'll do the same to them and won't 

allow them into Alberta. 

 

That's fairly serious, Mr. Minister.  We don't disagree that there 

should be some form of Buy Saskatchewan.  It was the former 

Tory administration that in fact helped SaskPower achieve one 

of the highest levels ever in its history.  But the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, Mr. Minister, estimates that 50 per 

cent of their members have done work outside of 

Saskatchewan, and that 80 per cent of those members did that 

work in Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, closing our borders, implementing onerous 

labour legislation, imposing costly environmental legislation, 

increasing utility rates, Mr. Minister, that all goes against the 

stated plan which 



1666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

you brought into this Assembly, significantly hurting 

Saskatchewan business and workers.  Mr. Minister, won't you 

admit now that that is anti-business, anti-jobs, and as Economic 

Development minister, won't you stand up for your own plan, 

sir, stand up and correct some of the ills that the rest of the 

ministers in your government are doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say, as the 

member's mind grinds along missing the odd cog, I want to 

remind him that it's impossible to understand how you say on 

one hand this is a terrible place to do business, and yet why are 

you doing this dastardly thing of keeping all these Alberta 

companies out of this terrible place to do business? 

 

Now you can't have it both ways.  Either it's a good place to do 

business, which in fact it is; it's a wonderful place to do 

business.  But you can't say on the one hand it's a great place to 

do business and all these Alberta companies want to come here 

because they can't get jobs in Alberta, but we don't know how 

to create a situation that's good for business.  It doesn't work.  

This is a good place to do business. 

 

But I'll tell you one thing, sir:  that the many years we watched 

your administration on the west side of the province with all of 

the jobs being done by companies with Alberta plates, that 

having a balance in the system, there's nothing wrong with that.  

And Saskatchewan people believe in that. 

 

There are a number of contracts in the last year that have gone 

from Crowns to Alberta companies.  But if you're making the 

argument that all contracts should go to Alberta contractors, I 

simply don't understand why it took nine years for the people 

of the province to kick you out, as they did in 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Underground Storage Tanks 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the Environment minister.  I had the pleasure of 

also attending a meeting of the Environmental Fairness 

Association in Davidson last night.  It was obvious that the 

people there simply want common sense from government. 

 

Most of the money from the sale of a litre of fuel goes to 

government and to major oil companies.  The private service 

station owners get three and a half cents.  These small-business 

owners say they can't afford to clean up the environment by 

themselves at three and a half cents a litre. 

 

Mr. Minister, last night your deputy said that wasn't an issue.  

What do you say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite needs 

to remember that business is business, and if I have a piece of 

equipment on my property that wears out, I need to replace it.  I 

think maybe the 

member opposite is one of the only persons that doesn't 

understand that; that the piece of equipment that wears out is 

mine and I need to deal with that when it wears out. 

 

I don't think anybody denies that.  I don't think anybody at the 

advisory committee denies that.  I don't think anybody at the 

meeting would deny that.  If equipment is worn out and it 

belongs to me, it's not the government's job to replace it.  And 

if the member opposite had listened, he might acknowledge 

that what is disturbing to people is if they don't do enough 

business to pay the cost of buying new equipment.  Again, this 

is a business decision that has to be made. 

 

The uncertainty that arises from the issue is the uncertainty of 

knowing what the clean-up costs might be, which ought, I 

think, in the mind of the average business-minded intelligent 

person, ought to say that good business would say before you 

have the problem resulting from leaks, you should make sure 

that your regulations and your business practices replace the 

equipment before it leaks.  That is the simple goal of the 

program -- to make sure that before you incur the additional 

costs of contamination and the results of it and the risk to the 

public, you engage in the upgrading at a time when that cost is 

down to the cost of replacing worn out equipment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, a person at last 

night's meeting said he has underground tanks that have been 

dry for over 20 years.  He wanted to know how the government 

could kill his future, his livelihood, by forcing him to remove 

those tanks. 

 

Mr. Minister, your deputy said that there was no requirement to 

dig up those tanks.  Others at the meeting disagreed with that.  

What is the real story?  Does he have to remove the tanks or 

not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the regulations provide 

authority to require those kinds of tanks to be removed.  It's not 

the first administrative requirement at the moment, but it is 

there within the authority.  It is that kind of issue that results 

from the careless work of the previous administration that is 

before . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sorry.  It is that kind of 

issue that was insensitively dealt with with the previous 

administration that we've referred to the advisory committee to 

see if it makes sense.  If it doesn't make sense, we'll change it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

obviously there's some poor communication between yourself 

and your deputy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is aware of mistakes his government 

made in regards to GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

and hospital closures, and I'm sure that he would like to avoid 

those mistakes again. 

 

Mr. Minister, your deputy says that he is willing to 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1667 

look at other ways of resolving the fuel tank issue.  He says the 

rules are not cast in stone.  Mr. Minister, will you tell us today 

what aspects of the rules and regulations your government is 

considering changing, and when you're going to inform the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to know the answer to that question since he voted for the 

action plan which resulted in the extension of deadlines so 

people could have more time to plan.  He voted for the proposal 

to set up the advisory committee which is now studying the 

issues.  And he ought to know that the advisory committee was 

set up specifically for the purpose of looking at the issues in all 

aspects of the upgrading requirements for service stations so 

that they might be done sensitively. 

 

We ought not to leave unreasonable expectations about this.  

The simple fact that worn out equipment needs to be replaced 

and sometimes that's a financial challenge for businesses who 

are not pumping a lot of gas, remains a fact.  That's a dilemma 

that cannot change but it's a business fact of life that business 

people in Saskatchewan acknowledge. 

 

The other issues respecting the exact standards to which the 

upgrader occurs is being reviewed by the committee.  The 

issues with respect to contamination levels in the soil are being 

examined.  And I'm expecting a quick response from my 

committee so that hopefully by early September we'll be able to 

respond to the recommendations of the committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

your deputy told everyone last night there will be changes to 

your own rules regarding the removal of underground fuel 

storage tanks.  Now you may dispute your deputy on this issue 

as well.  But if this is true, will you not put the whole process 

on hold until the changes are made public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, again our dear member 

opposite from Shaunavon, I don't want to suggest descriptions 

for the posturing he's doing, but there's a bit of insincerity in it, 

because he obviously knows that aside from the class A sites, 

the upgrading for all sites was extended to April 1, 1995.  And 

therefore while the committee is examining this issue, members 

can make their decisions about upgrading.  May I reiterate, this 

is a business decision.  If I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, for the seventh time, will you agree 

to debate the president of the Saskatchewan bar association on 

the issue of your new no-fault insurance policy?  Yes or no? 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I am actually very, very surprised, Mr. 

Speaker.  Here we have a House of debate and these members 

across are unwilling to debate.  And I'm saying therefore that 

the minister wants to debate; I will debate him right now in the 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Appointments 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We'll see if we can 

find a minister over there with courage today. 

 

My question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, in the orders in 

council released yesterday we see that you are continuing to 

live up to your vow to end patronage by appointing former 

NDP (New Democratic Party) candidate Jim Mills to the board 

of SGI .  That's the same Jim Mills, Mr. Speaker, who already 

sits on the Highway Traffic Board. 

 

Mr. Premier, we've already established that your government 

has appointed 37 former MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) and candidates to government boards and 

commissions and now some of these people are being 

appointed to a second and third board. 

 

Mr. Premier, isn't one trip to the trough enough?  Aren't there 

other qualified people in Saskatchewan you could give some of 

these appointments to rather than giving two or three 

appointments to your NDP friends? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- As we . . . (inaudible) . . . into the SGI 

board member, Mr. Speaker, we have done a lot of work in 

looking at credentials of our board members and indeed Mr. 

Mills has a great background, and I'm very surprised, you 

know, that the member from across stands up to question that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll refer this one 

then to whichever one of them has the courage to answer the 

question. 

 

Mr. Minister, I hear that the other day there was a contest on 

the radio and the DJ (disc jockey) announced that if you had 

won in the past, you weren't allowed to enter again.  I guess 

there's no rule like that on the NDP wheel of patronage.  And I 

just point you in the direction of Mr. Garf Stevenson, already 

on the SaskTel board at 300 bucks a day, already on the 

Provincial Health Council. 

 

Does that stop him from winning again?  No.  He hits another 

$500 a day jackpot on your phoney health elections 

commission. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you eliminate the NDP version of double 

dipping?  Will you make a rule that says that a person can only 

hold one board appointment at a 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

time?  How about that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

respond to the member opposite and express my dismay and 

concern about this continuing attack by the Progressive 

Conservative Party on the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool simply 

because of the fact that maybe at some point in time, they did 

not see eye to eye when they were in the government.  And I 

want to remind them that that's just the way government is -- 

sometimes you don't see eye to eye on some issues. 

 

Garf Stevenson is a notable citizen of this province, former 

president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, one of the largest 

corporations in Saskatchewan, and therefore has the expertise 

and the background and the experience to contribute a great 

deal on the board of the Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

and SaskTel. 

 

I'm proud of the fact that Mr. Stevenson is prepared to give of 

his time to be able to lend his knowledge to this board, to one 

of the corporations in this province of which we are proud, 

because it has in the past and will continue in the future to 

serve the people of this province well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

just to prove to the Deputy Premier that we're not picking on 

anyone in general, I'll give you a few more examples. 

 

Don Cody, Mr. Deputy Premier, appointed to SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) and SGI -- 

nice double dip there.  Miles Kroll appointed to the Farm Land 

Security Board and a Farm Ownership Board.  Pat Trask, 

Saskatchewan Research Council and Women's Advisory 

Council. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, we're not picking on any one individual.  

We're trying to get a point across to you that this is going on 

and on and on.  Your friends are double dipping, sir, and it is 

obscene. 

 

Now there are thousands of qualified people out there, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, that could sit on boards and commissions.  

Will you give them a chance?  Will you limit board 

appointments to one per person?  And, Mr. Deputy Premier, 

would you give some consideration to allowing a committee of 

members of this House to set board appointments?  Would you 

do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

member from Thunder Creek very clearly that we will continue 

as a government to appoint people to boards and commissions 

who are capable and based on their competence and based on 

the kind of contribution that they can make to the board or 

commission to which they're appointed.  That has been the 

principle on which we have based our appointments to date and 

that is the way we're going 

to continue to make those appointments. 

 

Now it so happens, Mr. Speaker, that some of these people may 

be supporters of the New Democratic Party.  I don't apologize 

for that.  I want to remind the members opposite that 51 per 

cent of the people of Saskatchewan voted for this government 

in the last provincial election.  And therefore, from time to 

time, some of those people who voted that way will be 

appointed to boards.  But the bottom line is going to be on their 

competence and their ability to make the appropriate 

contribution to the body to which they are appointed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 65 -- Aboriginal Sentencing Circles 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the 

close of my remarks I will move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly encourage the Department of Justice to 

work with aboriginal communities to extend and improve the 

use of sentencing circles within the justice system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I begin I would like to acknowledge the 

help and advice of Judge Barry Stuart of the Territorial Court 

of Yukon in Whitehorse.  Judge Stuart has had extensive 

experience with sentencing circles and has been most generous 

and helpful with both his time and his written work. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I have spent some time in conversation with 

Mr. Ivan Morin, who was himself sentenced by a sentencing 

circle last year in Saskatoon.  And I am indebted to him for his 

comments and his insights. 

 

If a fair trial is the basis of justice in our community, so is a fair 

judgement.  People have been seeking fair judgement in human 

life since the days of Solomon.  Three things concern us about 

our system of justice: first, fair and just laws which everyone 

sees to be fair and just; second, that breakers of those laws are 

caught and found guilty by due process of law; third, that these 

people found guilty are given the appropriate judgement. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we concern ourselves solely with the third 

-- appropriate and fair judgement.  An age-old means in the 

aboriginal community, which has its parallel too in Europe 

centuries ago, and may be found in other cultures throughout 

the world as well, is the sentencing circle. 

 

Aboriginal communities, generally nomadic, were single, 

integral units where every person had a role, an essential role, 

from gathering food to hunting.  Crime did occur in these 

communities, but the very nature of the nomadic, integrated life 

meant that punishing 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

offenders in ways similar to our own punishments, that is by 

putting them in jail, was never part of their culture; but proper 

judgement was. 

 

The community recognized that crime reflected disharmony, 

and that it was incumbent upon everyone, through mediation, 

reconciliation, and restitution, to bring back harmony.  Thus 

everyone became part of the justice system and the idea of 

sentencing circles developed.  Sentencing circles have been 

used with success in northern Canada, and their wider 

application in Saskatchewan is urged in this motion. 

 

We are here talking about individual cases in individual 

communities where judgements have to be made in the context 

of a particular individual in particular circumstances in a 

particular community and at a particular time. 

 

If we think one of the first requisites of civilized society is 

justice, it makes sense that those with some knowledge of these 

particular considerations should participate in the judgement.  

Thus a sentencing circle is a process whereby community 

members recommend a sentence in cases involving other 

members of the same community. 

 

A sentencing circle does not focus on punishment. The 

overwhelming energy of a circle is positive, and the circle 

considers the causes for the criminal act in the context of the 

social, economic, or family environment fostering crime.  The 

sentencing circle, unlike the criminal justice system, does not 

treat crime as a simple problem calling for a simple answer.  

The circle, rather, recognizes how complex are the causes of 

crime and therefore how complex must the considerations be 

that inform any response to crime.  In other words, crimes have 

many causes.  Wise judgements should recognize this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my friend and colleague, the minister responsible 

for Indian and Metis Affairs, tells a wonderful story about two 

aboriginal men, Billy and Fred, and the theft of a VCR.  When 

you hear this story, which he tells beautifully, you begin to 

understand how and why our justice system fails aboriginal 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not my intention to tell this story because I 

couldn't tell it nearly as well as the minister does, but I do hope 

you have a chance to hear it one day. 

 

I like the idea of using what was once an important element in 

aboriginal culture, circle sentencing, to help ensure that our 

justice system no longer fails aboriginal people. 

 

Circles are characteristically made up of the accused and the 

victim, their families, elders, the presiding judge, and other 

interested community members.  Also in attendance are 

defence counsel, a prosecutor, and police officers. 

 

Typically circles are held in a courtroom or other 

place open to the public.  Chairs are arranged in a circle with 

everyone finding a place where they feel comfortable. 

 

After opening remarks by the judge and counsel, the formal 

process becomes an informal discussion with everyone 

introducing themselves by name, not by title.  Simply by 

arranging the court in a circle with all the participants facing 

each other with equal exposure and access to each other, the 

dynamics of the decision-making process are changed. 

 

Just as officials and community members are brought together 

as equals in searching for solutions, everyone is drawn into 

discussion, unlike a typical courtroom setting where judges and 

lawyers dominate.  In some circles a talking stick or eagle 

feather is passed from participant to participant. 

 

The focus of the discussion then becomes how the best interests 

of the community may be served by the judgement.  This could 

involve practical advice to the accused and recompense to the 

victim and family of the victim, or a conventional jail sentence.  

It must be emphasized the community offers support to the 

accused and his or her victim.  But also the accused has to 

show genuine commitment to changing his or her ways and 

accepting suggestions for improving his or her life. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, in the context of personal change, to 

quote a long-time offender.  He said: 

 

 I can't wait to get up and into the day because now I know I'm 

needed.  People need me.  That's never been before.  So I've 

been sober since then, (since the sentencing circle), almost 

two years.  First time.  No one thought I could do it and 

neither did I. 

 

Sentencing circles are not so much about what happens to the 

offender, however, as what happens to the community.  

Sentencing circles empower the community to take over their 

own problems and work at solving them.  You cannot have 

healthy communities if they cannot work at solving their 

problems.  Conflict, even violence, is all too much a part of our 

world.  But conflict can be a positive building tool if properly 

handled. 

 

If you have problems or conflicts and you always bring in 

outside help and outside law enforcement professionals to 

handle the problems, the underlying causes of these problems 

may remain unacknowledged and unresolved.  Thus, 

sentencing circles may not only bring wise judgement 

concerning criminal acts, but also strengthen communities and 

the bonds between their members.  Better judgements will 

foster the community's growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot improve on Judge Stuart's conclusion to 

his paper on sentencing circles given at a Quebec congress last 

year.  He said: 

 

 Circle sentencing profoundly reshapes perspectives through 

the frank, often 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

 emotionally difficult sharing of information, feelings and 

thoughts.  Everyone involved changes their perspective about 

people, about events surrounding the crime, and about what 

should be done. 

 

 The principal value of community sentencing circles cannot 

be measured by what happens to offenders, but rather by 

what happens to communities.  In reinforcing and building a 

sense of community, circle sentencing improves the capacity 

of communities to heal individuals and families and 

ultimately to prevent crime. 

 

 Sentencing circles provide significant opportunities for 

people to enhance their self-image by participating in a 

meaningful way in helping others to heal, a participation that 

is recognized and appreciated by the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, circle sentencing and all parts of the 

community-based justice system are not just short-term 

solutions but investments in the community's future. 

 

I move, seconded by the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood: 

 

 That this Assembly encourage the Department of Justice to 

work with aboriginal communities to extend and improve the 

use of sentencing circles within the justice system. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to have the opportunity to speak on and to second this 

motion that is before us now. 

 

It almost appears that everyone in today's world is saying that 

the criminal justice system is breaking down seriously.  It is not 

doing the job that people expect of the justice system.  People 

out there are upset at what appears to be the failure to impose 

stiff enough penalties on people that victimize other people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one example of that was put to me by a service 

station owner in Craven.  His concern was that his son was 

caught for not wearing a seat-belt and was fined $80; and yet a 

person who had broke into his store and stole some cigarettes 

and other goods was apprehended by the police and given a 

suspended sentence.  He was not made to make restitution to 

the owner; therefore it would appear that the justice system is 

appearing to be removed from the realities outside of the 

court-house. 

 

When you add to this the uneasiness that is felt by the 

aboriginal people when they are put through our court system 

because of all the uncertainties that they have with the 

workings of our court system . . . In the '70s, aboriginal court 

workers went a long ways to make 

these people feel much more comfortable when they were in 

court.  But the sentencing was still not relative as far as a just 

penalty for what was done.  For these reasons, there has been a 

movement towards a new approach to justice, one that puts 

aside the punishment model and stresses the human need for 

reparation and healing. 

 

The existing approach to justice focuses on crime as a law that 

has been broken.  The response is to assign blame and to 

punish.  But this emphasis leads people to avoid the 

consequences of admitting responsibility for their behaviour.  

Punishment is therefore threatened, and that sometimes 

prevents the truth from coming out. 

 

Yet we need the truth in order to feel safe again.  We have to 

know what makes this crime happen, what led up to this crime, 

and therefore each party connected to the event must have the 

possibility and the responsibility of speaking the truth they 

know to each other, and also listening to each other so that the 

total picture can come out. 

 

(1430) 

 

This does not change our assessment that what has happened 

was evil.  But it can mean that evil does not have to remain an 

obstacle between us.  We can search for solutions together.  

Because crime has come from the community, therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, the solution to it must also come from the community.  

Because crime is a human problem, therefore the solution must 

be a human solution.  It is the people with the problem who 

must be put at the centre stage and given the resources and the 

assistance and professional support to attend to the needs of all 

three parties -- the victim, the offender, and the surrounding 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this takes part in sentencing circles.  Sentencing 

circles were first conducted in the Yukon in 1991.  His Honour 

Claude Fafard began conducting sentencing circles in several 

northern Saskatchewan communities in the fall of '92.  Since 

that time, upwards of 50 cases have been heard, mostly in 

northern Saskatchewan, but also most recently circles have 

been conducted further south. 

 

While our trials are a stage that has many formalities, the 

sentencing circle is extremely flexible, thus making everyone 

feel much more comfortable and feeling freer to speak the 

truth, unlike the courtroom.  Whereas my colleague has said the 

physical setting allows participants only be the lawyers and the 

judge, the circle setting draws everyone into the discussion and 

the problem solving also. 

 

There is an apparent and actual equality created by and within 

that circle.  This is a dynamic which is essential to building a 

partnership between the community and the justice system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes to the sentencing process will not 

be the makings of a fix-all.  They will not be the end results.  

They would be relatively small steps in a 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

very long journey to move the criminal system, criminal justice 

system, from its destructive impact on people and communities, 

to doing what it should do, and that is working closely with 

communities to prevent crime, to protect society, and to 

rehabilitate offenders; and instead, process conflict in a manner 

that builds, not undermines, a sense of community. 

 

One might also observe that the movement towards circles may 

be part of a much wider process of reform; one that tries to 

build bridges towards justice institutions and processes which 

are more respectful of and more respected by aboriginal people. 

 

The end goal of the whole process is the healing of the 

brokenness in the community and between specific people so 

that the cycle of violence and vengeance can be broken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, therefore I am pleased to second the motion and 

to support it in this House.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too find 

it an honour to be able to stand and speak in favour of the 

motion brought forward by the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden: 

 

 That this Assembly encourage the Department of Justice to 

work with aboriginal communities to extend and improve the 

use of sentencing circles within the justice system. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to first of all take a moment to look at 

an article in, I believe it was the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, 

September 2, 1993 and it talks about sentencing circles involve 

the community -- something that the motion before us 

addresses. 

 

 Lately we are hearing of instances where people convicted of 

a crime are receiving their sentences only after a sentencing 

circle has taken place.  Many people are unaware of what this 

means.  Why is the offender not given a sentence by the court 

like everyone else?  What is a sentencing circle and how does 

it work?  Why is a circle preferable to the regular sentencing 

process?  How can an offender get a sentencing circle? 

 

This article addresses these questions. 

 

 The increased focus on sentencing circles is a response to the 

apparent failure of the criminal justice system in reducing 

crime rates and rehabilitating offenders. 

 

 Many courts and justice workers at the sentencing stage now 

seek to give victims more of a role in the process.  They also 

look to jail as a last resort and try to get the community to 

participate more. 

 

 Traditionally punishment is the main goal in sentencing.  A 

sentencing circle gives greater 

emphasis to rehabilitation and reconciliation.  Therefore 

communities become involved and assume responsibility for 

solving disputes.  So that community participation in the 

process has a true impact, communities must be given power 

to resolve many conflicts that now go through the criminal 

courts. 

 

 This is especially important in cases where a long history of 

jail sentences have destroyed an offender's self-worth, 

causing depression, anger, or suicidal tendencies.  In these 

cases the offender often returns to a life of crime upon 

release.  The judge, Crown and defence lawyers, the 

offenders, the victim, police, and the professional advisers 

such as probation officers and psychologists, make up the 

sentencing circle. 

 

 Members and elders of the supporting community and 

members of the offender's and victim's families also sit in the 

circle.  In most cases the public has free access to the room, 

but this may change if issues are particularly sensitive. 

 

 With the arranging of the participants into a circle, everyone 

faces one another and so has equal access and equal exposure 

to the others.  This changes how the sentencing decision is 

made because the judge and lawyers no longer sit in their 

prominent places above and in front of the regular courtroom 

setting. 

 

 They no longer own and control the process.  The discussion 

is less formal.  And outsiders, including victims, offenders, 

and their families, are drawn into the discussion much more 

readily than they would be in a regular courtroom setting.  

Participants are on a more equal, level footing.  The 

community and the justice system become partners in 

deciding what is the best sentence. 

 

 The information gathered about the perpetrator's 

circumstances and use of the crime is more complete and the 

most appropriate sentencing options should result.  Then, 

since members of the community have a part in deciding the 

sentence, they take on the responsibility of making sure 

through monitoring and support that the offender honours his 

or her sentence. 

 

 The offender faces his or her sentencers each day and faces 

the disapproval of friends, neighbours, and family.  The 

community may also learn much about what ails it and causes 

crime within it, which can lead to effective efforts to correct 

the situation. 

 

 To receive a sentencing circle, one must apply to the court 

after a conviction is entered.  A circle may not be appropriate 

in all cases, especially where jail sentences over two years are 

expected or where punishment is the only 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

 choice. 

 

 The Saskatchewan Court of Queen's Bench has held that 

before a circle will be granted, the offenders should, at the 

very least, be worthy of either a suspended sentence or a 

short prison term with probation attached.  Offenders should 

be truly sorry for the offence and must want to turn their lives 

around with the help of their community. 

 

 The request for a circle should be supported by community 

members ready to make useful recommendations and take 

responsibility for supervising and enforcing the terms of a 

probation order.  However in a different case, the same court 

has also held that such factors as type of crime, possible 

length of sentence, or whether an aboriginal community is 

involved, should not be considered in deciding whether to 

hold a circle. 

 

 Circles have so far been confined to northern or aboriginal 

communities.  These are likely the minimum requirements for 

a sentencing circle.  Recent court decisions denying and 

granting sentencing circles are now under appeal and we 

await final word on guidelines for this important sentencing 

alternative. 

 

I believe that's a good article, Mr. Speaker, explaining the use 

of sentencing circles.  And I know that I've been in meetings 

where I've heard speakers talk about the different stone 

formations across our province made up in circles.  And they're 

involved, in most cases, in native communities, and they talk a 

lot about native life and the way they treat one another. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, what we have here in sentencing circles 

is an opportunity for individuals to face up to the crime that 

they have committed; and for the community at large, as has 

been suggested by members opposite, to have not only the right 

to sentence an individual, to have them pay for the crime that 

they have committed, but also the responsibility of helping that 

person to understand the wrongs that they've committed and 

working together with the individual who has committed the 

crime in helping them to understand that they've infringed upon 

another person's rights; and it's therefore their responsibility as 

well not only to pay for the crime they've committed, but also 

to make right and restitution with the victim.  And I believe 

that's very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our party has always recognized the valuable 

contribution that native people have made to the Saskatchewan 

way of life and we recognize the debts that we owe them. 

 

And I believe the issue of native justice in particular has 

become a very important one, and certainly a number of native 

people I've talked to or aboriginal people have indicated that 

they would like to have some involvement and have some say 

regarding justice and regarding sentencing and in working with 

their peers, as they believe that it would be a way of addressing 

the growing crime or criminal concerns that have been arising 

in our society. 

 

Natives have obviously been poorly served by the justice 

system as we see it today.  Many fail to get adequate legal 

representation; consequently a disproportionate number of 

them end up in jail.  And once in jail they face a severe cultural 

shock that makes rehabilitation even more difficult than it 

ordinarily would be. 

 

Natives are at a cultural disadvantage when dealing with the 

European-style justice system.  Its procedures are foreign to 

their culture.  The ideas that justice is blind, that it is impartial, 

and exists independent from the whims of society at large, are 

ideas that work well for people of European culture, but natives 

do not understand or appreciate these ideas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to them community involvement and the 

involvement of community elders, which might be seen as 

political interference, are integral to a holistic approach to 

justice. 

 

Some would argue, Mr. Speaker, that this isn't fair, that justice 

is a universal concept that must be applied in the same way for 

everybody.  Natives however reject this and say that justice 

varies from person to person depending on a very close 

examination of their lives and experiences. 

 

This viewpoint was defended in 1992 by Canada's Chief 

Human Rights Commissioner, Max Yalden.  In his testimony 

to the Royal Commission on Aboriginal People, Yalden said, 

and I quote: 

 

 It is by now a well-established principle of human rights law 

that where cultural or other circumstances warrant, people 

may need to be treated differently in order to be treated 

equally. 

 

It was on this basis that governments across Canada began 

experimenting with different methods of administrating native 

justice.  Some of these have been informal and ad hoc with the 

judge simply inviting band members to the sentencing hearing 

to speak along with the convicted person's legal counsel in 

arguing sentencing. 

 

Other experiments have focused on the post-sentencing 

rehabilitation problems by creating healing circles and healing 

lodges to reduce the culture shock felt by the incarcerated 

natives and to help rehabilitate them in ways that are consistent 

with native beliefs and culture. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we're quite well aware of the effort that is 

being made and presently the work that is ongoing in the 

Cypress Hills region of a healing lodge to deal with women of 

aboriginal, or native ancestry, in their criminal backgrounds 

and helping them through the process of rehabilitation and 

serving their time. 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

In Saskatchewan we have been experimenting with permanent 

sentencing circles; native or Metis councils that take the place 

of sentencing hearings, in order to render sentences and 

penalties that are consistent with native ideas of justice and 

healing.  This approach, I believe, Mr. Speaker, creates a blend 

of justice systems, where the court system for society at large 

establishes guilt or innocence while the aboriginal circles 

execute the court's decision in ways that are consistent with 

their culture. 

 

The first such circle in Saskatchewan to deliver a judgement in 

an urban area was a Metis sentencing circle in Saskatoon.  This 

was a very useful, deliberate process that all participants 

approached very seriously. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, none of these experiments have been 

without their pitfalls.  No justice system in the world is perfect 

and it is particularly difficult to implement a dual system where 

two ancient systems of justice are foreign to each other and are 

expected to work alongside each other.  I believe that was made 

evident by the fact that the sentence of the Saskatoon Metis 

sentencing circle was later appealed by the Crown. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, if we are to pursue the concept of 

native self-government in good faith, problems like these will 

have to be addressed.  And I might add, this will not happen 

overnight, and it will take a lot of work and understanding from 

parties on both sides, native and non-native. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we encourage the government to do this; to show 

this good faith.  We likewise invite the leaders of the native 

community to work with us as we go through the trial-and-error 

process of developing a working system of native justice within 

our justice system.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, the use of sentencing circles has 

been discussed by the three previous speakers, basically in the 

way that they will affect the aboriginal community or the Metis 

community or the Indian community in the province of 

Saskatchewan, or throughout Canada as a whole. 

 

I want to enlarge upon the group of people that this probably 

should be used for, and is the group that basically now are 

called young offenders.  And the reason that I suggest that we 

should take a concept from the aboriginal community of North 

America and implement it into our society is that if you take a 

look at the food that we eat in Europe and North America, 

about 60 per cent of the base items come out of the aboriginal 

or Indian communities of North and South America. 

 

If you do a research or a study on how the governing structures 

in both the United States and Canada differ from the governing 

structures that you would find in Europe and the nature of 

them, you will find that . . . and even some of the changes that 

occurred in Europe 

come out of the native community and the nature in which they 

govern themselves. 

 

And most of the time when these changes were implemented, 

they were very effective and appeared to be a more natural 

approach to things.  And I believe that that's part of the reason 

why they have worked in the past. 

 

This natural way of including into the sentencing the people 

that are affected on all sides of it, is somewhat the same as used 

with children in a school where they are found as a disciplinary 

problem, and you would find the parents are invited in along 

with teachers and the child itself.  And that is in essence sort of 

a natural setting. 

 

And I see the sentencing circles to somewhat be an extension or 

a more formalized structure of this natural approach.  And it 

also means that the segmentation of the society disappears, 

where things are brought more into a more global or holistic 

approach, which has been indicated by one of the speakers 

before. 

 

So from my perspective, Mr. Speaker, I look at this experiment 

not as one that should be utilized in a manner where it is 

directed at only a segment of the society, that being the 

aboriginal community, but rather that it be directed to solving 

some of our problems related with sentencing throughout the 

whole society. 

 

And I thank you for the opportunity to have made these 

remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take a 

few minutes just to make a couple of remarks on this motion 

which I think is rather significant.  Because it deals with a 

problem that is current before us and one that we don't have a 

complete solution for. 

 

It's brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, every time I go to 

visit one of the penal institutions in my home town of Prince 

Albert.  As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, we have a penitentiary 

which is run by the federal government, which has something 

like 4 or 500 inmates in it; we have a provincial jail for men; 

and we have a jail for women in Prince Albert. 

 

And if you walk into any one of those institutions, walk into 

the penitentiary, you're quick to notice that, oh, there will be at 

least 50 per cent of the inmates who are in the penitentiary are 

of native background.  And if you look . . . walk into the jail, 

you'll find that there are probably between 70 and 80 per cent 

of the men in the provincial jail who are of native background.  

And even more striking, if you walk into the women's jail, the 

stats show that a full 98 per cent of those incarcerated there 

would be of some native background. 

 

It really raises rather a puzzling question, Mr. Speaker, when 

you realize that in the province of 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

Saskatchewan perhaps 10 per cent of the people are of native 

background.  So why this disproportion?  And of course if it's a 

question that's puzzling to me, it certainly would be even more 

puzzling and unanswerable to members of the native 

community. 

 

Clearly the justice system that we have, which is based on a 

system where you're asked to serve a penalty, is not serving a 

part of our society as we might hope it should.  So for this basic 

reason, the fact that the system, the justice system, is not 

serving that aspect of society -- those people from native 

background -- in a fair way, we should be looking at ways of 

improving the system.  And I think that this system of 

sentencing circles is . . . provides at least a partial answer. 

 

It also has forced us . . . forces us to think and consider the 

make-up of our society and the background of our society when 

you start looking at sentencing circles.  Because in order to 

understand why they work and how come . . . where they 

originate, it really forces you to do a new kind of thinking 

about society and about systems. 

 

Most of us that sit in this legislature have European 

backgrounds.  And the European backgrounds, our philosophy 

stems from Christian thought, which is considerably different 

than the philosophy of native people in North America, which 

is based very much on sort of a circular concept, as is Asian 

thought. 

 

The basis of Christian morality and Christian thought is that 

things are either black or they're white.  You're either good or 

you're bad.  You do something; you should get punished for it.  

You live your life and in the end you end up being judged and 

you go to heaven or you go to hell. 

 

When you apply this concept of being judged by somebody 

exterior in the ultimate judgement and apply it then to how it's 

being used in our current system, in our current society, it's 

rather similar, because the justice system also puts you in a 

position of being judged by somebody . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we 

have a special guest, or guests, from Japan.  Mr. Okamoto, with 

Okamoto International from Japan is here with us today; his 

interpreter, Ms. Miyata; as well as Ken Sexton, who is a 

business person from Saskatchewan.  And then also, if he 

would stand and be recognized, Mr. Scott Rutherford who 

works with Okamoto International. 

 

And they are in town doing business, and I'm sure all 

members will want to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 65 -- Aboriginal Sentencing Circles 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you.  I was just mentioning, Mr. 

Speaker, of the contrast.  There is an underlying philosophy of 

the western thought compared to native thought that leads us to 

think and to believe that considering an alternate justice system 

and integrating it into our system is a very important measure. 

 

And if you consider, Mr. Speaker, that in our system, in the 

western system, once you're found guilty, or even if you're 

charged with committing a crime, then what's done with you is 

you're taken outside of your community and you're put into the 

justice system, which is supposed to be objective.  And then on 

the basis of evidence given there, objective evidence, 

somebody who doesn't know you makes the judgement and 

makes the sentence. 

 

And this compares starkly with this sentencing circle method 

because there you involve people right in the community, 

people who know you and who are involved with you and have 

been involved with you all the time. 

 

So it's a matter in one case you are being tried by people 

outside of your realm of acquaintances; in the other case you're 

being charged by people on the inside, people who know you.  

One case it's supposed to be an objective system and the other 

case it's a subjective system. 

 

I guess there are other comparisons.  We came here to this 

country and we were instilled with the idea of conquering 

nature, whereas the native way is to live in harmony with 

nature.  They say things should be natural and you should just 

adapt naturally whereas we try to change nature.  So I think that 

the whole . . . we're the richer.  I believe we're the richer for 

trying to integrate the two systems because we learn a lot. 

 

And I want to close by congratulating those judges who are 

experimenting with this and using the system to integrate the 

native system into the white judicial system.  Because as 

members mentioned before, it is only the sentencing portion 

that they are using, and the judge in the end still has the 

decision, the ultimate decision, whether or not to accept the 

sentence proposed by the circle or to mete out an alternate 

sentence. 

 

I believe this is a very worthwhile effort and we should 

continue with this concept of sentencing circles and perhaps 

even learn to adapt it to youth as the member from Turtleford 

had mentioned earlier. 

 

I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to follow 

my colleagues in speaking to this issue of sentencing circles.  

It's a very important topic to a great many people.  As you 

would be more than a little bit aware, Mr. Speaker, there's a 

wide perception, with varying accuracy, but certainly a wide 

perception that crime is on a rapid rise. 

 

Certainly there are disturbing pieces of evidence in relation to 

some areas of crime, but as it comes to violent crime, I'm 

delighted to say that we are north of the 49th parallel and we 

have not taken the same approach as our American cousins 

south of the 49th parallel.  I say that not to denigrate the 

Americans -- they can certainly run their country -- but theirs is 

a slightly different value system. 

 

I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that in the April 18th 

Maclean's magazine they talk about body counts, and there's a 

chart showing the murder rate per 100,000 people.  And they 

use admittedly selected North American cities in 1992, which 

was the latest year for which statistics were available.  But I 

note with some dismay that the murder rate in prairie cities 

such as Winnipeg, it's 2 per 100,000; Edmonton it's 3.8; 

Calgary 4.6 per 100,000.  That's disturbing and that's 2 and it's 

3.8 and 4.6 murders too many -- no question about that.  But I 

look at the U.S.(United States) comparison cities and the rate 

runs anywhere from 11 per 100,000 up to one city that is 75.2 

per 100,000. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now I realize we're not talking about murders when we're 

talking about the use of sentencing circles, and I think we 

should keep that into a perspective.  In Saskatchewan we have 

long made use of organizations such as the John Howard 

Society, particularly for young offenders.  My family had some 

reason to have some dealings with the John Howard Society 

and their youth services within the past year. 

 

I'm pleased to report that the John Howard Society provided 

very professional, competent, and capable services.  As a result 

of our interaction, there was two young offenders that I think 

have a decent chance of redeeming themselves or straightening 

out their lives.  Certainly they've avoided the lock-up as a result 

of it, and I wish those two young people nothing but the very 

best as they strive to make their lives more meaningful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can build more jails for offenders and clearly, 

in some instances, jails are still the most appropriate method of 

dealing with some elements of our society.  But the real 

question is, in my mind, what will work towards reducing the 

numbers of crimes and the impacts of crime?  How will we 

help everyone in our society to not perpetrate a crime?  How 

can we coexist?  How can we live together and respect one 

another as human beings? 

 

And now I get to the sentencing circle part and I think of who it 

is that matters most to most of us as 

individuals.  Mr. Speaker, my constituents mean a very great 

deal to me.  Members of the political party I belong to mean a 

great deal to me, but I want to make it very clear:  my family 

and my closest friends mean more to me than all of the above -- 

my family and my friends.  To me this sentencing circle is all 

about having family, friends, in a cultural milieu that is 

meaningful to an offender. 

 

Meaningful, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that people who have 

erred, intentionally or not is immaterial, but people who have 

erred will find that a sentencing circle of family, friends, and in 

the support of milieu, are far more likely to set their lives 

straight than people who we simply say well, you made an 

error, it's off to jail you go. 

 

Clearly the system of, you made an error; it's off to jail you go, 

has not really served us terribly well.  I'm not hereby 

advocating that we do away with jails.  That's not the point of 

this.  The point is if we can prevent some criminal 

reoccurrence, some crimes from happening again, then our 

efforts will be worthwhile. 

 

To this end, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to stand and say that I am 

supportive of the whole idea of a sentencing circle.  I think it's 

a very worthy and worthwhile, innovative idea and I certainly 

hope that it serves us very well long into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 66 - Reduction of Number of Cabinet 

Ministers 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

worked out very well today that on private members' day we 

would be discussing a motion one day after the tabling in this 

Legislative Assembly of a Bill to do just that -- reduce the 

number of cabinet ministers in the province of Saskatchewan 

by legislation. 

 

And in that intervening period of time, Mr. Speaker, I have had 

the opportunity to review the comment of both members of the 

government and others who have looked at the idea.  And I 

naturally expected the reaction I did from this government 

because they seem to negatively react to all proposals put 

forward by the opposition as far as the democratic reform of the 

Saskatchewan Assembly. 

 

And it's a little disheartening, Mr. Speaker, because prior to 

October of 1991, I used to spend a lot of hours in this 

Assembly listening to the members of the New Democratic 

Party as they debated, and particularly on private members' 

day, when they talked about ways of changing the political 

process in the province of Saskatchewan to make it more 

taxpayer-friendly, to make it more user-friendly, I guess, to put 

it in the vernacular. 

 

Times are changing, Mr. Speaker, and the public out there that 

pay us and expect us to perform on their 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

behalf are becoming very demanding with the political process 

these days.  And they are saying to politicians, no matter what 

their stripe, that it's time that you started to listen and that you 

once again reflect the views of the people that elect you. 

 

And I can say some of these things quite honestly, Mr. Speaker, 

because having served in government for a number of years 

and seeing some of the abuses that come along with governing, 

that come along with political power, you must learn from 

some mistakes that you're part of.  And I'm amazed that the 

New Democratic Party in this province does not recognize the 

errors that they're making, Mr. Speaker, in regards to some of 

these issues. 

 

We just had the final act, if you will, of the electoral boundaries 

changes taken through this Legislative Assembly on Monday.  

And by that the government reduced the number of MLAs in 

the province from 66 to 58.  I don't think there's a soul in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that doesn't agree with 

the reduction taking place.  The problem is the process 

surrounding it. 

 

The fact that, as we have seen with this government in so many 

areas, they tend to be very urban orientated.  That they tend to 

wish to disassociate themselves with many areas, particularly 

rural Saskatchewan; that there is in fact developing a two-tiered 

system in this province in many areas.  And I'm afraid that 

we've seen it in health, we potentially can see it in our 

education, and certainly we will see it in the electoral map. 

 

But be it that may, Mr. Speaker, if the reduction of the size of 

government is on the agenda, and I believe it is, and that it is 

worthwhile for us to look at ways of reducing the total 

representation by the province to save those salaries and save 

the ancillary costs that go along with maintaining 66 MLAs as 

compared to 58, then we should be prepared to also look at 

other parts of our institutions. 

 

As we all know in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and particularly 

those of us that have served on Executive Council, that the 

costs of maintaining a cabinet minister are far greater than a 

private member.  Cabinet ministers, because of their workload, 

have to have staff, they have to have access to vehicles, they 

have to have access to airplanes, they have to have access to 

cellular phones, they have to have access to a lot of government 

levers in order to do their job. 

 

And I don't think anyone would want to take those away from 

them, Mr. Speaker.  But the simple fact is that a cabinet 

minister costs a lot more to maintain. 

 

And I honestly believe that the current cabinet of the member 

from Riversdale is too large, given the workload and the 

responsibilities of some of the members opposite that I see not 

being terribly busy some days.  And I think there is an 

opportunity for a reduction in the size of the cabinet without 

putting undue pressure on anyone.  Because it is really some 

days a very thankless job, Mr. Speaker -- those 

meetings that go from 7 o'clock in the morning till 10 or 11 at 

night. 

 

And the one part about the comments made by the Deputy 

Premier in the newspaper on this topic, as he responded to the 

tabling of the Bill yesterday, was that everyone in the province 

wants to see a cabinet minister.  And that is the truth.  And I 

don't suppose that will ever change unless we change the 

fundamentals of our electoral institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I firmly believe that because we have allowed, as 

a political institution, the power of Executive Council to grow, 

that there have been severe repercussions for our political 

system because of that.  As the power of cabinet and premiers 

and prime ministers has grown, and the role of private members 

has been reduced, you naturally have a want by the public to 

access those levers of power. 

 

I think it is very important for us, as we rethink some of these 

institutions, to look at ways of putting back in the hands of 

private members some of that, not only that authority but that 

responsibility that would allow members of the public to feel 

more comfortable with simply going to a private member. 

 

That will be difficult because a mind-set has developed over a 

number of years that says that isn't the way our British 

parliamentary system works here.  But I think for the salvation, 

Mr. Speaker . . . and I say that because the public will demand 

reducing; that's on.  And if we're going to learn to live with less 

and still maintain a credible system, then I think we have to 

rethink this division of powers which exists, with the governing 

party particularly, in our House. 

 

And I look at ways of strengthening the committee system.  

And there has been some discussion, Mr. Speaker, in this 

session to that regard.  I believe personally -- and I say this now 

as a personal note, not as the leader of my party -- that we can 

strengthen the committee system a great deal in this House and 

in general in our British parliamentary system as we practise it 

in Canada. 

 

I look at the American experience, I look at the Australian one, 

and some others around where they have taken that capability 

and strengthened it.  And that is why you've seen a number of 

the Bills brought before this House by the opposition going in 

that direction, always recognizing that the majority, which in 

this case would be the New Democrats, would maintain that 

majority on the committee.  That is a very fundamental part of 

our philosophy as we practise it in this province.  And no one 

should be able to abrogate the duly elected authority of a 

majority party through the committee system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I honestly do believe that if members are put into that 

process and given an opportunity to work that you will find . . . 

for instance, if we were to hold televised hearings on a 

particular subject with the chairmanship being in the hands of 

one of the private members of the government, witnesses being 

called, that type of issue which many people are familiar with 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

today because they watch cable television, that you would then 

in the minds of the public create members of the Legislative 

Assembly who would in effect have more power, to use that 

word -- and perhaps that's the wrong word -- more 

responsibility and authority, Mr. Speaker, perhaps would be 

more proper. 

 

It would be a gradual shift but I think it is absolutely 

fundamental because the Deputy Premier was right when he 

said that it is almost impossible to access in a huge province 

such as ourselves, the province of Saskatchewan, access 

everyone who needs the attention of cabinet at all times.  So it 

isn't unrealistic, Mr. Speaker, to start strengthening from the 

other side of the perspective.  And that would give the public 

some comfort as to their ability to access the levers of 

government. 

 

The other thing that I think could be done, Mr. Speaker -- and 

it's a two-part thing -- I've always believed that when you enter 

cabinet you should not be required to stay there for ever and 

that there is some sort of base . . . you lose face if you aren't in 

cabinet any more.  I really believe that our institutions, the way 

they're structured and the demands that are upon a member 

upon entering Executive Council are such that it should maybe 

be mandatory that after serving two years you take a rest 

period. 

 

It is a terrible lifestyle, Mr. Speaker, especially if you have 

family.  The demands of Executive Council are very onerous.  

And I think in visiting with my colleagues in my government 

time -- I know in visiting with some of the current cabinet -- 

that it is an incredibly onerous task that you undertake and you 

must give up a lot in order to fulfil it. 

 

(1515) 

 

And I think it would be very responsible of some future leader 

in this province to say at the very beginning of the day that 

there will be a structured in-and-out of Executive Council.  

Because what that does, Mr. Speaker, once again is it allows 

the public other options rather than cabinet itself to access the 

levers of power. 

 

You would then, in a system such as ours, have a number of 

former ministers who had not left under any cloud, who had not 

left because they weren't doing a proper job, who had not left 

because they had lost their political usefulness to the system.  

They would simply have served and stepped out and were 

prepared to serve again. 

 

And that concept is tough for some to follow, Mr. Speaker.  

But I honestly believe for the salvation of the system it is 

important that that be considered. 

 

The other thing that is necessary, I believe . . . and it has been 

put to the side because the former Conservative administration 

in this province employed a lot of legislative secretaries.  And I 

would be the first to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there were 

too many.  But I honestly believe that in our system, either the 

parliamentary secretary, the Legislative 

Secretary -- they go by various names -- is a very useful tool, 

because what it allows that person to do is in effect substitute 

for a minister in almost all circumstances except at the cabinet 

table. 

 

It gives them the access, for instance, to modes of travel, to 

modes of communications, it allows them to have a degree of 

legislative authority, Mr. Speaker, and it is also an excellent 

training ground for movement into executive government.  And 

used properly with controls, Mr. Speaker, it would once again 

enhance the role of private members.  And because those 

private members are far wider distributed around the province 

than say the members of cabinet, it would give the public some 

comfort. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there are many ways that the 

Deputy Premier was not prepared to consider when responding 

to this legislation yesterday that we, as legislators, can make 

the public more comfortable with our system.  And we could 

allow that a rule . . . and you have to start somewhere, Mr. 

Speaker, and it would be interesting to hear from members of 

the government in particular what they think the proper ratio is. 

 

What I proposed to this Assembly yesterday was that the 

cabinet be limited to 25 per cent of the total Assembly -- not of 

the government members, but of the total Assembly.  In other 

words, that one-quarter of the members at any given time in 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, would be in executive 

government, or if you wish, less than that number, but that 

would be the maximum percentage. 

 

And I think it would send a very clear message out to the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker, that there were some 

fundamental shifts and changes being thought about, that the 

expectation of having a cabinet minister on your doorstep sort 

of on a moments notice is being changed.  That there was a 

look being given to how you deliver that feeling of security 

which people are demanding from executive government today 

back to them. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when you set a rule like that in place, 

then the other things that many of us think about and talk about 

but perhaps have never conceptualized would become more 

apparent.  And I firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, that the public are 

thinking about these issues. 

 

For a long time, because our economy was growing and we 

were expanding, it never seemed that there was a limit.  People 

were very complacent about government.  They simply thought 

of it as something that was there, it provided more and more 

services, but because my wages were constantly going up, that 

my gross national product was constantly growing, that there 

was really no irritation with our system.  And hence, Mr. 

Speaker, you did have this increasingly large proportion of 

decision making put in the hands of cabinet. 

 

Now past governments, Mr. Speaker, and even the current one, 

have tried to address regional balancing, 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

political considerations, and the workload by increasing the 

size of cabinet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to you that is absolutely the wrong approach 

in the public's mind in 1994.  They don't believe that that is the 

course to follow.  They honestly don't.  And I think if any 

member in this Assembly would go out and listen today, they 

will tell you that, Mr. Speaker.  It's why I took great issue with 

the fact that the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon now 

have more MLAs than they do aldermen.  I think there will be a 

move afoot, as there was in the city of Moose Jaw in the last 

civic election, to actually reduce the number of aldermen. 

 

People are saying that the size of government has to be 

compacted.  And so, Mr. Speaker, we as an institution have to 

put our minds to work on how we figure out those other 

delivery systems which are more cost effective, which go hand 

in hand with, say, a reduction in the size of the civil service.  I 

don't think there's a political party in Canada today, Mr. 

Speaker, that isn't cognizant of that. 

 

We see the social compact in Ontario.  We see movement all 

around this country to shrink the size of government, and 

consequently you always have to shrink the size of the people 

that manage government, Mr. Speaker.  And ultimately in our 

system that is this House. 

 

If the member from Prince Albert . . . and he seems interested 

in this topic because he does yap from his seat, Mr. Speaker -- I 

would like to see him stand and talk about this issue.  He is a 

private member, and the access of his constituents to the levers 

of authority I believe, Mr. Speaker, need to be enhanced.  And I 

think if that member talked to people in his community, he 

would understand that principle. 

 

The trick, Mr. Speaker, ultimately then is to put more power 

back in the hands of private members through a whole 

sequence of instruments.  And if they're very difficult for some 

of the members of the government to conceptualize today, 

that's all right.  But they better start thinking about it as the road 

lengthens because I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the demand is 

there.  None of us can hide from it.  The demand by the public 

is there and they will increasingly pressure politicians to deliver 

those demands. 

 

Now what I said today, Mr. Speaker, is my own view on how 

you possibly could do that.  Other members may have a 

different view.  But one reason for a piece of legislation like 

this is that I believe it then sets in place a starting point.  And 

only a starting point.  Maybe the amendment needs to be made 

that it needs to be a different percentage; I don't know.  There's 

no magic, Mr. Speaker, the 25 per cent, other than it seemed 

like a reasonable expectation of the average taxpayer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let's not be diverted by side issues.  If access 

to the levers of power and authority in government are the only 

reason that you have to maintain a bigger percentage than 25 

per cent in 

cabinet, then, Mr. Speaker, we're doing it wrong.  Then we 

need to think about how we give members of this Assembly, 

both government and opposition, the opportunity to have the 

public feel confident in what we're doing in here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's I think with a great deal of pleasure that I 

would move today in this Assembly, seconded by the member 

from Morse, the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

legislated reduction in the number of cabinet ministers, 

specifying that the number be proportionate to the number of 

MLAs in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And that if we discuss these things, Mr. Speaker, as private 

members, then ultimately we will come up with a better system 

of government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a privilege for 

me to enter the debate today to discuss some of the areas of 

reform that our opposition has raised as a matter of course in 

this session.  And I am proud to be a part of that group of 

people who have raised these issues for this Assembly to 

discuss and think about.  We have raised a number of issues, 

Mr. Speaker, and I went to the blues to pick out a number of 

them, and I believe that they are significant.  We deal today 

with one that deals with reorganization and it deals with setting 

up a limit to the amount of members that can be in Executive 

Council or the cabinet.  And I believe that it is significant that 

we discuss these issues as a part of the format dealing with 

providing efficiencies within the framework of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have asked this Assembly on seven occasions 

to deal with issues as a road to reform in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- a road to reform that is on the public agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are, I believe, dealing with an issue and issues 

that the public are talking about each day.  After the session 

was over on Friday, Mr. Speaker, I went to my home and I took 

a tire off a tractor and I took it to the repair shop, and I visited a 

brief time with the people who were repairing the tire.  And I 

just raised the matter of utility rates, Mr. Speaker.  And utility 

rates for about 15 minutes became a topic of a great deal of 

intensity, Mr. Speaker -- intensity that turned to anger and 

resentment. 

 

Why?  Because, Mr. Speaker, the public, the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan, have no access to the utility changes 

that were made and they are becoming extremely, Mr. Speaker, 

extremely angry about the role that this executive branch of 

government is playing in dealing with the kinds of things that 

they are. 

 

And they say, well we will make the decision in cabinet and 

then everybody else has to listen.  Well everybody in this 

Assembly has to listen as well, Mr. Speaker, because we don't 

have any input into the changes.  And we are suggesting, as we 

go through this 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

reform package, that it would be a benefit to us in this 

Assembly to speak about those issues; it would be a benefit, a 

far greater benefit, to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan to know that this Assembly had passed those 

resolutions about the utility rates or even had a chance to speak 

for or against them. 

 

But no, Mr. Speaker, we can't do that in this Assembly.  And 

we have never been able to do that.  And I believe it's time for a 

change.  Those kinds of reforms are the kinds of things that we 

have raised on a consistent basis, Mr. Speaker.  Seven 

occasions we've raised changes to the way things are to be done 

and could be adjusted and altered. 

 

This resolution also is another step that could be taken in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And it would bring about real 

reform, Mr. Speaker.  It's not whether members can drink Beep 

out of their glasses or use their computers on their desks, Mr. 

Speaker, but this is fundamental reform in the way this 

province and this legislature does its business. 

 

This resolution speaks to a number of reform initiatives brought 

forward by us as official opposition.  People have been asking 

for these reforms, Mr. Speaker.  And I just have to go into my 

constituency and they say, you're right when you do this and 

you're right when you're saying that; why don't they listen? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's really interesting that there was a time 

when they said the same thing.  They said, it's time to make 

changes; it's time to make adjustments.  In fact the Premier 

himself made these promises while he was in opposition.  And 

these promises had to do with the size of cabinet.  In the 

Star-Phoenix on October 5, 1989, it states, and I quote: 

 

 Mr. Romanow said there is no need for any more than 15 or 

16 ministers (Mr. Speaker).  What really needs to be the 

yardstick in every cabinet is the times, and we are in periods 

of restraint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's what we're in today.  And the Premier, as 

then the leader of the opposition, spoke very convincingly and 

he said: it's times of restraint.  Well what have we got?  We 

have 30 per cent of our cabinet is ministers.  So what do we 

need?  We need to have those things reduced. 

 

(1530) 

 

Even after being elected, the Premier gave an interview with 

Maclean's magazine . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And if the 

member from Regina Wascana wants to get into the discussion, 

she will have ample opportunity later, and she probably will.  

And she will justify a huge cabinet.  We'll just watch and see 

what happens. 

 

After being elected, the Premier gave an interview with 

Maclean's magazine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I quote from 

that article dated November 4, 1991.  This is only four days 

after he got elected and appointed as 

Premier of this province.  And the quote from the Maclean's 

magazine says: 

 

 Romanow stated the new cabinet will include only 10 

ministers and will be expanded only when the province can 

afford it, declared Romanow.  What people want is not more 

government but better government. 

 

That was in a quote out of Maclean's magazine. 

 

The cost of a minister's office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be 

calculated in a number of ways.  And I have been in executive 

branch of government; I have been a cabinet minister, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and so I think I can speak with some authority 

about the volume of traffic that goes through a minister's office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 1991, my office coordinated and 

arranged for seven ministers to attend in a period of 60 days 

about 120 meetings, meeting with farmers across this province.  

I know what high levels of stress and pressure that created on 

my office, and I know that it is important for us to meet and 

come to the people of Saskatchewan because they want to 

know what's going on. 

 

So let's talk about the cost.  Calculations based on answers 

given by the government during last year's estimates, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the average cost for ministerial assistants is 

over $250,000 in a minister's office.  And I should add that 

these figures were provided before the last pay raise for the 

ministerial assistants in each of the offices of the cabinet 

ministers. 

 

Add to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, travel of both the ministers 

and assistants, telephones, computers, government cars, media 

monitoring, subscriptions, contributions to pensions, operating 

costs, staff training, equipment and furniture, and we're looking 

at a pretty hefty sum of money, Mr. Speaker.  A low estimate in 

the cost would be $300,000, Mr. Speaker, and that doesn't 

include the over $80,000 salary a minister receives in addition 

to about 10,000 a year in per diems.  So we're talking about 

another $90,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Again these figures 

don't include any travel; they don't include any communications 

that are significant in a minister's office. 

 

And then the Premier was right when he said these were times 

of restraint.  But what have we got?  We have a government 

that wants to spend more.  They say, cut back on constituencies 

-- cut back on constituencies.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

debate about that in this Assembly.  There are people across 

this province who have said, why cut back on just the rural 

constituencies when you're talking about cutting back on 

constituencies?  Why do you point a finger at rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we brought a proposal forward to 

this House in which we said that for every constituency that 

there is federally, which is given to us by law out of the 

Parliament of Canada -- we have 14 -- each one of them should 

be divided into four 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

and then we would have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an opportunity 

to decide what's the average volume and size here.  When the 

federal government would change theirs, then we would change 

ours. 

 

In reviewing some of the proposals that were brought forward 

this spring, the city of Regina would be included in parts of 

four different federal constituencies; and those federal 

constituencies could be divided into four; and the federal 

constituency that I live in could be divided into four.  And that 

was the way we suggested changing it. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, didn't bring it down to 58 

constituencies, it brought it down to 56.  Now you take 25 per 

cent of 56 and you have a considerable less than what you have 

here today in the way that these things are being done and 

being proposed. 

 

Now all the government has to do is support initiatives brought 

forward by us and the taxpayers in the province could save 

some money.  And we could probably put some of that money 

to use in my constituency in the health care programs; we could 

put some of that money to use, or we could just save that and 

lower the debt.  And that, Mr. Speaker, would probably be 

supported by the majority of the people in my constituency. 

 

Our proposal would limit the number of cabinet ministers to 25 

per cent of the number of MLAs elected to this Assembly.  For 

instance, if there's 66 members now, 25 per cent of that total 

would be 16 or 17 members.  That is not an unreasonable 

number, I don't believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the Premier even agrees.  In 1989, again in the 

Star-Phoenix, October 5, the Premier states, and I quote:  

There is no need for any more than 15 or 16 ministers. 

 

So it's not a matter of proportion to the Legislative Assembly, 

it's a matter of proportion to responsibility.  That's what we're 

talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a proportion to the volume 

of responsibility.  And that's what we need to think about. 

 

Another article, this one from the Leader-Post dated 

November 10, 1990, states, and I quote: Mr. Romanow 

suggested an NDP cabinet would range from 14 to 16 

members. 

 

And that was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before he was elected.  He 

said it before he was elected.  Four days after he was sworn 

into office he said, 10 is going to be what we're going to have 

until this province can afford more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I sit in Public Accounts, and as I listen to 

the Provincial Auditor talking about the volume of debt this 

province has, it hasn't gone down since 1991.  It hasn't gone 

down one penny.  In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 1991 till 

today it's up two and a half billion dollars.  The total liability is 

up two and a half billion dollars.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what we're talking about. 

Now let's talk about what Alberta does.  Consider it. A 

province with many more people, two and a half times the 

population base -- how many cabinet ministers do they have?  

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 17, Mr. Deputy Speaker  

_- 17.  Well if Alberta can do a good job of governing with 17 

members, why can't Saskatchewan do it with 16 or 17?  And I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, it probably has to do with, the 

reason being that they're socialists.  That's probably the reason 

why they can't do it. 

 

The answer, Mr. Speaker, is I believe we can.  All the members 

opposite have to do is agree, just like the Premier said, that we 

should have 15 or 16 members of Executive Council. 

 

The members opposite spoke time and again about the 

sweeping reforms they were going to implement if they ever 

had a chance to form government.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they had 

a chance, they have a chance.  And my bets are -- and I don't 

gamble except in my job -- I'll bet that they would not even 

take a chance.  Do you know why?  Because they're power 

hungry.  They're hungry for power, they're hungry for control, 

and this is the only way that they can have absolute control. 

 

They were going to extend question period, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, from 25 minutes to 45 minutes a day.  Have we seen 

that?  No, we haven't.  They were going to support a set 

election date every four years.  We bring a Bill forward, and do 

they do it?  No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they did not. 

 

They were going to enhance the role of private members, 

private members in this Assembly to be able to speak their own 

mind, to be able to speak the mind of their constituencies.  And 

what are they going to do?  They don't do that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  They don't.  And I have speeches that were given in 

this Assembly to prove it.  And all we have to do is go back to 

the debate on the Bill 39, I think it was, on the role of 

individuals being allowed for changes in The Department of 

Justice Act that dealt with the lifestyles of individuals other 

than the traditional ones. 

 

And those are the kinds of things that people in this Assembly 

spoke negatively about and said, I don't believe that changes to 

the Human Rights Bill are going to do what the Minister of 

Justice said.  I heard individuals say that in this Assembly. 

 

Could they vote in this Assembly to their conscience?  No, Mr. 

Speaker.  They had to go outside and say it to their 

constituents, but they couldn't vote the freedom of conscience 

in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  They couldn't vote that way.  

They had to leave. 

 

In fact one of the members did take the courage to speak out 

about it.  And, Mr. Speaker, I complimented him on his 

integrity, his honesty.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's a serious, 

serious problem.  We should all have the freedom to do that.  

All of us should have the freedom to do two things: one, speak 

our conscience, vote our conscience; and the other is to be able 

to speak and vote the conscience of our constituencies. 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

Those are fundamental to this place, and the people in this 

province want to have that.  They want to have not only that, 

but they want to have the leadership shown by the quality of 

people that will speak their mind, and speak on behalf of their 

constituents. And that's, Mr. Speaker, why we are raising and 

bringing these kinds of reforms forward. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they were given an opportunity to form 

government.  They had all of these things that they were going 

to do.  And then they had a chance to form government on 

November 1, 1991.  They took over power.  And what has 

changed, Mr. Speaker?  What has changed? 

 

Today I made an observation about the members' statements, 

members' statements as being made by members of this 

Assembly.  Some of them were good, some of them were bad.  

But who was paying attention? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commented about this very important fact, that 

by the end of this session, if it wasn't just ahead of question 

period, nobody would be here to attend to listen to what other 

people were saying. 

 

It's exactly as it is in the House of Commons in Ottawa, where 

those individuals who are speaking about various items that are 

of significance to them, are of no significance to the other 

private members.  That's the changes that this executive branch 

of government, the NDP party, the NDP Government of 

Saskatchewan have made. 

 

Those are the changes that I believe are very, very small to 

what the people of the province want to have.  They want to 

have a change in the way we do govern.  They want to have a 

change in how we respond to them.  They want to have a 

change in how we react to their needs, their requirements.  

They want to have a way of responding to the people's work in 

this Assembly. 

 

And how do we do that?  We have suggested seven different 

ways in this session for that to happen -- seven different ways 

for those people to bring these issues forward.  Free votes -- I 

talked about that.  What better way for a private member to 

enhance his position in this Assembly?  What would happen if 

one of those members would bring a Bill forward?  What 

would happen if one of them brought a Bill forward? 

 

Well we had an example of that last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

The member for Regina Rosemont wanted to bring a Bill 

forward.  On his own initiative he wanted to bring it forward.  

He has a personal view about trade unions and he wanted to 

bring it forward.  Should we have said no? 

 

But you know what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  The 

government members said no to their own member.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is exactly what happened.  They said no to free speech 

in this Assembly.  They said no, you cannot do that.  We will 

limit you to being a private member with no say. 

What these individuals in the front row have done is they have 

said to those individuals who want to be individuals, who want 

to bring forward issues from their constituency, saying no, we 

will not allow that to happen.  We can see exactly how serious 

these people are about enhancing the opportunity for their 

private members. 

 

Then we have another issue that I want to talk about a little bit 

and that deals with the issue that I raised earlier about utility 

rates.  Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we are supposed to deal 

with the budgets of this Assembly, with the budgets of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Executive branch of this Assembly brings forward budgets, but 

what do they bring forward budgets on, Mr. Speaker?  They 

bring forward budgets on the Consolidated Fund which is about 

60 per cent . . . well it's not even quite 60 per cent; it's about 55 

per cent of the total volume of dollars of business done by this 

executive branch; 45 per cent is outside, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

outside the framework of this Assembly.  We can't even talk 

about it. 

 

And what do those people need to do on the other side of the 

House?  They need to say we will give back, we will give back 

to the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to have a control 

of the agenda for these utilities that we have to pay taxes on.  

But what did this group across the way say?  No, we can't do 

anything like that. 

 

(1545) 

 

What I want to point out to this Assembly is we get the 

criticism over here and say oh, you had PURC.  You had the 

Public Utilities Review Commission established, and what 

happened to it?  You killed it yourself. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just point out by asking 

the question this way.  Why is it that every time an NDP 

socialist government gets into power, people get afraid of their 

utilities?  Why do they get afraid of the utilities?  The power 

increases; the energy . . . SaskEnergy, natural gas increases; the 

SGI increases; and the SaskTel increases.  Why are they afraid 

of them?  Why do they get angry at this executive branch for 

doing that? 

 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, there is a reason for it.  Because they 

just indiscriminately raise those rates all the time.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, causes the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, it causes people in the province of 

Saskatchewan a great deal of frustration. 

 

And I want to point out to you, when is the last time you went 

into a small business in your communities and said, how do 

you like the utility rates so far?  How do you like the power 

rates? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They don't mind at all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- They don't mind at all.  Well I just 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, they haven't been talking to the 

same businessmen that I've been talking to. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public is completely fed up with these 

rate hikes, and they are handed down by these executive 

individuals who are wielding power.  This great family of 

Crown corporations is delivering another tax hike. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the executive branch of this government 

is the reason why we're here talking about it and we don't think 

that the government is doing the right thing. 

 

We brought proposals, Mr. Speaker, to the Rules Committee 

that would have allowed for more free votes in the Assembly; 

they would have enhanced the private members' Bills and 

motions.  And what did we get?  No, we didn't get any of those 

changes brought forward. 

 

We yesterday raised the point, we're debating it today in private 

members' day -- An Act to amend The Government 

Organization Act (Executive Council Reduction).  Reduce the 

volume of cabinet ministers in this province, Mr. Speaker.  And 

people in the province have said yes, that's the right thing to do.  

They said yes, it was the right thing to do with reducing the 

members of the Assembly.  But why did you take only the rural 

ones?  Why did you only take the rural ones? 

 

You've got more people in city council in Regina . . . or less on 

city council than you have MLAs in the city of Regina.  Is that 

the way this province should operate?  And yet, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have in the south-west part of the province huge 

areas.  The constituency that I live in runs all the way from 

Swift Current to Pense; that's the new constituency that I live. 

 

If I wanted to have my discussions with my MLA, and if he 

would happen to live in Pense, Mr. Speaker, it would take me 

two hours driving to get to see him -- two and a half hours.  

And that's one way, Mr. Speaker.  That's the kind of thing that 

they're asking. 

 

And then they have 11 -- they have 11 MLAs in the city of 

Regina, they have 11 MLAs in Saskatoon, and they just have to 

go across the street and say hi to their MLA. 

 

And then they want to say okay, we'll reduce the volume of this 

Legislative Assembly to 58, but we will not reduce the size of 

Executive Council.  If they'd have reduced the size of 

Executive Council, they could have kept the amount of MLAs 

they had in this province.  But why not use it for reduction in 

the volume of taxes paid by the people of this province. 

 

So what we're saying, Mr. Speaker, is we made 12 . . . or there 

were 12 government proposals passed by the Rules Committee, 

but none of the rules that we brought forward are even tabled.  

We haven't an opportunity to bring them forward.  In fact the 

chairman of the committee has not called a meeting to have us 

bring them forward.  Now that's what I call cooperation.  That's 

what I call an approachable government. 

 

They won't even listen.  We have seven Bills on the Table, 

including the one we brought forward yesterday which deals 

with a topic we're talking about here today.  We're dealing with 

An Act to amend The Government Organization Act 

(Executive Council Reduction).  That's the kind of Bill we 

brought forward to make this government realize that 

somebody has to speak on behalf of the people. 

 

They are not reforming the Assembly even though they said 

they would.  They are proving that government is all talk and 

no action when it comes to really wanting to bring the wishes 

of the people inside these walls.  And that's, Mr. Speaker, why 

I'm supporting this motion before this Assembly today, brought 

forward by the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to support a 

legislated reduction in the number of cabinet ministers, 

specifying that the number be proportionate to the number of 

MLAs in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

That's the reason why I'm supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker 

-- to give back to the people of Saskatchewan an opportunity 

for control, and regulating the business and the conduct of the 

individuals in this Assembly so that they have a say and that 

they have the freedom to access that opportunity with their 

members of the Assembly and have them speak on their behalf.  

And so I'm proud to support the motion brought forward by the 

member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the conclusion 

of my remarks, I'd like to move an amendment to the resolution 

no. 66 before us by the member from Thunder Creek to: 

 

 Remove all the words after "Assembly" and replace them 

with: 

 

 recognize the Premier's and the government's efforts to 

maintain a cabinet of reasonable and efficient size, currently 

at 18, unlike the previous administration's cabinet which had 

up to 25 members; and further, that this Assembly recognize 

that cabinet size is only one element in an overall effort to 

streamline the operations of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think people at home today listening to this 

probably are turning and trying to adjust the fine tuning on their 

set and see the contrast and see if they really are listening to the 

members from a Tory caucus, the same ones who are not able 

to walk the talk, the ones who have not apologized to the 

people in this province for what they did when they were in 

government. 

 

And it's the complete hypocrisy of the members opposite from 

their recommendation and their 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

government's administration that I guess, tongue in cheek, all 

you could say would be that their formula for the numbers in 

their cabinet would be, let's have at least one cabinet member 

for every two of our private members, or about 50 per cent plus 

or minus. 

 

And there were times when all we could do was in a 

half-hearted way joke about the idea that every member 

opposite had an additional salary or was paid an additional 

stipend either as a cabinet member or as a Legislative 

Secretary, except for Lorne McLaren.  So if you ask cabinet 

and legislative secretaries to go out of the caucus room, you 

would have a caucus meeting of one member from the 

members opposite. 

 

But then the people of Saskatchewan know why that member 

wasn't rewarded by being a member of the cabinet opposite, of 

25 members of cabinet opposite, or was being paid additional 

dollars as a Legislative Secretary or assistant. It was because he 

was the chair of caucus and had another way to finance his 

additional expenses and the things that he wanted, through the 

monies that were allocated to the caucus members opposite. 

 

It's no wonder the people of Saskatchewan are trying to figure 

out what this is.  Is this a conversion on the road to annihilation 

by the members opposite?  I think so.  When you look at them 

standing up and trying to say they now, after 10 years of an 

administration that laid on the people of Saskatchewan the 

enormous debt that they put forward, the mismanagement of 

the Crown corporations sector that they participated in, can 

now say they've got seven new ideas for democratic reform and 

we're not willing to comply with any of them.  What a surprise. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan aren't 

interested in some short-term political game-playing speeches 

by the Tory members opposite.  They're not going to fall for 

that.  And they have more meaningful reforms in mind, and 

they know that if you got rid of the entire cabinet today, took 

them all out and said we don't need a cabinet in this province, 

well I think you'd probably be able to address one-tenth of one 

per cent of our budget. 

 

What next?  What do we do next after we've removed all of 

that representation and the people who are working hard for the 

people in Saskatchewan?  Well that wouldn't even pay the 

interest on the debt for a day and a half. 

 

So where would we go from here in their great and wondrous 

schemes of now to reform the measures that are put before this 

Assembly?  And that after they didn't prepare and put forward a 

budget in this Assembly their last year in office -- they walked 

out of the legislature saying that it was too hot for them and 

they couldn't control it. 

 

They had some areas of this province without representation for 

up to two years, Mr. Speaker, leaving people without a voice in 

this House for up to two years.  And now speak about, after 

they left election periods of more than five years for their own 

political gain, to tell us now that they've been converted and we 

should be looking at legislation to say every four years when 

they didn't even come forward with a way to replace the people 

who were missing from this House and speaking for the 

representation in areas that were without anyone to represent 

them here.  One has to wonder what this conversion experience 

is all about. 

 

The amendment I'm placing before the House today, Mr. 

Speaker, recognizes that this Premier and this government have 

been responsible in maintaining a reasonable-size cabinet.  

Cabinet make-up shouldn't just be reflective of some arbitrary 

proportional figure.  People want that number to reflect the 

priorities of government and have the amount of cabinet be 

able to address the issues and areas of concern of the day. 

 

I'm quoting from the member opposite who said times are 

changing and people are more demanding.  Yes, they are.  

People today demand accessibility of their cabinet members.  

They want to be able to consult with their cabinet when new 

Bills are being contemplated or when new policies are being 

formulated, when we're planning to amend some previous 

legislation that's been before the House.  They want us to work 

with groups to form consensus building in this province rather 

than divide-and-conquer mentality that was put forward by the 

government before. 

 

They know that major initiatives require many aspects of public 

policy to be considered, and they know with integration of 

services, such as the child action plan that requires a drawing 

together of many departments in a collaborative manner, that it 

requires the hard work and diligence of a number of cabinet 

members. 

 

I want to read to them from an article that is from the Moose 

Jaw Times-Herald, which I believe is very close to the 

member from Thunder Creek's area, and it says in the heading, 

"A bigger cabinet much needed." 

 

 To the editor: I would like to take issue with the editorial in 

your edition of September 30 which criticized the recent 

expansion of the provincial cabinet.  Even the Leader-Post 

has acknowledged the need for more ministers to relieve the 

burden of some overworked members. 

 

 It would be false economy to restrict the numbers with so 

many areas demanding attention at this difficult time, so 

many areas left in disrepair and disregard by the members 

who were in government before.  It would take the expertise 

of all 17 ministers to wrestle (and it was 17 at that time) with 

the deficit and the problems in our economy as they try to put 

our province back on the right track. 

 

 I really don't envy them their job of coping with problems 

which they inherited from the former Tory administration.  

They have been getting some unfair criticism because of 

some unpopular decisions which they have been 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

reluctantly forced to make.  Premier Romanow and his 

government have displayed and will continue to display a 

financial responsibility which was lacking by the Grant 

Devine government and his regime. 

 

 A negative editorial such as that one does do nothing to foster 

the confidence of people in the elected government.  I think 

we should be able expect more objectivity from our 

newspaper. 

 

And this was from Addie Hughes from Moose Jaw in the 

Times-Herald at the time. 

 

(1600) 

 

And she reflected a lot of what I was hearing out in public at 

the time when we had a very small cabinet and people were 

having difficulty accessing them.  They knew the job that was 

before them was an immense task.  We knew we would be 

going forward in a way into a major health reform initiative, 

that we had many outstanding issues to address in our 

economic development plans, in the Partnership for Renewal, 

the consultation that that needed, and in addressing and 

updating of the labour legislation that's before this Assembly 

now. 

 

People expect and demand more involvement in their ideas and 

their initiatives.  They want to be consulted and they want to 

feel a part of the process.  They know the selective memory of 

the members opposite. 

 

So I think I should refresh the memory of the Tory members 

who were an active part of that cabinet and of that caucus.  And 

I would have loved to have been there to see what they were 

saying and they were doing then about these important items of 

reform that they've just discovered now.  It shows up the 

complete hypocrisy of the motion that's put forward today. 

 

In a comparison between the size and expense of Devine's 

cabinet and our cabinet, Mr. Speaker, at one point in his first 

term of office, Mr. Devine during 1983 had 25 members of 

cabinet.  From June 1989 to October 1991 he had 20 cabinet 

ministers, still far more than what the member is contemplating 

in his motion today.  I wonder if then they spoke up to their 

caucus and to their cabinet which they were a part of. 

 

During that same period, 11 legislative secretaries were 

assisting cabinet.  Only one Tory MLA, as I mentioned earlier, 

Lorne McLaren from Yorkton, was neither a minister, a 

legislative secretary. And we couldn't figure out at that time 

what poor Lorne had done not to be on the receiving end of all 

of the additional padding of their pockets from the members 

opposite. 

 

They mention the cost of a minister's office.  The average cost 

of a minister's office during Devine's last term was about 

$412,000.  This includes as I said, minister's salary, a car, 

salaries for staff members.  Ministers at that time were allowed 

about 7.7 staff positions per office.  The premier's personal 

office 

costs were a part of this average. 

 

But it's also a telling tale, when you look at the former 

premier's office staff and costs, because the costs for one year 

of operation in Devine's office was $828,000.  Where were 

these reforms then, Mr. Speaker?  Did they stand up and talk to 

their premier?  I wonder. 

 

Now this also includes 23 hidden employees that were working 

for Mr. Devine . . . I'm sorry, the member from Estevan, whose 

salaries were paid by other departments, to pad that number 

paid by other departments.  And the number again was 

$828,000. 

 

Each legislative secretary was paid an additional $7,000 above 

the normal MLA stipend to do the work of the so-called reform 

that they would put forward.  Let's cut the costs out of that end 

and let's get more people being legislative assistants and we'll 

pay them.  So where is the saving?  I know, let's not do that.  

Let's get the legislative committees up and working and give 

the members opposite an additional per diem, plus some of 

their travel expenses to come and serve on a committee.  

Where's the economy and the better service in that 

recommendation? 

 

And in fact, as chair of the Municipal Law Standing 

Committee, when I took the committee, all-party member 

committee out to the public, it was the members opposite that 

stood up and said, this was just a little make-work project and it 

was adding extra cost to government, and they didn't see the 

valid part of the process.  Where are those members now, when 

they've now had a conversion and want the democratic reform 

that they've outlined in the motion before us? 

 

And they say, we haven't done anything, or we've said 

something when we were in opposition and we haven't been 

following through.  That is far from the truth, Mr. Speaker, and 

the people of Saskatchewan know that.  They know we have a 

plan.  We have done many reforms and we've put many 

reforms forward in this Assembly and within our own caucus.  

And it speaks to the active role, the strong role that my 

colleagues and private members play in the committee structure 

of our caucus, that hears from the public and plays an active 

role in the formation of policy and new legislation that comes 

before this House. 

 

And if they haven't heard about that now, then I'd say they 

haven't been out and talking to the people in Saskatchewan.  

And they hadn't done it in the past; it wouldn't surprise me that 

they haven't done it now. 

 

So we began our term with 11 members of cabinet; that was 

eventually expanded to 18.  There were no legislative 

secretaries.  And when we had a smaller number of cabinet 

members, we knew that there were areas in government that 

needed some extra support and some strong leadership; and not 

allow it to fall to the hands of the bureaucrats in those areas to 

run in the absence of having a minister paying attention to 

those areas. 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

We knew the people were saying that it's difficult to get a 

response from a minister's office because there were so few 

hands on deck, and it was very difficult to get ministers out to 

talk about major reform areas and major initiatives.  We know 

that they feel that with the increasing numbers of members of 

cabinet, that they've had the opportunity to speak on those 

initiatives. 

 

And you look at health care alone.  The job that's required to do 

in the area of health care and moving a system from curative 

care to a preventative mode and a wellness model takes the full 

time of two cabinet ministers -- the minister from Regina 

Hillsdale and the minister from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

In each office now we've gone from 7.7 on average from the 

old Tory offices, to staff members of six, complements of six.  

And the average cost of a minister's office today, including all 

of the above that the members talked about, is 329,000, 

compared to when they were in office and it was $412,000 per 

office.  The cost of the Premier's office today, in one year, is 

$543,000 compared with close to a million dollars of the 

premier during the Tory era. 

 

They know that we are moving to have a more cost-efficient 

and effective government and to look at freeing the costs. 

 

Now in all of those costs, I didn't even begin to talk about, in 

the auditor's report that first year, what the other members 

opposite felt were the necessities of a cabinet minister's office.  

These didn't include the perks that they felt were necessary to 

run a cabinet minister's office, like the free liquor that was 

hauled in to the cabinet ministers' offices; like flying into the 

Big Valley Jamboree with their friends and having a big party 

there at the taxpayers' expense; preferred sitting at the Centre of 

the Arts and tickets delivered to the ministers' offices at the 

taxpayers' expense. 

 

Those were the necessities of the members opposite.  Where 

were they when this was going on?  Now all of a sudden they're 

a new and revitalized Tory caucus on the road to conversion.  

On the road to conversion or reform, on the way to 

annihilation.  And no wonder, Mr. Speaker, in this province 

why the people are saying that the members opposite should 

stand up and ask for forgiveness for the way they acted during 

the past 10 years in this province. 

 

So what's changed with them?  For someone who was a key 

part of those 10 years in this province, what has changed now?  

Well finally, and thank the people of this province, things have 

changed.  And I want to outline for you what a New 

Democratic government has done in the area of planned 

democratic reforms since we've been elected. 

 

We've begun a process that is restoring the public's trust and 

confidence in government in Saskatchewan.  It would be good 

to have the media onside in at least giving out the basic facts of 

what's happening in democratic reform in this session in this 

legislature and in this government -- at least a balanced view of 

what's going on -- and if they want to urge us to do more, fine.  

But at least let the public in this province know what's 

happening in the area of strengthening the democratic process 

and public's trust and confidence in government.  But I just 

don't see it lately in the media in Saskatchewan and I'm still 

hopeful that that might happen one day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are pages of things that we've tried to 

accomplish, since we took over government, to restore the 

public trust and confidence in government.  All of which 

doesn't somehow register in the memory banks of the members 

opposite, so I want to tell them. And I think it's important to tell 

the people in the province, in the absence of the media doing it, 

what we've been doing. 

 

We can go back to . . . and it's only two years -- two years to 

some people seems a long time.  When you're galloping, trying 

to turn around the massive debt and the mess that was left to us, 

when you're trying to fix every aspect of government, and 

trying to restore the faith in management of the Crown sector, 

two years is not a long time in the life of a government around 

here who has been galloping with the number of members we 

have in cabinet, trying to address all of those issues. 

 

But if you remember back to the very early days of 

government, we appointed the Saskatchewan Financial Review 

Commission or the Gass Commission to open the books -- open 

the books and provide an independent audit of the province's 

financial affairs. 

 

Why did we need to open the books?  The public were calling 

for that.  I won't mention right now what the public also wanted 

to see happen that rhymed with  books and should be 

administered to the people who were responsible for the mess 

that we did find in those books.  But, Mr. Speaker, the people 

had a loud voice then when they wanted to know where we 

stood in the province of Saskatchewan; and when they found 

out, were horrified. 

 

Shortly after that, we restored fair and open tendering for 

government contracts.  It wasn't a tendering process that said 

the minister's office would open their top drawer and determine 

which one of their friends today would get the contract.  We 

restored fair and open tendering for the government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We passed legislation to ensure by-elections are held within six 

months of a vacancy -- within six months.  It didn't translate 

into the best of weather this year, I'll tell you, but we held our 

promise and we lived up to our commitment and we allowed 

representation to sit in this House very quickly after the 

by-election, at the beginning of this session rather than leave 

people in this province without the representation they deserve. 

 

We proclaimed the province's first Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act.  The Act established a right of 

access to government records and sets out rules for how 

government handles personal information. 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

We introduced an MLA Conflict of Interests Act to ensure 

political representatives carry out their public responsibilities 

openly and fairly; introduced a conflict of interest 

commissioner to enforce that Act. 

 

We've introduced a code of ethical conduct for MLAs which 

commits them to the highest of ethical standards and guides 

them by a set of fair principles, to ensure honesty and fairness. 

 

Introduced a Crown Corporations Act to ensure proper notice is 

given to the legislature and the public when a Crown is being 

considered or created, unlike the Crown corporation that was 

developed under the previous member, Grant Schmidt from 

Melville, who had his little slush fund from his Crown 

corporation that he would hand out dollars to his friends, and 

the fiasco that that created, outside of accountability of this 

House. 

 

Introduced a new policy to release to the media and the public 

all public polling and market research conducted throughout 

the government every 90 days; reintroduce the ward system in 

Regina and Saskatoon, after the municipal government 

standing committee went out to talk with people and find out 

really what they wanted to see happen in the municipal 

elections later this year; introduced The Constituency 

Boundaries Act, and the members have alluded to that; open 

the doors of the Board of Internal Economy meetings to the 

public and to the media; appointed the Provincial Auditor to be 

the auditor for the Crown Investments Corporation; release the 

Public Accounts on time for the first time in a number of 

years. 

 

Not only that, we've included summary financial statements in 

the Saskatchewan Public Accounts for the first time; released 

annual reports within 90 days of year end.  What a novel idea, 

but the people of Saskatchewan had not seen that for a number 

of years from the members opposite. 

 

We re-established an independent Public Service Commission 

and we could go on just about the horrors that existed within 

that. 

 

Introduced elections of the Speaker of the legislature by secret 

ballot by all members of the legislature rather than by being 

appointed by the Premier.  And no easy task some days, Mr. 

Speaker, to keep us in line in this House.  I know it was very 

difficult for me to sit in an orderly manner and listen to the 

kinds of things that the members opposite could say after we 

know what they did and what they said when they were, not 

only in government in the previous administration, but were a 

key part of cabinet doing the things that they did, and now say 

that somehow they're new and renewed Tory government. 

 

We've adopted the accrual accounting method.  Now for some 

people that doesn't sound like a lot, but it's a major step forward 

in assuring the people of this province that the debts that are 

incurred are going to be shown to the public in the year that 

they incur, and not the whoops episodes after the election 

experiences we've had in the last two elections from the Tory 

members opposite.  This is a cash-based accounting system 

used by the former government that allowed those things to 

occur, and where were they when they could have introduced 

an accrual accounting method? 

 

(1615) 

 

I'm certain that they didn't introduce that before this legislature 

and I'm sure they didn't wax eloquent within their caucus to 

bring forward such sweeping changes, and call the tune of the 

mortgaging of the children in this province because of the debt 

that they've incurred. 

 

We've introduced the tabling of financial statements in the 

legislature for Crown Investments Corporation and its 

subsidiaries, and if the members of the Crown Corporations 

Committee really want to pay attention and get working at the 

Crown Corporations Committee level, they would have known, 

and they are participating in sweeping changes to the Crown 

Corporations Committee that would make the Crowns more 

accountable and open to the discussions that they want to see 

occur in the context of the overall plan of the Crown 

corporations and the performance review of those Crowns, to 

make some sense of some of the rate increases they've been 

talking about. 

 

It's things like SaskEnergy, when you have to pass on a 9.5 per 

cent increase in the utility rates there, but you cushion the 

people from the 40 per cent increase in costs that we've had to 

incur to purchase the gas because they sold off our gas supply 

and gas fields in the first place, and leave us at the mercy of the 

market-place.  And they should be ashamed if they don't go 

forward into the Crown Corporations Committee and help us 

get forward the proposed amendments to bring before this 

session of the legislature. 

 

Well that's what we've been doing as a government.  But I also 

want to go on to say that in the daily life of an MLA and the 

daily operations of our constituency offices, things have 

changed as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was elected, it took a few months but I 

negotiated the same kind of consideration that was given to the 

former member from Wascana Plains, Beattie Martin, to have 

his office space.  And so when I moved into that office, I 

walked in and I thought, well maybe there would be a filing 

cabinet.  I didn't expect to see his files there, but maybe a filing 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker.  Maybe I could use the computer.  I don't 

know what would have been wrong with the equipment that I 

couldn't be able to use that.  Perhaps a desk or a chair.  For, 

after all, those things were paid for by the people and the 

taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I walked into that office I was left with the 

jingle bell hanging over the door.  And I don't think that's all 

the taxpayers paid for to help the cabinet minister in the 

government opposite, help him do his job in the previous Tory 

administration.  I don't 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

think so. 

 

So what have we done?  Well in the life of our constituency 

offices we've eliminated the right of the MLA to remove all of 

the office furniture and equipment after he or she is defeated.  

MLAs are required to file an inventory of office equipment and 

furnishings that will be updated regularly -- accountability to 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan who paid for that 

equipment through their taxpayers' dollars in the first place. 

 

All claims from office and communication allowances must be 

supported by original invoices and give a complete description 

of the product or service that's been obtained.  And I won't tell 

you the nightmare of some of the procedures that happened 

from the members opposite. 

 

Radio and broadcasting expenses must be documented with 

original invoices that indicate when the broadcast occurred, or 

a copy of a document that you're going to circulate to your 

constituency to know what you've bought with your 

communication allowance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some members of the government opposite did set 

up an office.  Then there were others who sort of set up an 

office but the office was their home, and then charged the 

government a substantial amount for rent on that office space in 

their home.  And because they needed some money to set up 

that office space in their home, they also needed some money 

to pay their spouse or their relatives to be assistants in that 

home. 

 

And so what have we done to recognize these things were 

happening?  We've instituted some reforms there as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  MLAs must operate a constituency office to use their 

office and secretary allowances.  The office cannot be in the 

residence of an MLA. 

 

Where were the members opposite?  They could have put 

forward that reform.  I don't remember it in the Hansard 

records as coming out of the members opposite. 

 

No new management companies may be contracted to operate 

constituency offices.  Purchasing or renting of office space or 

staffing by family members . . . I see the members opposite, I'm 

hitting a few sore spots here, hitting a little bit of a twinge of 

conscience.  I haven't seen it often from the members opposite, 

and I guess I still don't see it because they're not willing to 

stand up and ask for forgiveness from the people in this 

province. 

 

But anyway, we've allowed now to have purchasing or renting 

of office space or staffing by family members or companies 

owned and operated by the family as being prohibited.  It 

makes good sense, Mr. Speaker, when you're dealing with the 

trust of the people of this province for the efficient and wise 

use of taxpayers' dollars.  And we've prohibited the hiring or 

contracting with an MLA family member, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It's with all of those things in mind, I think the people of the 

province want to see their politicians walk the talk.  They don't 

want to see them stand up and look at the cheap political 

theatrics that we've seen earlier today.  They want to see 

someone who's committed to putting forward measures of 

democratic reform, to acting responsibly when they're looking 

at appointing cabinet members to carry out the duties of 

government; and that those members should be able to have 

enough time in their day to consult with the people in this 

province, to be able to wisely address the issues because 

they've got the time to do that and they've got the wherewithal 

to carry forward in the very necessary reforms that are before 

this government at this time. 

 

They want to see a more active role for private members, and 

we've introduced those through private members' statements; 

we introduced that through a more active private members' day, 

and I'm participating in one at this moment and members 

opposite have the opportunity to participate in both of those. 

 

They want to be able to approach the members of the caucus 

committees and to know that when they're speaking to those 

caucus committees, private members are involved in their 

issues and will take those issues to the ministers and will be 

responsible to carry their voice forward when considering new 

policy development and formation of policies that will come 

before this House. 

 

It's the best system of a democratized caucus across this 

country bar none, Mr. Speaker.  And it's the people of the 

province that know about this system, if it's not the members 

opposite who have taken the time to find out what their caucus 

could have done to improve the role of the private member and 

they failed to do.  But then of course there weren't many private 

members, were there? 

 

They were cabinet ministers, they were legislative secretaries, 

raking in additional stipends from the province's taxpayers so 

that they could pad their own pockets, and stand up today and 

say that they're now new and reformed and want to put these 

important initiatives before this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's no doubt the reason why they've put the 

motion forward is to get a little bit of cheap political hit and 

some small-time theatrics.  And it's every reason why I'm 

moving the amendment to the resolution no. 66 before us, 

seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

 

 Remove all the words after "Assembly" and replace them 

with: 

 

 recognize the Premier's and the government's efforts to 

maintain a cabinet of reasonable and efficient size, currently 

at 18, unlike the previous administration cabinet which had 

up to 25 members; and further that this Assembly 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

recognize the cabinet size is only one element in an overall 

effort to streamline the operations of government. 

 

I'm proud to be able to stand in support of the amendment that 

I've placed before you today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to support 

the amendment from the member from Regina Wascana Plains 

for the reason that I realize what people in my constituency and 

other constituencies want. 

 

People do not want silly rules.  What people want is good 

government.  They want good, accountable government.  They 

want government to take care of their money; spend what you 

take in, not a billion dollars more a year than you take in.  

People want more input into government and people want less 

partisan politics when it comes to serious problems, and they 

want less wrangling between people and they want people to 

cooperate, people that are in government, and to work together. 

 

This is why I am against the member from Thunder Creek, 

against his motion, because I don't think arbitrary and silly 

rules as to how many members are in cabinet are the important 

. . . or the things that we should be discussing. 

 

What we should be doing when we are in power is giving good 

government.  I'll give you an example of what I mean.  To run 

the previous administration for one year, the Executive 

Council, it took a total of $10.377 million.  Over $10 million. 

 

We have cut those expenses to just over $6 million to run the 

Executive Council.  Those are the kind of things that people 

want.  People know that it costs to run government.  What they 

look at is what is a percentage of what it costs to run 

government.  If it's a reasonable expense, people will pay that 

expense. 

 

I mean there are democratic reforms and there are democratic 

reforms.  We have to be honest.  People out in the country tell 

me, look, you just take that government and run it the way I 

would run my business or I would run my farm.  And I agree 

with them. 

 

When I make decisions in caucus as a caucus member, I take 

care of their money in the same way . . . I take care of their 

money the same way as I would take care of mine.  And that's 

what people want us to do. 

 

Let's just review some of the facts that the member from 

Regina Wascana Plains gave us.  Okay.  Like I said, people 

don't mind if you have some expense to run government.  What 

they do mind, if you set the record in the Commonwealth for 

the size of government -- that they do mind. 

 

At one point in 1983 we had 25 members of the 

cabinet; 25 members, 11 legislative secretaries, as she has said. 

And only poor old Lorne McLaren who was chair of caucus.  

You know people didn't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that 

was 1983; I don't have my dates mixed up.  So anyway, 

accumulatively this was a big cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That they did mind.  Like I said, they set the 

record in the Commonwealth. 

 

I think what a person should do when they are in government, 

what people should do is reasonably sit down and say, if we 

expect the people of the province to behave in an accountable 

way, we should behave in an accountable way. 

 

What I mean is, the people . . . our caucus has set up a system 

second to none.  We have done that in our own caucus.  How 

can we expect other people to reform if we don't reform our 

own caucus.  We have set up a caucus committee; all the Bills 

are passed through the caucus committee, through cabinet, and 

then through caucus.  And they are voted on democratically.  If 

they do not pass caucus, they do not pass, no matter what the 

Executive Council says. 

 

(1630) 

 

This is the most democratic NDP government -- I can't speak 

for Liberals or Conservatives -- but this is internally the most 

democratic government that the NDP or CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) has ever had.  We have 

consciously shifted from the Executive Council having all the 

control to back-benchers like myself having say and control.  

And I can tell you that people in my constituency believe me, 

because I can look them in the eye and say, I have some 

influence in that huge caucus, and they believe that. 

 

So I would say to the members opposite, make some changes in 

your own caucus; make sure that you conduct your own affairs 

democratically before you come into the House and try and 

impose rules on us; run your own place, run your own caucus 

democratically. 

 

Now what has the Romanow government done?   I should say 

. . . pardon me, I shouldn't use the Premier's name.  What has 

the member of Riversdale done to restore public trust and 

confidence in this government? 

 

Okay, here's one thing.  We appointed the Gass Commission, 

the Gass Commission which led to a lot of reforms.  We have 

to date taken many of their considerations and put them into 

action.  For instance, we passed legislation to ensure that 

by-elections are held within six months of a vacancy. 

 

You know, I don't know, you guys, why the members opposite 

are chirping like this.  I mean, I would never have believed that 

I would have attracted so much attention in this legislature, for 

heaven's sake.  I can't believe this . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes, yes.  Well I think, you know, they're trying to get me 

off my line of thought.  They don't realize that in my family 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

everybody talked at once.  So it is very hard to get me off the 

line of my thought when I'm determined. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Okay, what have we done?  By-elections -- to 

ensure by-elections are held within six months of a vacancy.  

Now this may have seemed . . . might be seen by some people 

as not that important, but I can tell you when it was minus 35 

below and I was on the doorstep in the North West by-election, 

it seemed very important to me that democracy was upheld in 

this province. 

 

Okay, introduced a new policy to release to the media and the 

public all public opinion polling and market research conducted 

within 90 days.  This is very important.  I think the former 

government did all of their governing on polls.  I mean now if 

we do take a poll, the people know about it and they know the 

results of the poll and they know how much it cost.  Just think 

of that.  I would have loved to have seen the polling results of 

the former government and the polls they took and how much 

those polls cost. 

 

We've put ourselves right on the line.  I mean people know we 

do poll, but they can see the costs of the poll and they have it 

right there.  I mean, that's honesty.  What more do you want? 

 

Okay, we introduced The Constituency Boundaries Act to 

reduce the number of MLAs from 66 to 58; an independent 

commission to establish the boundaries. 

 

Here's another important one.  I'm not going to go through all 

of them, but some that I think that are important, I've checked 

off: appointed the Provincial Auditor to be the auditor of the 

Crown Investments Corporation.  Isn't that wonderful?  

Wouldn't we have loved to have seen that in 1987 or 1988?  

Here's another one: release the Public Accounts on time.  Isn't 

that a revolution? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's a novel idea. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Isn't that a novel idea, as my colleague from 

Nipawin says.  Now at least the Public Accounts can function 

with some efficiency.  Included summary financial statements 

in Saskatchewan's Public Accounts; introduced mid-year 

reporting of the province's financial situation.  I think this is 

very important even to me as a private member, to have the 

Minister of Finance make a mid-year financial statement.  That 

helps me to know exactly where we are going as a government 

too and helps private members make decisions.  This is a very 

important thing to do as far as financial accountability is. 

 

I don't really think that . . . these are small points and people 

don't realize how important they are for us to do our jobs 

properly. 

 

Here's another one: introducing the tabling of financial 

statements in the legislature for the Crown Investments 

Corporation and its subsidiaries.  A very important thing, 

because this is ultimately where the 

decisions are made and where the vote is taken and where the 

debate takes place. 

 

I think maybe I agree with the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains, that maybe some of our media should realize how our 

rules are made and how they come into being.  I was surprised 

to read Murray Mandryk and he didn't realize that we had 

already seen the auditor's report before it's tabled.  I think if 

he'd . . . he's been around here long enough; he should know 

things like that. 

 

I mean it would be helpful in this democratic reform, in the 

new way that people are thinking, it would be helpful if the 

media and the opposition and the government could work 

together to give the best kind of representation to people in this 

province. 

 

In our term, new rules were adopted to streamline government, 

to make it more accountable.  I agree with the previous speaker.  

When I was elected, there wasn't a single stitch of furniture -- 

nothing -- in my office.  I received over 2,000 petitions saying 

that people wanted MLAs to be able to keep their furniture and 

office equipment.  I wrote back in a column and said look, 

folks, I agree with you.  I wish that the first three months that I 

had had something to work with.  But I had to take second hand 

furniture from my own home and start my office that way. 

 

If I am defeated next time, there will be a full, equipped office 

left for the MLA succeeding me. And that is the way it should 

be.  And if I am re-elected, I won't have to spend more money 

for furniture except when you have to replace things like fax 

machines and telephones. 

 

So that is a very important thing to have changed and to have 

inventory to see what is in the office. 

 

Another important thing I think -- and I had done this from the 

beginning -- is most of my claims, instead of reimbursement, 

they were paid directly by the original invoice.  And I followed 

that personally, I would say -- my assistant has figured it out -- 

about 96 per cent of my invoices were paid for the original one, 

and I agree with this.  I think it is better.  There are some cases 

where you have to have reimbursement, but it's better to pay 

directly to the invoices.  And I support that. 

 

Radio and broadcasting expenses must be documented with 

original invoices that indicate when the broadcast occurred.  

That's another change.  MLAs must operate a constituency 

office to use their office and secretarial allowances.  The office 

cannot be in the residence of an MLA. 

 

And again, I think it's incumbent today to be accessible to our 

taxpayers.  And we are given these allowances and, I think 

again, I don't think they find the cost of running the offices that 

unreasonable if they can contact you and have some input into 

the decisions that you make and so on. 

 

So I've think we've started to make our government a  



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

good, accountable government.  That was the number one thing 

that taxpayers say to me.  They want us to run the government 

well and they want us to be accountable.  And I think we've 

started down the road.  There are more improvements that we 

can make. 

 

And again, the second point: people want government to take 

care of their money as they would take care of their own 

money.  And I think we've started on that.  Certainly the 

decisions that my colleagues and I make, this is the way we 

make them. 

 

The other thing is they want more input into government.  We 

can improve.  We are just beginning to learn how to get 

opinions and consensus from people, and sometimes we omit 

people that we should include in the process. 

 

Sure, we've made mistakes.  You're only human.  But we're 

learning how to do this.  This is a new way of doing it.  I had 

never, never -- and I was politically involved all my life -- ever 

been asked by any MLA to come to a meeting where I would 

have input on a draft Bill; never, ever in my life.  And like I 

said, I was a very political person.  This is just something new 

that we are beginning to do and we should . . . and we will 

improve on the processes and the less partisan politics. 

 

Look, I'm not naive.  We're all politicians at the end of the day.  

But the thing is that some of the serious problems that confront 

Saskatchewan and Canada can be resolved if at times we work 

together for the good of the people that we represent, whether 

we are NDP, Conservative. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why not all the time? 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- All the time . . . one of my colleagues from the 

opposition said, what about all of the time?  Of course all of the 

time we can, but there are times when we are not, like in this 

debate, we are not going to agree on how we come to the same 

place because philosophically we come from different ends. 

 

But that doesn't mean when we're discussing an infrastructure 

program with the federal government and municipal 

government and the provincial government, we cannot be 

sensible and we cannot cooperate.  That's what I mean. 

 

What I meant was that philosophically there are going to be 

times we are going to disagree.  But when it comes to a 

problem or a solution, we should be working together more.  

And people are telling me that all the time -- and I agree with it, 

by the way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those are a few of my comments that I wanted 

to add to the debate.  And I will support the amendment. 

 

 Remove all words after "Assembly" and replace with: 

 

 recognize the Premier's and the government's efforts to 

maintain a cabinet of reasonable and 

efficient size, currently at 18, unlike the previous 

administration cabinet which had up to 25 members; and 

further, that this Assembly recognize that cabinet size is only 

one element in an overall effort to streamline the operations 

of government. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been 

sitting here and listened very attentively to the speakers.  I find 

it very interesting -- some of the comments being made and the 

suggestions that were made.  And I think the two members, the 

member from Regina Wascana Plains and the member from 

Cut Knife-Lloyd had some positive comments to make, 

although it's interesting to find them as well just continuing to 

defend the government position. 

 

And they talk about reform on one hand, and yet on the other 

hand they would suggest that any reform that may even come 

from an opposition caucus is not the appropriate type of reform.  

Even the piece of legislation or the motion brought before us 

this afternoon by my colleague, the member from Thunder 

Creek regarding establishing the size of cabinet and making it 

proportionate to the number of MLAs in this House.  It would 

seem to me that that is a fair motion and it's a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Is the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster still debating or has she sat down?  I do 

believe I recognized the member from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

what we find, across the land there's certainly if not a breeze 

but a wind blowing for change across our land and in the whole 

political spectrum.  I'm not sure it's blowing as strenuously as 

the breeze that was blowing outside yesterday, where you had 

to really hold your hat on if you were going to keep it on your 

head, but there is a change being demanded by the public. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, when you look at this Assembly 

and you look at the number of ideas that have been raised, the 

number of questions that have been raised, suggestions that 

have come forward, and as my colleagues have indicated, we 

have eight private members' Bills that are before this 

Assembly, I think that is a reflection of what the public in 

general are asking for.  Certainly any time I've talked to people 

on coffee row or even last night at the meeting at Davidson 

regarding . . . with individuals, the fuel tank owners and the 

service station operators who are affected by the environmental 

legislation, I find that people are looking for change. 

 

Now they're not necessarily demanding all the change that 

maybe we're bringing.  But I think they're asking for bits of 

change and little pieces of change, one at a time.  And so I 

think it would be appropriate if this Assembly would indeed 

give some additional 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

leadership and show that the Assembly is able and willing to 

work and look at private members' Bills, even private members' 

Bills brought forward by opposition members that would 

benefit each and every one of us as sitting MLAs.  That would 

give us not only a greater ability to represent our constituents, 

but as well, Mr. Speaker, open up the doors for real reform of 

our parliamentary procedure and the parliamentary forum in 

this Assembly. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, as I was listening to the 

members as well, and they talked about . . . and of course the 

cajoling about the Conservative caucus at this time, how come 

all of a sudden they've reformed.  And I want to just make 

mention to a number of the members here that because we 

didn't necessarily talk about our actions all that openly prior to 

1991 doesn't mean that there wasn't a lot of change, and that 

individual members had looked at ways in which they could 

deal with the constituents and ways in which they could be a lot 

more open with the constituency. 

 

(1645) 

 

And both of the members from . . . the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains and the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

talked about the office allowance and talked about equipment.  

And I'd just like to bring to their attention that even prior to, 

considerable time prior to the 1991 election, I ran a personal 

column in my local paper indicating that I perceived my office 

equipment as being something that the taxpayers had 

purchased, and that it was all laid out there and it was there for 

the taxpayers at the end of my term.  And that was long, long 

before we'd even got into the real mode of changing some of 

the rules. 

 

I think it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at what 

took place in the past.  But I don't think we want to dwell on 

the past.  I think it's time we started looking to the future.  And 

it's obvious members don't want to listen to what some of the 

things that took place in the past, some of the initiatives taken 

by individual MLAs or even governments in the past that were 

productive and open. 

 

Let me bring to the members' attention -- and of course I look 

around the Assembly and I don't see too many people presently 

here who were here in the last Legislative Assembly -- when 

the opposition of the day said it time and time again that they 

would make this place and this province ungovernable.  And 

most of the members sitting here on the government side of the 

House were not here when they . . . were not here or were not 

part of that opposition, so we'll maybe give them the benefit of 

the doubt.  But time and time again we were faced with an 

opposition that was not constructive, but obstructive, and the 

most obstructive opposition that I've ever seen. 

 

The member from Regina Wascana Plains talks about Crown 

Corporations Committee and how Crown Corporations 

Committee operates.  Maybe the members should go back to 

Hansard and from the Crowns, and just look and see and 

follow the format that their former members took when they 

went to 

Crown Corporations, or even in this Assembly.  Is it little 

wonder that it was difficult to get any format or proper business 

done, to bring in any initiatives? 

 

Maybe what the government of the day should have done, Mr. 

Speaker, is what this government did -- change the rules 

unilaterally.  There was a lot of discussion at the time about 

changes and about how the House would operate, but there was 

never a consensus reached amongst the parties.  The opposition 

wasn't in favour. 

 

I can remember standing in this House when for day . . . time 

after time and minute after minute in the House, one member 

after the other would go down one row and up the other row 

with one petition in hand.  They'd read the whole petition -- 

pretty well everybody's name from Mickey Mouse -- to the 

Assembly, present it to the House . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- To Donald Duck. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- To Donald Duck -- and that filled in one day after 

the other.  In fact I'm not exactly sure how many days we spent 

in that mode. 

 

Was that proper?  Was that right?  Now the rules have been 

changed.  And I don't dispute the fact that the rules needed to 

be changed, but basically the government of the day, the 

opposition -- the government presently sitting today that was 

the opposition of the day -- now has found it better to change 

the rules so that a new opposition will not have the same 

opportunities. 

 

Now I don't think, dealing with my colleagues around here, that 

you would have faced that type of format.  But I think, Mr. 

Speaker, we all know that there's time for change.  We face 

change in our lives on a daily basis; we all anticipate and face 

and realize that change is going to come about. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the motion brought forward by my 

colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, is a very 

appropriate motion, and I don't see anything wrong with 

limiting the number of cabinet members.  I think, Mr. Speaker, 

when we look at the number of cabinet ministers we presently 

have in this Assembly or in this House at the present time, Mr. 

Speaker, if you were to say that even 56 or 58 members, as we 

will have in the next provincial election, at 25 per cent you'd be 

looking at about 15 cabinet ministers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if a cabinet minister finds that the 

positions and the responsibility that is laid on his or her 

shoulders is a little too great, would there be anything wrong 

with the Premier of the province, rather than appointing another 

cabinet minister or making an associate minister, would it be 

wrong with the Premier appointing someone to a legislative 

position, Legislative Secretary position, to work along with that 

minister? 

 

It would seem to me that, Mr. Speaker, you would be able to 

appoint, for the price of one cabinet minister, I believe you 

would probably be able to appoint five 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1994 

legislative secretaries.  So even if you reduce the cabinet to that 

number even from the present, you could still have a savings in 

cabinet by having someone to work along with the cabinet 

minister.  And that would provide a means as well for other 

MLAs to get a better understanding of how government 

operates.  And who knows?  It might even be a format to 

groom individuals to fit cabinet positions. 

 

Now maybe a person in cabinet may find that just a little 

threatening to have someone in their office as a Legislative 

Secretary working along with them, thinking that maybe in a 

year's time they are going to be moved up into the position of 

cabinet and the cabinet minister is going to be pushed to the 

back of the Assembly. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, there are lots of alternatives for 

change.  And I think it would be very unfortunate if this 

Assembly, when it adjourns later this summer, would find that 

it has failed to take the opportunity of bringing some real 

reform. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we as MLAs certainly have an 

opportunity.  As I've indicated, there's a wind blowing across 

the land.  We've seen what's happened on the federal scene as 

new parties have emerged.  And we've all seen what the public 

has done and jumped on the bandwagon and accepted some of 

the reforms that the Reform Party has brought forward. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that those reforms are genuine, that 

people want to see their legislative bodies change.  They want 

to see the Legislative Assembly change.  They want to see the 

way government operates change.  Is there anything wrong in 

allowing members the opportunity to stand up and speak freely 

and represent their constituents?  That's something that I've 

argued for a number of years. 

 

We can argue, as the Minister of Economic Development did, I 

believe, about a week or 10 days ago argue the fact that every 

member has the opportunity to represent their constituents.  But 

where did he mention?  Did he say they had that opportunity in 

the House?  No, he said they have the freedom to speak out in 

caucus. 

 

And we all know, Mr. Speaker, that caucus meetings are not 

open meetings, as we have in the Assembly here.  They are 

behind closed doors.  And at the end of the day, when the 

discussion is complete and the member leaves caucus office, 

the member usually falls in line with what the general 

consensus was, reached in caucus. 

 

And I don't think that's wrong, Mr. Speaker, because consensus 

in caucus is an indication that even though the member, and 

even though his constituents wouldn't agree with consensus, 

had the opportunity to speak out, the government still has, and 

the government members or the caucus itself, whether it's 

government or opposition, still come to the House having 

reached a consensus, and this is the policy they're going to 

follow. 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part though is the fact that 

to an individual representing his constituency . . . an issue that, 

as I've indicated time and time again, on one side of the 

province may not mean a lot.  We've just gone through a fair bit 

of debate in my area regarding time.  And certainly people in 

the Moosomin area and the Esterhazy area, along that eastern 

side of the province, have been arguing for a number of years 

that maybe it's time that we moved to daylight saving time. 

 

But if you go to the western side of the province, as we've sat 

in our caucus, certainly, as I was trying to represent my 

constituents, and you can appreciate there's quite a diversity of 

opinions in my constituency being on the time issue, but when 

we discussed it in caucus, my colleagues on the west side of the 

province weren't all that interested in daylight saving time.  

They felt that the time we were on right now, mountain 

standard time, or central standard time certainly fit in well with 

their schedule. 

 

So you can see the differences, even in this Assembly.  Is there 

anything wrong?  So while I'm arguing in caucus, did my 

constituents know that I was arguing on their behalf, raising 

these issues?  Whereas if I would have had the ability . . . and I 

believe we all took that ability on this side of the House to 

stand up on a number of issues and say these are the concerns 

my constituents are raising.  And we will continue to raise 

them.  But at the end of the day, we realize that democracy will 

prevail, that the number of members who are speaking and the 

ideas that have been brought forward, we will . . . the decisions 

that are made will be based on the vote that is taken and how 

the vote has come down. 

 

So to allow members to have the freedom to speak in this 

Assembly will not destroy a government.  It just gives that 

member the ability to speak out a little more openly about the 

concerns that their constituents are raising. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the motion that is before 

this Assembly, I don't think there is anything wrong with us 

taking a look at, if we're going to downsize the number of 

MLAs in this Assembly, and certainly the government has 

made a lot of arguments as to why we should downsize.  My 

colleagues have raised the fact that we suggested a proposal 

that would have allowed for four provincial MLAs for every 

federal seat; that would have even downsized this House by 

even two more members, down to 56.  I think that was a good 

and positive alternative and solution. 

 

And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it would 

identify constituencies with the federal boundaries and so 

you're dealing with one minister, rather than the overlap as we 

see takes place in our province on a daily basis where we have 

municipal governments dealing with two or three health boards, 

or two or three boards of education, or health districts, or home 

care districts -- all these issues that overlap.  And I think it's 

time we looked at ways in which we 



April 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

can combine our boundaries and establish boundaries whereby 

members are able to speak with one person rather than 10 other 

interested groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it would be nice if . . . and I think it would be fair, and I 

think government members would be honest if they would sit 

back and look at some of the Bills that have been brought 

forward by the opposition caucus.  And I understand that we 

are going to probably have a Bill or two even brought in by 

government members on some of the legislation that they 

brought forward such as The Trade Union Act.  I think it's only 

fair that we give the time of day and allow for full and open 

debate on a number of these issues, rather than having them die 

on the order paper. 

 

And the debate that is taking place in this Assembly today 

regarding the limitation of cabinet ministers is a good and 

healthy debate.  It gives members from all parties the ability to 

stand up and give the reasons as to why they believe one form 

of . . . is appropriate enough, whether they believe in open 

cabinet . . . number of cabinets members is appropriate, or a 

restricted number of cabinet ministers. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, I'm getting the feeling that some of 

the members may be thinking I'm getting a little long-winded.  

But I don't know why they would even think that way.  But I 

think it's appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we do take the time to 

address these issues carefully. 

 

I trust that a number of the members in this Assembly, 

government members in fact, also have been listening, and that 

they will give us the opportunity to debate some of the private 

members' motions and pieces of legislation as well as the 

legislation that the government is bringing forward as well. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, even though there is much more 

that I could add to this debate, I would adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


