




















































Hansard: April 26, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1837 

 April 26, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on day 60 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 To the minister responsible for the liquor and gaming 

commission regarding the International Gaming Business 

Exposition: (1) what was the purpose of the trip; (2) how 

many delegates from the province of Saskatchewan attended 

the International Gaming Business Exposition; (3) how many 

delegates from the Saskatchewan Gaming Authority attended 

the exposition; (4) how many individuals had their total or 

partial cost of the trip covered by the province, and would 

you please provide a breakdown; (5) what was the total cost 

of the trip, including air fare, registration fees, meals, 

accommodation, etc.; (6) please provide a brief outline what 

information was gained through the attending of this 

convention. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the House I would like to introduce a couple 

from Aberdeen, Doug and Cathy Button and their young son, 

Cory, up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're here today to 

observe the proceedings of the House and I'd like to ask 

everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you to the 

other members of the Assembly, a group of 23 grade 5 and 6 

students from Rosemont School -- a good crew up there.  

They're sitting up in your gallery along with their teacher Joe 

Milligan, and Gord Stickle who is the chaperon.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like you to welcome, along with the other 

members, welcome these fine students here to watch the 

proceedings today. 

 

We'll be having a photo opportunity at 2:20 in room 218.  Let's 

all welcome them. 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to introduce to all members through you, 

sir, two good friends of mine, Clair and Edna Lethbridge.  Clair 

Lethbridge is a retired United Church minister.  The 

Lethbridges have served in pastoral charges across Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, notably in Zion United Church in Moose Jaw 

and Whitmore Park United Church here in Regina. 

 

It's a real pleasure to have them in the gallery.  Mr. Speaker, 

they are seated in your second pew and I would ask all 

members to welcome them this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Tribute to Saskatchewan Police Officers 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure we all are 

accepting of the fact that high technology is upon us and that 

resist or not, Detroit television is now part of the daily life in 

many Saskatchewan homes.  But I think we should remind 

ourselves from time to time that the Detroit Lions are not our 

football team, the University of Michigan is not our Alma 

Mater and the Detroit crime rate is not ours. 

 

The Saskatchewan Police Commission's annual report was 

recently released, and as an article in the Star-Phoenix 

suggested, there are some interesting statistics.  For instance in 

1993 the 1,000 police officers of Saskatchewan discharged 

their firearms exactly 13 times in the line of duty. 

 

I don't know about other members, but I find that statistic 

highly comforting and reassuring during these times of public 

alarm and media hysteria about the rising tide of violence.  

Further, none of these 13 incidents resulted in injury to any 

person.  Unfortunately, two skunks, one rogue steer, and two 

injured deer were not so lucky. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not claim that our Saskatchewan society is 

free of problems. I realize that we're susceptible to the lure of 

violence found in other areas of North America.  I appreciate 

the public's concern for its safety from violent criminal acts, 

but I also believe we have much to be thankful for, and one of 

those things is the comparative safety of our streets and homes. 

 

Furthermore, as a former police commissioner myself, I 

recognize that to some extent the ability of our police officers 

to enforce the law without resorting to violence greatly reduces 

the incidence of violence in society.  For this I congratulate the 

peace officers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Election in South Africa 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today 

marks the first day of voting in South Africa, a truly historic 

event.  There are 19 parties on the national ballot.  The ballot is 

2 feet in length and is written in 11 different languages. 

 

Even more incredible, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 85 per cent 

of the electorate in that country will be voting for the first time. 

I understand that in Saskatchewan we have 800 individuals 

who will be exercising their right to vote in this election. 

 

It is my sincere hope that the elections are carried out without 

further violence or bloodshed.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is 

unfortunate that this momentous day has been marred by acts 

of violence against innocent people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, democracy is a freedom which all people have the 

right to exercise, a freedom which we in Canada take for 

granted.  Until today, democracy in South Africa was but a 

dream.  It is our hope and prayer that the people of South 

Africa are able to overcome the prejudice and interracial strife 

in order that the election procedures may be carried out 

peacefully without further incident, and that they will be able to 

develop and build a prosperous and peaceful South Africa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too wish to comment 

on the historic event that is taking place in South Africa today, 

tomorrow, and Thursday.  Mr. Speaker, in 1948, the South 

African writer, Alan Paton, writing in Cry the Beloved 

Country, commented on the racial conflict that even then was 

tormenting his country.  He said: 

 

 I have one great fear in my heart, that one day when the white 

people are turned to loving, they will find that the black 

people are turned to hating. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today the whole world is watching South 

Africa, sharing Paton's fear and hoping with him that he is 

mistaken.  For the first time in its troubled history, South 

Africa is holding an all-people election.  Finally, the nearly 35 

million black, ethnic Indian, and mixed coloured people will 

join the mere 5 million whites at the polls.  The odious rot of 

apartheid will finally be cleansed. 

 

I am proud, Mr. Speaker, of the role that sanctions have played 

in bringing to an end the role of apartheid, and I am proud of 

the role that many people in Saskatchewan have played in 

insisting on those sanctions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people of goodwill all around the world send their 

hopes and best wishes to the people of South Africa and to their 

political leaders, Nelson Mandela, F.W. de Klerk, and 

Mangosuthu Buthelezi. 

 

This is perhaps the world's best chance for the 

peaceful transition to democracy from totalitarianism, a 

transition that history tells us . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time is up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

National Broomball Championships 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Returning to closer to 

home, the national junior girls and boys broomball 

championships were recently held in Regina for youth 18 years 

of age and under.  The girls' team from Quebec won the gold 

medal while the Manitoba boys' team took home top honours. 

 

I'm very proud to report that both the girls' and boys' teams 

from Saskatchewan won silver medals.  I am even more proud 

to report that both Saskatchewan teams are from Odessa in my 

constituency.  To the players, coaches, families, and the 

community of Odessa, I would like to offer our sincere 

congratulations to both teams for a job well done.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Saskatchewan Publication 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, today I would like to inform the 

Assembly about a new publication for Tourism Saskatchewan 

called Get-Aways 1994.  This booklet is an easy, hassle-free 

way of getting information and planning a vacation in our fair 

province.  As we all know, Saskatchewan offers diverse 

opportunities for tourism.  There are hundreds of events, 

activities, and attractions each year within the borders.  The 

Get-Aways booklet, featuring six broad categories -- events, 

arts, culture, heritage, history, golfing -- is one of the easy ways 

of using it. 

 

The booklet offers over 50 adventure-filled vacation packages, 

one of which is in the Turtleford constituency in the 

community of Spiritwood, and the Carlton Inn is the place to 

phone.  The government supports the Get-Aways 1994 booklet 

because it helps showcase this great province and will bring 

many interesting tourists to the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Prayers from the Associated Gospel Church 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I've received a letter from 

Pastor Rick Garrison of Cornerstone Associated Gospel Church 

in Mossbank.  He greets me on behalf of the church 

congregation and says in the body of his letter, I quote: 

 

 The purpose of this letter is to encourage you that we as a 

congregation are praying for you and your government.  

Please be assured of our prayer support as you face so many 

varied and difficult issues. 

 

The order of service he encloses includes a list of 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

prayer requests.  One of these requests, and again I quote, is: 

 

 for Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, Premier Roy Romanow, 

MP Allan Kerpan, MLA Lewis Draper, and all in government 

positions in our country. 

 

I wish to take this opportunity to pass these greetings on to the 

main persons.  And I'm sure that although he doesn't mention 

them specifically, he includes you, Mr. Speaker, sir, your staff, 

the Clerks and members of all three caucuses in this Assembly, 

and I would like to convey our thanks back to Pastor Garrison 

and his congregation for their good wishes. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Western Canada Midget Hockey Championships 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take a moment as well to 

acknowledge a special feat.  The Weyburn Red Wings last 

night won the western Canada midget championship, and on 

that team are three individuals from my constituency -- Robert 

Bratton, Michael Currie, Kris Porter.  I want to commend the 

Red Wings for the job they've done to date; wish them well in 

the upcoming Centennial Cup playdowns in Alberta next week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday over a hundred small-business people met in 

Davidson to discuss how they might be able to get the 

provincial government to listen to the very real concerns they 

have over the Trade Union and Labour Standards Act.  They 

are being forced, Mr. Speaker, into considering tactics that are 

unheard of for these hard-working people.  For instance they 

are now talking about taking a time from their business to 

organize rallies against these two pieces of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. 

Minister, you have received hundreds of letters and phone calls 

that tell you there will be significant damage to small business 

around this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, the first step to solving a problem is admitting 

that you have one.  Let's take that first step, shall we?  Will you 

admit that there are significant problems with your labour Bills.  

Would you do that, Mr. Minister -- admit it today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm sure there will be a great deal of comfort, 

Mr. Speaker, in that answer to the business people who met last 

night in Davidson, Saskatchewan, to bring forward their 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Minister, it would be more useful if you told us, and you 

have told us in this Assembly, that there is nothing wrong with 

what your Bills are proposing for the business community.  Mr. 

Minister, would you answer these people with more than a 

simple no to the real concerns that they are bringing forward? 

 

We have received already, Mr. Minister, a number of faxes 

from the program that they are beginning today, sir, that say, 

and I would quote to you: 

 

 The proposed changes have a profound effect on our ability 

to compete in an open market, especially on taxpayer-funded 

projects. 

 

And another one says, and I quote: 

 

 We had a good year and we were looking at expanding.  We 

will now be taking a serious look at our plans and possibly 

moving to Alberta. 

 

Mr. Minister, small business is talking.  Will you listen, will 

you act, before job creation and business investment go 

elsewhere.  Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to answer the 

question on behalf of the government.  And I want to say that 

the Minister of Labour, in his one-word answer to the previous 

question of the Leader of the Opposition, said so because the 

fundamental assumption behind the Leader of the Opposition's 

question is major economic damages behind this Bill.  It is the 

typical Chicken Little, sky-is-falling, approach which both the 

Conservatives and the Liberals, now in the legislature and 

historically in the legislature, have always argued whenever it 

comes to any kind of legislation to help working men and 

women. 

 

Now we've indicated right from day one in our economic 

strategy, including the Partnership for Renewal paper printed 

some months ago, that we would be rejuvenating the labour 

market policy and that we'd be reviewing and updating labour 

legislation, including amongst other things, The Trade Union 

Act.  We are doing that.  We've introduced the amendments. 

 

We've also said at the same time, and I repeat again, that we are 

open to suggestions for improvements to the Bills, whether 

they come from small business or from the trade union sector 

or from the community at large.  Those discussions are 

ongoing.  It's a proper and fair way of consultation and that is 

the way we hope to proceed in order to help the working 

families and the working people improve the climate for labour 

and for business, and to do it in accordance with our 

partnership paper. 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, they 

are saying your Partnership for Renewal isn't worth the paper 

it's printed on.  It is simply another broken promise.  And I am 

sure there will be a great deal of comfort to those people, Mr. 

Premier, that you referred to them as Chicken Little.  They 

have proposed change after change to you and your Labour 

minister over the last month.  Your Labour minister simply 

says no; you compare them to Chicken Little. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, their concerns are real.  These are 

the people that create the jobs.  These are the people that take 

the folks off welfare, that make up the job deficit in this 

province.  Mr. Premier, can you do more than refer to them as 

Chicken Little?  Would you promise this Legislative Assembly 

that you will indeed listen to their concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said in the answer 

to the previous question, and I repeat again: the Chicken Littles 

in this situation are the 13 or so that are seated over there in the 

official opposition. 

 

It is you people -- you, the Leader of the Conservative Party; 

you, the Leader of the Liberal Party -- every time in the history 

of the province of Saskatchewan get up and you say, whenever 

any labour legislation's recommended or suggested: Chicken 

Little, Chicken Little, the sky is falling, the sky is falling.  We 

don't listen to you. 

 

The second point that I want to make is that we are going to 

listen to the business community.  We are going to listen to the 

business community; we have listened to the business 

community.  They know about the objectives that have been set 

up; they know the consultations that took place with respect to 

The Labour Standards Act and the amendments which we have 

proposed as a result of those consultations.  With those we will 

do as we will with the trade union movement. 

 

But please, the main objective here is to improve the position 

of working men and women, to improve the climate for 

economic development, and to do it without the kind of 

confrontationist fearmongering and totally unrealistic 

statements that you make, sir, and the Leader of the Liberal 

Party makes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, the law firm of Brent & Greenhorn 

informs us that they have a client who is unable to secure 

employment as a result of injuries sustained in a series of 

accidents, none of which were her fault.  Despite several 

requests for an advance, no reply of any kind has ever been 

received -- not a single reply. 

 

Mr. Minister, this isn't over the course of a couple of months, 

but rather the course of several years.  The point here is that 

your no-fault proposal will put even more pressure and 

responsibility on SGI adjusters, who are already overworked, 

and takes away the injured person's right of redress in the 

courts.  And that doesn't help anyone. 

 

Audrey Brent, a lawyer who studied under the professor who 

invented no-fault insurance, says in her letter, that, and I quote: 

 

 If you persist in proceeding without reforming what is 

already there, then no-fault would be a fraud upon the injured 

persons of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you pull this Bill and allow all those affected 

to bring forward concerns such as these that I bring to your 

attention today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in regards to the specific 

comments on that client, I would have the member to please 

forward that to me right after and we will pursue any individual 

matter in that way. 

 

In regards to the no-fault aspect, it is completely inaccurate 

when you say that the right to sue has been taken away.  People 

will have the right to sue on loss of income. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, what is improved in the Saskatchewan plan 

is this, that we listened to the people of the province. They said, 

you should have an independent mediation process. And there 

will be an independent mediation process.  Even after the 

independent mediation process, a person will still have the 

option, if they disagree, to going to the Court of Queen's 

Bench. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is inaccurate for them to say that the 

right to sue has been taken away. It has not been. And also that 

there is a more thorough process in regards to mediation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

I'll indeed pass this on to you; but I'm surprised that you would 

need me to do that, since I have a copy of the letter that was 

addressed to your office from April 21 of this week. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan bar association has already 

accused you of breaking your promise with consulting with the 

public.  Now the Consumers' Association of Canada, is one of 

the most comprehensive and influential groups who look after 

the interests of Saskatchewan consumers, has recently told you 

to put the brakes on your no-fault insurance plan because you 

haven't done your homework and you've failed to consult with 

the public. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

They say, and I quote:  "Not only do consumers have the right 

to be informed, but they have the right to be heard." 

 

Mr. Minister, that does not mean a series of news conferences 

and advertising.  That's not consulting, that's just propaganda. 

 

Mr. Minister, why the rush?  Why are you going full speed 

ahead with your no-fault insurance plan in the face of 

widespread concern and misunderstanding?  Mr. Minister, why 

not a full round of public consultations where you listen and 

gain understanding before you pass this Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I have indeed listened to the 

people of the province.  We are looking at a 24 per cent rise, 

increase, if we didn't do anything.  We have made the decision 

to go ahead and come out with an alternate solution.  We have 

proposed a personal protection injury plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important to remember that 

in terms of consultation we had the SOBECO report, and we 

had members from the legal profession, we had a member from 

the medical people, we had members from the Paraplegic 

Association, from the Head Injuries, from the consumers' 

group.  The consumer at that time was the president, you know, 

the Consumers' Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have consulted and we had a report.  And even 

after we had the report a year ago we listened to more people, 

and the report that said we should have a pure no-fault plan, 

and we had come out with a modified no-fault plan that is 

indeed one of the unique plans in the history of Canada.  So, 

Mr. Speaker, we have indeed consulted and we are open to 

further consultation in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Crown Land Leases 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This afternoon 

my question is for the Agriculture minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, when the government has Crown land which is 

suitable for pasture, it leases that land to farmers.  And when 

there are two or more farmers interested in land, you accept 

bids to decide who gets the lease.  For some reason, in 1993 

you added age as one of the criteria for awarding leases. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your rationale for making age a factor in 

the decision to lease land to a farmer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, to the best of my 

knowledge, age has always been a factor in leasing land.  We 

have three criteria that we use: resource base, age, and distance 

from the land. 

 

We revised the system last year.  One of the things that 

we implemented into the new system is we will allow the local 

RM (rural municipality) to change the weight of those various 

factors to fit local conditions and that will be . . . the RMs will 

have a chance to make those formulas suit the local conditions. 

 

But to my knowledge age has always been a factor in 

determining land.  I think the desire is to lease it to younger 

farmers where possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's rather 

astonishing, Mr. Minister, for a government that claims to care 

about human rights legislation.  I received a call at my office 

today from a Mr. Wayne Galloway of Shellbrook and there was 

a piece of Crown land right next to his own, and in February he 

put in a bid for it, but he didn't get it.  Based on the 

government's bid rating system, he lost points because he's 51 

years of age.  And the fellow who won the bid, he won by a 

very, very tight margin of only a few points, and that's because 

the winner was 28 years of age.  So all things being equal, Mr. 

Minister, Wayne Galloway lost his bid because your 

government decided that he was too old. 

 

How many farmers have lost bids for pasture land based on 

age? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the best of 

my knowledge, through Liberal, Tory, and NDP (New 

Democratic Party) administrations, this has always been a 

factor.  And I think it's public policy that we would like to see 

younger farmers on the land.  I don't know how the Liberal 

leader would suggest that we ration land.  It obviously has to be 

some formula for allocating these leases.  And I think age is a 

very appropriate, a very appropriate factor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

don't know what you consider old, but when a 42-year-old is 

able to outbid someone simply because they're 32, that 

discrepancy doesn't seem to make any sense. 

 

Mr. Galloway thought it wasn't right for you to discriminate 

against him because of age, so he took the next step in the 

bureaucracy that you've created.  He went to the Saskatchewan 

Lands Allocation Appeal Board. 

 

The staff at the appeals board said that they didn't even have . . 

. they hadn't decided if they would allow him to appeal; they 

said that they were far too busy.  But if they did, it would take a 

while.  They're claiming that they're far too busy is going to 

create real problems for this gentleman because it will be far 

too late.  By the time this appeal occurs, the winning bidder 

could have already spent considerable dollars and built new 

fences. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, recognizing that your government appears to 

be guilty of age discrimination, will you 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

immediately reconsider this gentleman's attempt at an appeal 

and retender the lease? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think, as I pointed 

out, this is a very tough issue as to how you allocate land, and 

there's always people who feel that they should have had the 

land allocated to them. 

 

We think that resource base, age, and distance from the land are 

three fair criteria, and I think that is the policy upon which the 

land has been allocated.  And certainly I don't know what the 

Liberal leader would have us do.  Do away with the appeal 

board, or she wants the minister to make the individual 

decisions?  But I think the criteria are fair, and I think it's been 

a long-standing government policy, and we certainly are 

standing by that policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

wish I could have heard your response.  Part of the concern 

here is one of discrimination.  You say that there are other 

things taken into consideration as well, such as distance.  This 

gentleman's land was right beside what he wanted to lease.  The 

younger gentleman's land was not close by whatsoever. 

 

You had to deal with a very similar case with Mr. Gord Chapin 

of Meadow Lake who lost a bid because he is 42 years of age, 

and the winning bidder was 32 years of age.  Mr. Chapin has 

taken his case to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, and there are other cases just like these, Mr. 

Minister, which have not become public yet. 

 

Recognizing that there appears to be a very serious breach of 

human rights, will you commit in this House today to change 

the agricultural land lease policy to eliminate age 

discrimination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, that policy, as I say, 

is there; it's not a secret.  We do allocate land on the basis of 

those three factors; age is one of those factors. 

 

We do not believe that that violates the Human Rights Code.  

We certainly are not prepared to change that policy.  I don't 

know if the Liberal leader expects the Minister of Agriculture 

to interfere in individual cases and allocate land or what exactly 

policy she would recommend to replace this with.  But we 

think it's desirable to keep young people on the land and 

provide young people with an opportunity to farm in this 

province. 

 

It's a major problem trying to get young people into farming, 

and our policy is designed to help do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Government Appointments Review 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, in spite of the fact that you have appointed at least 

37 former NDP MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) or candidates to government 

positions and in the face of recent revelations that your 

government has appointed Dickson Bailey, a former federal 

NDP candidate to the position of executive director of the 

Saskatchewan infrastructure program, you continue to deny 

that your government is engaged in patronage. 

 

Mr. Premier, the government can't and won't tolerate that level 

of patronage.  We found that out in 1991, Mr. Premier.  We are 

all guilty of it.  Even the Liberals.  And the only government 

position that they have influence over, they still managed to 

appoint a prominent Liberal. 

 

Mr. Premier, the solution to this problem is before us.  We have 

a private members' Bill which will promote an all-party 

committee to review and establish strict procedures to protect 

against rampant patronage. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Premier, is simply this:  are you 

prepared to act on what the public is demanding of us?  Will 

you allow leave this afternoon to proceed to Bill 31 to establish 

the appointment of a review committee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I have some 

sympathy with the hon. member's question, but I must say that 

the hon. member will understand if I'm somewhat confused 

about exactly where it is the Conservative Party in 

Saskatchewan is coming from on this issue.  Because I have in 

front of me here a photocopy of a third-page story in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, a paper I don't read very often but 

one of my friends mailed this to me.  And it's dated March 28, 

1994, and what it says, Mr. Speaker, is "Tkachuk defends 

patronage."  Now who is Tkachuk? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Read the rest of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The Leader of the Opposition says, 

read the rest of it.  Well the rest of it says: Grant Devine 

defends patronage as inevitable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Senator Tkachuk said this: 

 

 "Being a patron comes from a king or queen giving 

Beethoven money to play his piano, for example," . . . 

 

 "Patronage to me is negative only when you put someone 

incompetent in that position." 

 

Now if that's okay for Mr. Tkachuk, if it's okay for the former 

premier of the province of Saskatchewan, why is it all of a 

sudden not okay for the Conservative Party?  And, I might add, 

if it's okay for the Liberal Party as well, why is it not okay for 

us?  I say that if competence . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Because you said you wouldn't 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We said we would not do it and we're 

not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We said we would do it; you said you 

wouldn't. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Utility Rates Review 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, we have received numerous letters of 

support for Bill No. 1, our Bill to create an all-party committee 

to review utility rates.  The most recent came from SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), Mr. 

Premier.  They said, and I quote: 

 

 In less than 30 months SaskPower has increased its rate three 

times.  SaskEnergy has increased its rate three times, and 

SaskTel twice. 

 

And I continue to quote: 

 

 This underscores the need to establish a regulatory agency to 

review rate increases by Saskatchewan publicly owned 

utilities.  The legislative utility review committee proposed in 

Bill 1 is consistent with a position SUMA members have 

taken through resolution, and therefore SUMA supports its 

passage. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you at least agree that this Bill deserves 

debate and that this Bill will be voted on in this Legislative 

Assembly?  Will you give us that assurance today, Mr. Premier, 

that you will do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, this looks like a day of 

contradictions and confusion on behalf of the opposition 

parties. 

 

First of all, I remind the House again that it was the 

Conservative government of the day that established something 

called PURC, Public Utilities Review Commission, and then 

summarily abolished it. 

 

By the way, if SUMA had written a letter to you when you 

were in government saying you shouldn't have abolished 

PURC, might carry a little more weight with me than them 

writing me today saying that they support your legislative 

review committee, to make sure that there's consistency in that 

approach. 

 

But I think the hon. member has to tell us why it is that you did 

away with PURC in the first instance.  You have to tell us why 

you did away with PURC.  You must have had a policy reason 

for doing away with it. 

 

And I'll tell you what your policy reason was.  PURC sets up a 

bureaucracy of several millions of dollars.  It requires 

consumers' associations to have the capacity 

financially and otherwise to be able to mount the defences or 

the examinations of the rate increases, and that of course is 

impossible to fund.  And the whole result is an extra added 

burden to government and has absolutely nothing to do with the 

rate changes. 

 

In fact PURC didn't change any of the rates that your 

government set up at all -- not once.  It simply approved it after 

millions of dollars.  Now you want a legislative review 

committee. Well look, I say why don't you folks get to work 

and do the work where the legislative committees now permit 

you to do the work, which is in Crown Corporations. 

 

And by the way, in the question of The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act, you can't have it both ways.  You can't be 

attacking us on no-fault, and then when we say okay -- we're 

not going to say it -- okay, you've got a good plan in no-fault; 

we're going to stand by for the moment; attack us when the 

rates go up by 24 per cent on insurance.  Get consistent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Fixed Election Dates 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I've 

never had the pleasure of listening to such a perfect man who 

doesn't make mistakes and doesn't make any contradictions.  

It's a pleasure listening to that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also have a question for this perfect man, 

and perhaps he can also prove again that he does not make 

contradictions.  Because, Mr. Premier, Bill 4 of this legislative 

session is an Act to set election dates every four years.  And in 

the NDP Democratic Reform document under the heading, 

standardized general elections, it recommends, and I quote: 

 

 That The Election Act be amended to stipulate that provincial 

general elections be held every four years. 

 

And that: 

 

 The Lieutenant Governor may dissolve the House sooner in 

the event that a government is defeated on the floor of the 

House or has an insufficient working majority. 

 

Unquote, from your document, sir. 

 

Mr. Premier, Bill 4 follows exactly your party's stated policy on 

this matter.  So now that you are not going to contradict 

yourself, Mr. Premier, will you agree to give leave to move to 

Bill 4 right after question period so that this Bill which follows 

your party's policy -- your party's stated policy -- so that this 

Bill can be debated in this Assembly and voted on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the specific 

question is whether I would give my leave.  I 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

suppose I would give my leave but of course I cannot speak for 

the other members of the legislature because our caucus of 

course is very independent minded and does things of its own 

situation.  So whether we can get that leave today, I don't 

know. 

 

But I do want to say this, that it's funny how the hon. members 

get up now and after having had nine years opportunity of 

doing the things which they urge we should do in less than a 

thousand days of office, somehow we have not rewritten the 

whole world or rewritten the whole rule book overnight, we're 

at fault. 

 

I tell you we aren't waiting here for an election to five years 

plus one day, which is what you did in November of 1991 -- 

five years plus one day.  And the idea of regularizing the 

proceedings of this House are now well established.  We have 

budgets more or less on regular times, we have openings on 

more or less regular times, the reports are being tabled on 

regular times, we've now got the six-month on the by-elections 

rule -- that is fixed in six months -- there are Crown 

Corporations and other committees' changes, the Board of 

Internal Economy has made tremendous improvements and 

changes; and do we want regular, four-year elections?  The 

answer is, as a general rule, yes. 

 

But I'll tell you this, Mr. Member, as I close, in taking my seat: 

what is more important here is not so much the legislation of 

the statute, it is the actual words -- words speak louder than 

deeds, and deeds speak louder than words, and our deeds have 

spoken louder than your words.  We've actually acted in a way 

to regularize the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would request 

leave to move that a Bill to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that Act 

be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this be first 

reading of the Bill to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that Act, 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- By leave, Mr. Speaker, I ask the 

opposition, particularly the Premier, for leave to now go to Bill 

No. 1. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Complete Government Financial Plan 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I, at the conclusion 

of my remarks, will move a motion, seconded by the member 

from Kindersley: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to present a 

complete financial plan outlining the budget of all 

government spending and revenue, including the Crown 

corporation sector, to the legislature each year, in order that 

MLAs and their constituents know exactly how and why tax 

dollars are being spent, as recommended in the Provincial 

Auditor's report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to outline today just a few points why I 

believe that we need to take this opportunity in this Assembly 

to discuss and provide an opportunity for the members of the 

Assembly to discuss the reasons and the rationale behind the 

Report of the Provincial Auditor, which says that the 

financial plans of the province of Saskatchewan as presented by 

the government are inadequate. 

 

And I want to point out to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, there are 

a number of occasions that the auditor has stated that there is 

not a complete financial report given by the government of the 

day.  And I want to quote a number of statements by the 

Provincial Auditor that show that changes have to be made in 

how we record and how we report and how we set together or 

put together an opportunity for the development of budgets 

within the framework of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've calculated from various papers from the 

government and  various papers from the Crown corporations, I 

find more and more, Mr. Speaker, that the shift for government 

spending is moving to the Crown corporation sector.  As I see 

it also, Mr. Speaker, there is more and more shift in revenues 

generated for the government by the Crown corporations. 

 

(1415) 

 

I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor has 

pointed that out very succinctly in a number of graphs that he 

has put in his report.  Mr. Speaker, they are I believe the work 

of a considerable amount of time and effort.  And also I want to 

point out to this Assembly that the auditor has made some 

significant changes. 

 

I also want to begin by saying that the government has allowed 

some opportunities for change within itself. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, there comes a point in time when they 

start to drag their feet, and I think they have begun to do that.  

And that's why we want to, in this discussion, encourage them 

to become more active in providing planning for how they raise 

revenue, how they deal with the various areas in the Crown 

corporation sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the revenue side in previous years -- I'll take 

the end of 1993, for example, Mr. Speaker -- the general 

revenue raised under programs was 55 per cent.  The spending 

on general programs constituted 64 per cent of the spending.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, comes from one basic area, that area 

being the involvement of the Crown sector in the discussion.  

And the Crown sector, as we see it day after day in this 

Assembly, even today in question period, we see over and over 

again, Mr. Speaker, that the government does not want to deal 

with the budget aspects of the Crown corporations. 

 

The expenditure under Crown corporations is at 36 per cent of 

the budget and the income is at 45 per cent of the budget, 

which tells me, Mr. Speaker, that 9 per cent of the total 

revenues generated over and above expenditures are revenues 

that accrued to the Consolidated Fund and various areas of 

government, and there is no way that they have an opportunity 

to come to this Assembly.  And that is very important for us to 

consider. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as we discuss this, the 

importance of the issue is placed before the Assembly this way: 

there is in total revenues generated a little over $4 billion . . . 

$4.4 billion generated in the Consolidated Fund by the taxes 

that accrue in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What do we have, Mr. Speaker, on the other side?  We have the 

Crown corporations, the user-fee organizations of this 

government -- they collect in the neighbourhood of $3.6 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that added together puts a total revenue generated 

about $8.1 billion.  And what do we talk about in this 

Assembly?  We talk about $4.4 billion or $4.6 billion worth of 

revenue, and we do not have an opportunity to discuss the 

others.  That is not the way it should be . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the members opposite say it's wrong. 

 

Well I want to give you an example, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

give you an example that in my mind is as clear as can be.  We 

do not have any opportunity in this Assembly to discuss 

gaming.  We do not have any opportunity in this Assembly to 

discuss gaming, and that is a fact, Mr. Speaker.  We cannot talk 

about the gaming minister, nor can we in fact discuss issues 

with the minister responsible for SGI, because those issues do 

not come before the Assembly because they are not in the 

Estimates book.  They are not there, and therefore we cannot 

speak about them.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong. 

 

The members opposite have said that, oh yes we can speak 

about them.  Only one place that we can speak 

about them and that is if they are required to borrow money, 

then we are allowed an opportunity to address the narrow 

aspect of what the money is being borrowed for; and we do not 

have an opportunity to discuss how the revenue is generated, 

what the plans and opportunities that the Crown Corporation 

sector is going to provide to this province.  Nor do we have an 

opportunity to discuss any of the boards and agencies that are 

directly related to those Crown corporations, i.e., for example, 

the Liquor Board -- we don't have an opportunity to discuss 

that. 

 

And as I see members opposite look in their Estimates book, 

they're going to find out that we do not have an opportunity to 

ask.  And that is also a point, Mr. Speaker, I want to make -- 

they don't have the opportunity in this Assembly to ask.  And 

that is really where the nub of the problem exists, Mr. Speaker.  

And that's why I raise this point.  I believe it's necessary to 

consider in every detail those inequities that we find. 

 

We do not have, for example, an opportunity in this Assembly, 

either from the Minister of Finance or the minister responsible 

for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), we 

do not have an opportunity to question him on the volumes of 

dollars that he is going to generate from increased utility rates.  

We don't have an opportunity to discuss that.  The only place 

that we have an opportunity to raise that is in question period, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we don't believe that that is right.  We don't believe it's 

right in this Assembly.  Do we have a right to raise those 

questions in Crown Corporations?  No we don't.  We do not 

have the right to raise issues on the basis of current information 

in Crown Corporations.  We do not have any way that we can 

raise issues as it relates to utility rate increases for 1994.  We 

don't have a right to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it's time that we changed that.  We don't have a right to 

raise the questions of whether SaskTel is going to raise their 

rates.  We don't have a right to raise the question of where 

SaskTel is going to spend the money.  We don't have the right 

to say to this Assembly and ask the Assembly to show us where 

they're going to spend the money on SGI CANADA.  We don't 

have the right to talk about the Sask auto fund in this 

Assembly.  We don't have the right to talk about the 

Saskatchewan Forest Products Crown corporation.  We don't 

have that right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We even have difficulty in coming to the conclusion that Sask 

Crop Insurance should have questions asked about it in this 

Assembly under Department of Finance or under the 

Department of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are problems that I believe that we have to 

address.  As we come into the 21st century we need to address 

those questions.  Because, Mr. Speaker, the agenda of the 

public is on the information provided to them and they want us 

to make decisions based on rationalizing the opportunity for 

economic development. 

 

This morning in Public Accounts Committee, Mr. 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

Speaker, we discussed considerable amount of issues related to 

this topic.  And, Mr. Speaker, in Public Accounts Committee, 

and I'm the chairman of that committee, the only way that I can 

raise issues under the current year which we're in is to have 

permission from the committee to do that.  That is the only 

way.  I cannot raise it as a matter of ordinary discussion.  I have 

to have permission of the government members in order for me 

to raise that issue. 

 

It is no different in the Crown Corporations Committee.  It's 

time, Mr. Speaker, that we have two functions in this 

Assembly: one is to deal with audits and the one that is to deal 

with budgets. 

 

And we have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, as members of this 

Assembly, to consider how we do that.  And I believe that we 

need to begin by allowing the Crown Corporations Committee 

to become the conveyor of an opportunity to develop the time 

when we can talk about utility rate increases; the time when we 

can talk about the budgets of the Crown Corporations; talk 

about the budgets of Crown Investments Corporation; talk 

about how transfers of money are made from one Crown 

corporation to the other. 

 

How long does it take before we have an opportunity to discuss 

issues like that, Mr. Speaker?  At least a year and a half after 

the fact; six to eight months after the audited statement comes 

out, Mr. Speaker; a year after the time when the decisions are 

made?  People in this province want to know today whether in 

fact they are going to have an opportunity to talk about their 

utility rate increases, whether they should talk about various 

organizations, including those, including those, Mr. Speaker, 

which are of a commercial nature. 

 

Those are also ones that need to be discussed by individuals in 

this Assembly, and that is also, Mr. Speaker, what we don't 

have an opportunity to do.  We don't.  And we only speak about 

these after all of the issues have been dealt with.  And that is 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, and it's time that we take a serious look at 

this responsibility and this opportunity that we have. 

 

I'm presenting this opportunity for members of this Assembly 

to deal with this on a forthright basis.  And I will probably see 

members in the government side say no to this kind of a format.  

No, why?  I raise some questions: do they have something to 

hide, or are they not willing to participate in change?  Are they 

not willing to participate in some suggestions that would create 

an alternative? 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, have introduced 

seven Bills asking this government to be open and forthright 

and deal with the issues, and what have they said?  We asked 

the questions in question period today -- three questions and 

there was a no to every one of them. 

 

They, Mr. Speaker, will make this government more 

accountable, and it's necessary for that to happen.  SaskPower, 

for example, needs to have somebody looking into some of the 

dealings that have been going 

on.  We raise some questions here about the responsibility of 

the president in relation to hiring his family to do certain 

contracts.  We raised the question about how many people it 

really takes to move to Toronto to talk about SaskPower. 

 

We raised a number of questions.  Those, Mr. Speaker, should 

be raised as items under the direction of what is the plan for 

SaskPower Corporation.  What is the responsibility of its 

president and chief executive officer to this Assembly?  And 

those are issues, Mr. Speaker, that I believe we need to deal 

with.  We need to deal with them precisely.  And because of 

that, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to present a 

complete financial plan outlining the budget of all 

government spending and revenue, including the Crown 

corporation sector, to the legislature each year, in order that 

MLAs and their constituents know exactly how and why tax 

dollars are being spent, as recommended by the Provincial 

Auditor's report. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am fully 

in support of the motion as presented by the member from 

Morse, Mr. Speaker, and for a number of reasons.  Presently it 

is difficult for MLAs and for the Provincial Auditor or for the 

public to assess the province's spending. 

 

There is good reason for this, Mr. Speaker, and that is because 

the NDP government has failed to provide a financial plan for 

the total government.  They provide a plan for the Consolidated 

Fund generally, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately that isn't the 

total, overall picture with which we have to deal with as 

government legislators. 

 

The budget in the Estimates document only provides 

information in the General Revenue Fund which means all 

Crowns, boards, agencies, and commissions are excluded from 

scrutiny. 

 

Last session the Finance minister compared the province's 

financial situation to a household that had overspent its budget, 

that it's credit card was over the limit.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the 

budget is like a household, what is the power bill for this year?  

Does the household receive cable services, or will it be getting 

service from SaskTel? 

 

The Department of Finance borrows for all governments, 

including the Crown; therefore they are aware of the Crowns' 

overall budgeting.  To alleviate this problem, the Provincial 

Auditor has recommended that the government provide a 

budget based on programing rather than on government 

departments.  If this was the case, the government would be 

able to put forward the actual budget of specific programs. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

For example, as it currently stands, agriculture programing is 

spent in the Department of Agriculture, the Agriculture 

Development Fund, the Crop Insurance Corporation, and the 

Agriculture Credit Corporation.  Using our current Estimates 

document, it is almost impossible for the Provincial Auditor to 

track the government's expenditures on agriculture, let alone all 

other departments and crowns. 

 

Now we've all heard the excuses the members opposite use 

when it comes to the accountability and opening up 

departments and Crowns.  They say that Crowns need secrecy 

in order to be able to compete.  And we heard that argument 

expressed in Public Accounts this morning from the member 

from Humboldt, Mr. Speaker -- that it was important for them 

for reasons of competitive advantage. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know about anyone else but I don't 

believe this argument is credible at all.  The budget of a 

corporation is far from being confidential information, yet this 

is the line Mr. Ching uses over and over again to defend his 

keeping 40 per cent of our province's revenues under his own 

supervision. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder what the president of CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) is afraid of.  

What is the NDP government afraid of?  That someone is going 

horn in on their monopoly on power, their monopoly on natural 

gas, their monopoly on auto insurance? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite should be 

reminded of what a monopoly really is.  The precise Oxford 

Dictionary states that the monopoly is exclusive possession, 

control or exercise.  Exclusive control, exclusive possession -- 

that means that there is no competition, there is no reason to 

keep the budget secret. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until the government puts forward a financial plan 

for the total government, they will continue to move money 

from pocket to pocket in order to paint whatever financial 

picture they feel is necessary to enhance their electoral chances. 

 

The Provincial Auditor advocates including Crowns, boards, 

commissions in the rest of the Estimates document in order to 

provide true accountability and the NDP continue to refuse. 

 

The way it stands, when someone from the Kindersley 

constituency walks up to me and says, why did you let the NDP 

hike our power rates, I have to say quite simply to them, Mr. 

Speaker:  well we have to wait a year from now and then I can 

ask them about it, ask questions about it to the Crown 

corporation at the Crown Corporation meetings.  Sounds pretty 

absurd, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that's one of the excuses the members opposite has given 

for not supporting the official opposition's utility review 

commission.  They say, well the opposition can scrutinize in 

Crown Corporations, 

forgetting to add that the meetings don't take place until a year 

after most hikes have already been in place.  That's our first 

opportunity, other than in question period, to ask the 

government questions about utility rate increases.  One year 

from the date. 

 

Furthermore, when was the last time the NDP government said, 

you're right, power rates are too high in Saskatchewan given 

these tough economic times, so we'll drop them by 5 per cent?  

It's never happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When was the last time you heard the Energy minister say the 

costs of providing natural gas to consumers has dropped by 

quite a little bit, so we're going to drop the rates by 10 per cent 

for SaskEnergy?  It's never happened either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these things have never happened and never will 

happen, because the NDP likes to control the finances of this 

province through Crowns, Mr. Speaker.  They did it in the '70s 

when utility rates went up by ridiculous amounts, and they're 

doing it again now. 

 

When the NDP were in power the last time, Mr. Speaker, auto 

insurance rates went up by 80 per cent, power rates went up by 

13 per cent, telephone rates went up by almost 79 per cent, and 

natural gas rates went up by a whopping 188.5 per cent during 

the last term of office of the NDP administration. 

 

No wonder they don't believe that a utility review commission 

is necessary.  They don't want to be held accountable for their 

decisions.  That's the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government does not want to accept the recommendations 

of the Provincial Auditor because we'd be able to better see 

their war chest, and we'd be able to get a better, closer look at 

the election goodies the NDP are building up in order to buy 

back the thousands of votes that have left them since the last 

provincial election.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You mean a war chest. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- That's exactly what it is.  A war chest for the next 

election is being built up presently, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

member from Biggar knows very well of what we speak 

because that's exactly the discussion that goes on in your 

caucus.  And you know that's the case.  The now member from 

Shaunavon spilled the beans and told us exactly that's what 

happened in your caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all have the opportunity to see what the NDP 

are really talking about.  If the NDP government continues to 

hide the financial plans of the Crowns, it will remain 

impossible to monitor where the money from the utility 

increases are going or how the NDP are spending it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a very large portion of the total 

government spending is outside of the budgetary process.  And 

that's the reason for a motion like this 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

being presented, Mr. Speaker, and that's the reason why I 

believe the people of Saskatchewan would support it.  And 

that's why I am supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker, and 

hopeful that the government will do the same. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

rise today to speak to this very important motion urging the 

government to present a complete financial plan of all of its 

spending and revenue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although the word accountability is not contained 

in this resolution, public accountability is at the core of this 

motion.  As members of this House should have come to 

appreciate by now, accountability is the fundamental principle 

of democratic societies.  And it is a principle that is very 

important to the Liberal caucus.  We have previously 

demonstrated our belief in this principle during prior 

proceedings of this legislature and its committees. 

 

Coincidentally or not, the very subject of this motion was the 

topic of the Public Accounts Committee meeting this morning, 

where there was a very helpful and healthy exchange of 

information between members of this Assembly who are 

members of this committee, with the auditor. 

 

It is perhaps serendipitous that we should now have the 

opportunity to further examine this concept as an entire 

Assembly while that discussion is still fresh in so many 

people's minds. 

 

As all members know, this legislature is currently engaged in 

the detailed examination of the spending plans of government 

departments.  That exercise provides us as legislators the 

opportunity to seek out details on the government's spending 

priorities. 

 

We are asking such things as the following:  What are the 

objectives and goals of each department?  Who do these 

departments serve?  How will those departments measure their 

success in meeting their goals during the year and at the end of 

the year?  What action will they take if their projections are 

overstated or understated? 

 

These are the kinds of meaningful questions that we in the 

Liberal Party have asked the ministers during Committee of 

Finance, and which we will continue to ask throughout the 

remainder of that process. 

 

But regardless of the answers, or how assured we may feel at 

the end of the process about where government is spending the 

taxpayers' money, we will still have only been given half the 

picture.  And this requires us to pose the question, why?  Why? 

 

Because as the Provincial Auditor tells us in his 1993 annual 

report, revenue for the Consolidated Fund, which is now called 

the General Revenue Fund, accounts for a meagre 54 per cent 

of all government revenue.  And expenditures from the 

government revenue fund account for only 56 per cent of all 

government expenditures. 

The remaining 46 and 44 per cents of revenues and 

expenditures for government as a whole are actually outside of 

the purview of this very legislature. 

 

The arguments against the proposal, Mr. Speaker, for a 

complete financial plan by the government as advocated by the 

Provincial Auditor, are very few.  In fact there seem to be only 

two broad types of argument. 

 

One is that this kind of plan will compromise the ability of the 

Crown corporations who must compete commercially.  The 

second is, loosely put, one of tradition, and covers several 

paternalistic arguments.  In response to the first argument that 

disclosure of a complete financial plan would negatively affect 

the commercial viability of Crowns, it is simply misleading, 

given the broad and general nature in which this information 

will be presented. 

 

The auditor has asked only for a one-line statement, Mr. 

Speaker, a one-line statement of projected revenues and 

expenditures for each enterprise for the coming year.  I don't 

see any of the Crowns being threatened by such a disclosure 

with such minimal information.  Perhaps eventually we can 

move toward more detailed disclosure on the part of the 

Crowns, but I think that we need to start with this very minimal 

amount of information, and that that would be considered to be 

progress. 

 

The second argument against this proposal was one which I 

refer to as the argument of tradition, one that at some point 

always contains the phrase, and I quote: because we've always 

done it this way.  End of quote. 

 

Government as a whole has experienced many breaks with 

traditions in the last few years, all of which I view as being 

very positive.  The auditor in fact commends the government 

for many of the reforms it has made to its financial dealings 

and reportings, and he credits the elected officials of all parties 

for their role in bringing about these improvements. 

 

I realize that all change is incremental and that having made 

some advances, we cannot be content to stop now.  We must 

push forward to the next small but significant symbol of 

openness on the part of government and we must get away 

from the type of government that says trust us, we'll do what is 

right for you; trust us, we'll show you at the end of the year or 

at the end of our term that we have acted in your best interests. 

 

To those who still advocate that decision makers should be 

trusted and left alone, public opinion polls and election 

outcomes over the past two decades would fail to support that 

notion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government departments and agencies have a 

plan.  They share that plan, often in some detail, with us as 

legislators and with the public as shareholders.  Crown 

corporations have a plan, or at least we all would like to think 

that they have a plan.  Together those plans show us where we 

are going, not just where we have been. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

We as legislators and our public as shareholders must be privy 

to those plans at some level.  This sharing of information will 

mark a point in our development when we, as government, 

cease treating our citizens as trusting children.  It will represent 

a turning point where paternalism end and consensualism 

actually begins. 

 

For years our governments have asked us to trust them, the 

general public to trust them.  And time and time again, 

governments have disappointed the people.  The people of our 

province are now wanting government that they can trust.  In 

fact they're asking the government to trust them as citizens --  

trust the people to know the plan and by knowing the plan be 

part of it, contribute to it, and work toward it. 

 

I think that we owe the people nothing less, and indeed we 

probably owe them much more. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I will at the conclusion of my remarks be moving 

an amendment, seconded by the member from Yorkton.  The 

amendment will read: 

 

 That all the words after the word Assembly be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 that commend the government for its commitment to 

financial reform as demonstrated by the passage of The 

Crown Corporations Act, 1993, the provision of summary 

financial statements and the mid-year financial reports and 

the other reform initiatives recognized by the Provincial 

Auditor in his most recent report, and further that this 

Assembly urge the Crown Corporations Committee to 

continue its mandate review and to make recommendations to 

the Assembly with respect to further reforms designed to 

improve public accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to be able to enter into this 

debate.  I would have wished that we could have waited at least 

one more week because my committee that I chair, the Crown 

Corporations Committee, will be bringing in a report within the 

next week or so, detailing many, many positive reform 

measures that will go a long way towards addressing the kinds 

of concerns that the members opposite all of a sudden have 

discovered. 

 

I find it really interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see the opposition 

standing up on its hind legs and talking about the reforms that 

this government must implement when they know very well 

that we inherited a very sorry mess that they had created.  

Indeed the Provincial Auditor refused to endorse the Public 

Accounts of 1990-91, because the members opposite had made 

such a mess of it.  They didn't follow proper accounting 

procedures.  With respect to Crown Corporations Committee, 

they refused to call regular meetings.  Crown corporations were 

created that nobody even knew about -- ghost corporations.  

They had a total mess in this province.  There were no timely 

reports and the whole situation begged out for 

reform. 

 

And reform is exactly what we are trying to do, Mr. Speaker.  I 

find it very offensive to hear the one member talking about the 

possibility that we have a war chest for the election.  I want to 

point out to him that Crown Investments Corporation's 

financial statements and related records have been audited by 

the Provincial Auditor.  The Provincial Auditor issued an 

unqualified opinion, stating that the financial statements 

represent the financial position of CIC fairly.  The Provincial 

Auditor did not identify a hidden pool of funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only war chest in this province is the strength 

of the people's commitment and conviction.  We will continue 

our financial reforms.  We will clean up the financial mess that 

we inherited from the members opposite.  And we welcome 

their suggestions for change. 

 

(1445) 

 

I was pleased to note that the Leader of the Third Party 

commented, as did the chair of the Public Accounts Committee, 

commented on what occurred in the Public Accounts 

Committee this morning.  I also attended that meeting.  I was 

very pleased to see them talking about the Provincial Auditor's 

report and initiatives that might occur for reform.  I would have 

wished though that there had been a member present from the 

third party, rather than only a staff person. 

 

Similarly, I would hope that the third party would start to send 

members to the Crown Corporations Committee on a regular 

basis.  And I would hope that when they do attend we don't see 

the sorry spectacle, as we did in an earlier meeting this year 

when we were reviewing SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) and the minister responsible was 

asked by the member from Shaunavon, well what kinds of 

questions should I be asking anyway?  Now I hardly consider 

that that sort of a statement gives anyone any degree of faith 

and trust in the ability of legislators to actually look at proper 

accountability practices. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the members of the government, unlike the 

members opposite, have been working diligently to reform the 

accountability procedures for this government, both in the 

department side and the Crown side. 

 

We are continuing to improve our management and 

accountability practices.  The departments' annual reports, for 

instance, have been vastly improved.  The Department of 

Finance has introduced better accounting principles for its 

management of the General Revenue Fund and there is now a 

much more complete and timely financial information that is 

brought to this Assembly.  This is a reform that the New 

Democratic government has implemented, and I am very proud 

of it. 

 

We have improved management measures all throughout 

government.  I would specifically 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

comment on the improved management measures in the 

departments of Health and Justice, and Highways and 

Transportation.  I would also point out, as the chair of the 

Public Accounts Committee is very well aware, that the 

departments of Social Services and Education, SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 

are working with the Provincial Auditor's office in order to 

examine and improve their management systems. 

 

Now dealing specifically with the Crown sector side, since I am 

chair of the Crown Corporations Committee, I want to 

comment on the kinds of things that are occurring there that are 

positive reform measures that will improve accountability for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

CIC, Crown Investments Corporation, now the holding 

company, provides much better information to both the Crown 

Corporations Committee and to the Public Accounts 

Committee.  They are working -- actively working with the 

Provincial Auditor's office -- on further improvements, and as 

the chair of the Public Accounts Committee knows very well, 

there's a working group consisting of representatives from the 

Department of Finance, the Provincial Auditor's office, and 

Crown Investments Corporation that is looking at the whole 

issue of financial plans. 

 

We have already implemented Bill 42, The Crown 

Corporations Act of 1993, Mr. Speaker, and that Bill made a 

major step forward in terms of improved accountability.  And 

I'm not saying that we've reached nirvana or perfection yet, but 

we are continuing to work towards it. 

 

But we have implemented very definite improved 

accountability.  We now have timely filing of annual reports.  

We have something that's quite unheard of or had been quite 

unheard of before, we have consistency in the annual reports; 

consistency in terms of what kinds of information is provided 

and how it is provided.  The content of those reports have been 

improved dramatically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is not whether or not there is a 

financial plan.  This government believes definitely in 

openness, transparency, and accountability of public finances.  

The question is what we mean specifically by a financial plan 

and where that financial plan will be analysed.  And that I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, is the whole substrata for this 

debate. 

 

Committees in this legislature have a long-established role in 

looking at the accountability of the governments of the day; 

they review and they analyse the finances of government.  So I 

would suggest that that analysis may not necessarily occur best, 

the financial plan analysis may not necessarily occur best in 

this august, red Chamber.  Perhaps it might best occur at the 

Crown Corporations Committee and Public Accounts 

Committee level where they can get into more detailed 

analysis. 

As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, on Crown Corporations 

Committee we have for the last few weeks been looking at 

various reform measures that we will be recommending to the 

House.  To make our role a much more forward-looking one, to 

make sure that what we are examining is much more timely, we 

are fine-tuning our role to focus more on organizations that 

receive significant revenue from outside the General Revenue 

Fund. 

 

We are making a major reform, Mr. Speaker, by asking Crown 

Investments Corporation now to give us an annual statement 

that will reflect the mandate, goals, objectives, and 

performance indicators of CIC.  We expect that this will be a 

much more comprehensive opening statement when it appears 

before the committee and we will view this as a performance 

review statement and planning document for CIC. 

 

We want to take a look at what the mandates and goals are of 

CIC and how they've measured up in the past year and how 

they're moving forward.  We want to look . . . we want to ask 

CIC now to give Crown Corporations Committee notification 

when they have significant financial transactions. 

 

We intend to hold regular and timely meetings.  We intend to 

ask CIC to report to our committee on the rationale for its 

investments, the structure of its investments, and the prospect 

and rationale for retention or divestment of those invention . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Would you stop the clock, please.  I just 

wanted to remind members that the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood had indicated at the beginning that she was going to 

move an amendment but her time has elapsed; and the member 

is to move her amendment within the time that is assigned to 

her, that is the 10 minutes.  But I will allow the member to 

move her amendment, but in the future that amendment is to be 

moved in the time that is assigned to her or to any other 

member, and the member may move her amendment. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I thank you very much for your indulgence and 

tolerance.  I'm sorry I forgot to watch the clock on this one.  I 

would like to move an amendment: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 commend the government for its commitment to financial 

reform as demonstrated by the passage of The Crown 

Corporations Act, 1993, the provision of summary financial 

statements and the mid-year financial reports, and the other 

reform initiatives recognized by the Provincial Auditor in his 

most recent report; and further that this Assembly urge the 

Crown Corporations Committee to continue its 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

mandate review and to make recommendations to the 

Assembly with respect to further reforms designed to 

improve public accountability. 

 

I do so move, seconded by the member from Yorkton. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very 

pleased this afternoon to have the opportunity to enter the 

debate and to second the motion from my colleague from 

Saskatoon Wildwood. 

 

Before I state my comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 

that in response to what the member for Morse had indicated in 

terms of the auditor's report, that the financial plan was 

inaccurate, I believe he said, I think what the Provincial 

Auditor has indicated, is that the financial audit is incomplete.  

And what the auditor states is that he would like to see a more 

and deeper and broader inclusion of the financial plan.  And by 

that, meaning the management of the financial affairs of the 

province, which includes financial plans and  accountability 

and certainly timely reporting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment first to recognize the 

momentous work and step that our government has taken to 

open the books in this province and to ensure that never in the 

history of Saskatchewan again can a government put the 

Saskatchewan people in the kind of financial mess that we 

found ourselves in the case of the past administration that we 

had in this province. 

 

And to begin with, the Gass Commission of course helped us to 

set our strategy in a direction for what the future might be, in 

terms of financial accountability and management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in three consecutive years we have budgets that 

are presented in advance of the year end.  And this ensures that 

we have adequate time available for organizations and 

departments to do their planning because budgets in fact are 

planning documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government's decision to provide third 

parties, schools, and municipalities and health care services 

with notice a year in advance, ensures that the planning process 

can be developed in concert with the priorities that they have 

and that there are no surprises of course that elevates the 

hardship of having to make decisions in a time of crisis or crisis 

management, as was the previous administration as they put us 

in a number of occasions simply by not having a budget in 

1991 and having several budgets tabled in late June of a year, 

well after the financial year had been completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my role as the past committee chairman of 

local government and education, we have heard on several 

occasions from delegations that we met with, who have 

expressed the positive decision that our government has made 

in allocating a year in advance the funding that they would be 

receiving.  That, Mr. Speaker, we would view as being good 

financial planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I review the 1993 Provincial Auditor's report I 

think it is important to recognize in chapter 1 of the Provincial 

Auditor's report where he states that: 

 

 In 1992, (and I quote) the Government took an important step 

forward (to prepare) . . . Summary Financial Statements. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

 Summary Financial Statements are essential because they 

provide an important starting point for planning and 

managing -- a complete financial overview. 

 

Readers are assured that the statements contained in the 

financial report of the many organizations in the government . . 

. uses to carry out the public policy objectives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here we have a Provincial Auditor recognizing the 

provincial government acting on its commitments as outlined in 

the Gass Commission, putting before this legislature and to the 

people of Saskatchewan an accounting process which is critical 

for planning and managing the financial affairs of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also clear that in the Provincial Auditor's 

report 1993, that without a doubt there is a commendation, and 

he has seen the practices of the management and the 

accountability of our government and it's officials.  And he 

indicates again, if I might quote, Mr. Speaker, from page 6, 

chapter 1, where he indicates that: 

 

 The Crown Investments Corporation (CIC) is improving its 

practices in several areas . . . 

 

And goes on to state what they are, and then it proceeds to 

indicate: 

 

 The Department of Finance introduced more rigorous and 

useful accounting principles to manage the revenues and the 

expenditures of the General Revenue Fund.  Such principles 

help ensure the Assembly and the Government (to provide a) 

. . . more relevant and reliable financial information. 

 

And goes on to give several examples of how the government 

through its departments has established audit committees and 

value-for-money audits, and how the Department of Social 

Services and the Department of Education and Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Arts and Science and Technology are 

managing their corporations and involving his office in a 

management systems to do an in-depth and broader evaluation 

of the financial expenditures of the province, of their 

departments.  Mr. Speaker, in today's climate, there is a 

demand for principled governance and public accountability, 

and our government is responding. 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, there remains the outstanding question that we 

debate today in this legislature and that we have been 

discussing at length in our Public Accounts Committee, which 

is the presentation of a financial plan.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

budget document that has been presented to this Assembly and 

to the people of Saskatchewan is the most detailed and 

revealing financial document or planning document that can be 

found anywhere. 

 

Our government's budget plan not only indicates the annual 

operations of the income and expenses, but it explains in detail 

the manner in which we're going to achieve many of our 

objectives.  It charts the history and our future goals. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the financial plan for Saskatchewan is 

obvious, and everyone who is paying attention is seeing that we 

are meeting the financial objectives as we've set them. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we debate the inconclusiveness of the 

budget document or the plan and use the Public Accounts, 

recognizing it as a statement, and it is included in our 1993 

report. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the burning question remains that compromises 

the comprehensive plan and how detailed should that 

comprehensive plan be.  And I say that this is not an easy 

question nor will the resolution be simple.  But I'm personally 

somewhat surprised to see us debating this particular issue 

today, particularly led by the chairman of the Public Accounts 

Committee, when in fact it is clear that we are going to be 

proceeding in putting together a committee that's going to be 

addressing this issue in great detail, as quoted in the resolution 

.31 of the Public Accounts Committee on page 27, by the 

Provincial Auditor, where he says that: 

 

 In February of 1993, the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts asked our Office to work with officials of the 

Department of Finance and the Crown Investments 

Corporation to prepare a report on a complete financial plan 

for the whole Government.  We plan to include the results of 

our initial work in (that particular) future Report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important here to recognize that we 

need to define what this financial plan looks like. 

 

And through the process of inclusion, when we're talking here 

about individuals from the Crown corporations, people from 

the Finance department, and people from CIC would be sitting 

around and discuss what in fact constitutes the financial plan.  

Today we believe that we have a detailed plan and our plan is 

our budget. 

 

The question that I think we need to ask is: is the government 

utilizing sound and acceptable 

accounting principles in reporting its transactions?  And to that, 

Mr. Speaker, we believe that we are, as is highlighted in many 

of the sections in the Provincial Auditor's report. 

 

The second question, I suppose, we will be asking in the Public 

Accounts Committee and through this Assembly is: should we 

have the government make the decisions and bring those facts 

forward through this Assembly in some detail? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my belief that there is ample opportunity for 

us to be debating the issues of the expenditures and the 

revenues of the Crown corporations.  And to date we've not 

seen or heard of any of that debate in this Assembly.  And so I 

ask the question as to why that hasn't occurred to this point in 

time. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the motion 

of the member from Saskatoon Wildwood and take my place in 

response to some of the questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to indicate that as I view 

this particular resolution initially, is that it indicates, to me at 

least, that there is a lack of understanding as to how the Crown 

corporations get their authority, and where that authority is 

provided, and what it does in when the debate was held in how 

a corporation should function in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and what it should be doing. 

 

If you take a look at the statutes of the province of 

Saskatchewan, you can go to any one of the Crown 

corporations that have been formed or sold by the 

Conservatives during their reign as the government, and you 

will find that in the statutes there is the detailed listing of what 

the corporation is legally able to do and how it is to achieve 

that and to cover those particular things. 

 

So what we have is really a . . . in dealing with the Crown 

corporations which appears to me that the members opposite 

didn't understand, is that we really have in statute what the 

objective of those Crown corporations are.  And because there 

has been . . . hasn't been a number of new Crown corporations 

being formed, it leaves this Assembly with a number of people 

who, number one, were only here during the 1980s when 

corporations were being disposed of rather than formed, and 

those that came after that without the understanding of what the 

power of a corporation . . . and the fact that really the direction 

and what the corporation should be doing is there in the 

statutes. 

 

Now these same individuals are moving from this Assembly 

where the discussion should have taken place in that regard to 

Crown Corporations Committee and other areas, asking for 

more detail and in essence wanting to go over the discussion 

that took place with the formation of the corporations to begin 

with. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has moved in a number of 

different ways to make more and more information available.  I 

say that it isn't necessarily providing information, but rather 

providing an educational experience for some individuals, in 

that the minister and the officials that are now at the Crown 

Corporations Committee respond to the questions of the 

members and have over the past year, two years at least, been 

giving answers that relate to more than just the year under 

review, and in fact come up fairly close to the date when things 

are actively . . . the active date. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that in doing so, the 

answering of those questions, you'll find that most of the 

answers are based in the corporations themselves.  Now the 

member initially, from Morse, when he stood up and said that 

there was no place that the results of the Crown corporations 

came into the Estimates, I'd like to point out to him that some 

of the Crown corporations which get most of their funding right 

from the Consolidated Fund are found in the Estimates. 

 

And let's take a look at one and give . . . the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation which is a Crown 

corporation; it's found in the Estimates.  And the reason that 

it's found in the Estimates is that it does not secure its funds 

indirectly from the public for providing a service to the public, 

but secures its funds from the government for providing 

services to the government. 

 

The member opposite is talking about some of the Crown 

utilities, the SaskPower, SaskTel.  And I point out to him that 

he should take the time to read the statutes of the province 

where SaskTel is included in there as one of them to understand 

that the previous discussion of what the corporation should be 

doing and how it should be spending its money and the 

relationship is actually right in the Act. 

 

But in stating that it doesn't come into the Estimates, he's 

totally wrong.  If you look on page 10 in the Estimates for 

1994-1995, transfer from Crown entities, the Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan is expected to 

transfer $60 million into the revenue of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the question then comes: why he would stand in this 

Assembly and indicate to the Assembly that there is no 

information coming to this Assembly?  The reason that he is 

doing that is that he simply wants to generate in the public's 

mind opposition to Crown corporations so that they can be 

privatized, so that we can have a situation in this province 

where the corporations that provide utility operations can 

generate a profit that can be pocketed by some private 

individual and moved out of this province and leave us in a 

poorer economic condition than we would have to be if we 

maintain and operate these Crown corporations as part of the 

governing of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some problems that we could 

solve, related to the committees of this Assembly.  And one of 

the problems is that with the 

Crown Corporations Committee and the Public Accounts 

Committee, that there's a tremendous amount of overlap which 

I feel, if we were to stop doing the overlap, we could reduce 

some of the expenditures of this Assembly and meet the needs 

of the public in the province quite nicely. 

 

And that would require from the auditor, I believe, two separate 

reports so that the reports could be sent either to the Public 

Accounts Committee or to the Crown Corporations Committee 

and handled then in the committee that this Assembly chose for 

the identity to be reviewed, or for the accounts of that identity 

to be reviewed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been an increase in the number of 

reports being made available to the members of this Assembly.  

The Crown Corporations now have a full management plan and 

we've been asked in the Crown Corporations to move forward 

with a presentation of that report prior to the year under review 

as one of the reports that the Crown Corporations Committee 

would look at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been indicated that this morning in the 

Public Accounts Committee that the comptroller indicated that 

the CIC in its completion is covered in the Consolidated Fund 

for the funds coming into the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just so that the members opposite who 

haven't taken the time to look at some of the different Acts and 

statutes of the province of Saskatchewan and don't realize just 

what the authority and the discussion that carried on in 

assembling the one, I'd like to point out to them what the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation had for 

powers. 

 

The indication that some of the powers that they were given 

and the objectives that they were to do, and one of them is the 

power to explore, to acquire, to open or develop mines, to 

participate in joint ventures, to regulate by resolution or by 

procedures at meetings, etc.  That is some of the powers that 

were provided to them. 

 

They were provided the powers to purchase shares, the power 

to acquire assets or to sell them, to accept advances from the 

department, the Minister of Finance, the power to borrow 

separate from the Minister of Finance.  And all of these powers 

in the end, if the assets that they acquired remained . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in support of 

the amendment before us. 

 

It's been an interesting experience to be a new member of the 

Legislative Assembly and in particular a new member of the 

Crown Corporations Committee and experience a very steep 

learning curve on what is 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

contemplated by the members opposite in the information they 

try to present through their so-called reform package and in 

reality whether or not they are walking the talk. 

 

And I would point out that, as a member of the Crown 

Corporations Committee that is putting forward a whole series 

of reforms and package of reforms, at the calling of the chair 

she outlined a number of those areas that would be discussed.  

And you would think that someone who is seriously looking at 

participating in reforms of accountability of information to the 

public and in particular their new-found zeal to look at the 

Crown corporations sector, that they would come prepared.  I 

found that it's the exact opposite, Mr. Speaker, in that I've seen 

no evidence that members opposite have come prepared to be a 

part and an active part of reform. 

 

And in the experience of having the two members of the 

Liberal Party come to the committees without any paper in 

hand, I think the order of the day has been quiet except to 

always reject or try and distort the information that's being 

brought forward because of the lack of knowledge of the 

Crown corporations and their sector. And the complete lack of 

preparation or the ability to put forward aspects of reform 

speaks to their ability, not to want to go forward in a serious 

way with reforms that are presented. 

 

(1515) 

 

So when we have the motion that's before us, I think it's sort of 

hoping that the public won't look at closely what the 

performance is of accountability through the Crown 

Corporations.  And it's no doubt and no wonder why.  Because 

members opposite would have us say, well let's forget what 

happened in the past.  And it's a serious mistake to forget 

what's happened in the past and let bygones be bygones.  You 

always learn from those experiences. 

 

And what did we have was a committee of the legislature, the 

Crown Corporations Committee, that in the past had been less 

than effective in its performing of its duties because during the 

late '80s and early '90s you saw this committee did not meet at 

regular times or regular intervals.  The annual reports which 

formed the knowledge base for the committee were not filed in 

a timely manner.  The government of the day made major 

spending and investment decisions in the Crown sector that in 

no small way contributed to the fiscal nightmare that we 

inherited and the problems that are now facing this province. 

 

And a lot of it was able to occur through the Crown 

corporations side of the operations in a cloak of saying that 

somehow this sector had to have commercial confidentiality 

which would hide a lot of the kinds of mismanagement and 

transactions that occurred.  And we can list over and over the 

areas where the deals that were made by the previous 

government did not reflect the best interests of the province. 

 

Well we can say, well that's just in the opinion of some of our 

members, but we can look then to the 

auditor's reports of 1990 and the year ending March 31, 1990.  

And the auditor says that CIC's public accountability to the 

Assembly is not well served with the current financial 

statements that are being provided; those financial statements 

do not give the Assembly the information needed to judge 

CIC's management of the assets entrusted to it by the 

Assembly. 

 

The auditor goes on to state that in his opinion, because these 

consolidated financial statements include financial results of 

corporations that are not subsidiaries and because an 

investment in shares of an investing company are accounted for 

on an equity rather that a cost basis, these consolidated 

financial statements do not present fairly the consolidated 

financial position of the corporation as of December 31, 1989 

and the result of its operations and the changes in its financial 

position for the year then ended in accordance with generally 

accepted accounting principles. 

 

I did not hear at that time the members opposite come forward 

and say, the auditor has a point to make and we're going to 

change some of these things; we're going to bring forward a 

reform package and make sure that we walk the talk; that our 

deeds will match our actions and our words will match those 

actions as well. 

 

It's only just recently that we've looked at the auditor's report, 

year ending March 31, 1993, and, lo and behold, the auditor's 

report states: 

 

 The Crown Investments Corporation . . . is improving its 

practices in several areas: 

 

This government is committed to a package of reform.  And 

we're not using the words to say we're committed; we're 

walking the talk and bringing in a package of reforms to the 

Crown Corporations Committee.  And in the management of 

CIC you can see the auditor go on to state: 

 

 officials of CIC are now proactive in providing information 

to the Standing Committees on Crown Corporations and 

Public Accounts: 

 

More accountability to the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 CIC is improving the budget information provided to its 

Board.  More complete and timely budget information will be 

valuable to CIC in carrying out its management 

responsibilities . . . 

 

Another positive change for accountability to the province and 

to the people that they are having a trust relationship with in the 

managing of the financial affairs of the Crown corporations 

side of the organization. 

 

 CIC (is now) working with (the office of the auditor to 

examine) . . . the systems and practices . . . (used) to manage 

its significant 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

investments. 

 

Working with the auditor, unlike the kinds of performances we 

saw from the members opposite who would attack the auditor if 

he dared to state that the members opposite were in some way 

not providing the information that was needed to make a fair 

and complete analysis of the financial situation in the province 

at the time, unwarranted attacks upon the Provincial Auditor in 

trying to discredit the auditor's office when they did not have 

the information . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order. The 65 minutes allotted 

to this debate has elapsed.  I do want to remind members that 

now, as agreed to, there will be or may be up to a 10-minute 

question and comment period.  A member does not need to ask 

a question, can make a brief comment also. So it will now be 

open to a question and comment period for those who wish to 

participate. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just 

want to take an opportunity to make a brief comment with 

respect to the discussion that has taken place today.  There 

were accusations by the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

that there were possibilities that our government could be 

hiding funds in a slush fund in the Crowns. 

 

And I want to take the liberty of referring to a question and 

answer session took place on February 5, 1993 where Mr. 

Kujawa asked the auditor: 

 

 If (for instance) the Liquor Board of Saskatchewan in the 

next three years makes $7 billion profit, can that be hidden? 

And if so, how? 

 

The auditor, Mr. Strelioff, answered as follows: 

 

 Mr. Chair, members, as far as I know, it wouldn't be hidden 

under the practices of the government.  I don't know how it 

would be hidden unless you change your practices. 

 

 Mr. Kujawa: -- Did you say it can be hidden? 

 

 Mr. Strelioff: -- Well under your current practices, it would 

not be hidden. 

 

I don't know how it could be hidden.  So I just want to say 

parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, the only changes made since that 

statement was made, if anything, is that the auditor has 

acknowledged that we've improved the accountability of the 

Crowns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a comment I'd like to 

address to the member from Saskatoon Wildwood.  That 

member is the chair of the Crown Corporations Committee who 

is presently dealing with the processes that the Crown 

corporations have put into place, and that committee has been 

at work for some time. 

Now in her opening remarks, that member mentioned and made 

mention of a setting of objectives for the Crown Investments 

Corporation. And my specific question to the member is what, 

in her opinion, should the objectives of the Crown Investments 

Corporation be?  I was wondering whether the member would 

favour us with a couple of remarks in that aspect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously I do believe 

that there are very major and important objectives that can be 

served from the Crown sector side.  And dealing specifically 

with the question that the member from Prince Albert is asking, 

I think that one of the major tasks that the Crown Corporations 

Committee has is to ensure that CIC is keeping its strong 

performers strong, and also that they are stemming the losses of 

money from the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

For too many years there were losses.  Whether they were 

deliberate losses or as a result of mismanagement, I don't know.  

But it clearly caused the people of Saskatchewan to all of a 

sudden have a major deficit and a major debt. 

 

I think we also need to make sure that we can improve the 

return from CIC's investments.  There's not much sense having 

these investments and not having them be reasonable and 

profitable.  We need to have positive returns to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally I would suggest that one major objective in CIC is to 

improve . . . is to restructure CIC's financial position.  And I 

would hope over the coming months that we can see measures 

that will bring all those objectives into play.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to ask the 

chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee whether in 

fact the budgets of the Crown Corporations will be reviewed in 

your new mandate as it relates to SaskPower, SaskTel, 

SaskEnergy, STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), all 

of the Crown corporations.  And will you allow the members of 

that committee to ask questions under the current year to show 

what those budgets are going to be, what the plans are going to 

be, and what the revenue is going to be also, and where the 

money is going to be spent?  Will you give us that assurance 

that that is what you are planning on doing? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the member from 

Morse, I would say that the Crown Corporations Committee 

will review as a priority those Crowns that obtain significant 

resources or revenue outside the General Revenue Fund.  And 

those specifically will be CIC, the parent holding company, and 

then SaskEnergy, SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskTel International, 

SGI, SEDCO, Sask Opportunities, Sask Crop Insurance, STC, 

SGGF (Saskatchewan government growth fund), Sask Forest 

Products Corporation, Sask Water, Sask Liquor Board and 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

licensing commission, and the Workers' Compensation 

commission . . . compensation commission, yes. 

 

We will also be asking for an annual performance indicator 

from CIC, the parent holding company, detailing its mandate, 

goals, objectives, and performances.  And we will not be asking 

for that, at least at this juncture, from the specific, individual 

Crowns because we do believe it is important that we look at 

the broad, overall picture.  And the best way that can be 

accomplished is by looking at CIC. 

 

That's the initiative that we're proposing, the reform that we're 

proposing, and I would hope that the members opposite would 

join us in making sure that that reform can be a workable 

reform. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for 

someone who is very fond of criticizing the government and 

our accountability.  And I want to ask the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone if she will acknowledge -- the Leader of 

the Liberal Party -- if she will at least acknowledge there have 

been major changes, major improvements, in the accounting of 

the Crown corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, again a question to the member 

and the chairman of the Crown Corporations Committee.  Is 

that to assume then that the information that will be provided to 

the committee will be on the year that is the present year?  Is it 

the present budget that will be reviewed?  Is it the present 

expenditure that . . . as it relates to revenue and expenditure, are 

those the issues that you will be reviewing in Crown 

Corporations Committee? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I thank the member from Morse for his 

persistence.  I knew when I stood up that there was one 

question that I hadn't answered and, I'm sorry, I forgot the 

specifics of it. 

 

Basically I would say to the member opposite that the annual 

report does and will continue to form the basis for the 

examination of the operations of a particular Crown.  The 

primary work of the committee, I believe, is to review the 

operations of the Crown, as outlined in the annual report. 

 

Nevertheless, what we will be doing as a reform is to entertain 

general questions about future objectives and also about past 

performance indicators.  No longer will we be confining 

ourselves to a narrow interpretation of only looking at the year 

under review.  We will also be allowing questions about future 

objectives.  So that the work of the committee will be much 

more timely and much more forward-looking. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then, Madam Chairman, then the answer is 

no.  You will not be reviewing the budget as it relates to 

revenue and expenditures. 

 

The answer you gave was a no, and I want to ask you 

this question: will you as chairman of Crown Corporations give 

equal opportunity for the opposition to ask questions as you 

have given opportunity for the government side to ask 

questions when it's perceived by the chairman to be in order to 

have the question raised because it might reveal some things 

that the former administration did? 

 

And will you give that same opportunity for the opposition to 

raise those questions that are current in the year that we are in 

so that we can have that discussion about those issues that are 

current in the Crown Corporations Committee?  Because your 

history has not shown that you have been prepared to do that. 

 

Mr. Lorje: -- Well now we're going to get into a down and 

dirty criticism of my functioning as chair. 

 

I would like to point out to the member opposite that I 

customarily, when we begin our review of any Crown 

corporation, I look first of all to the opposition to see if they 

wish to speak on a particular matter, and I have tended, simply 

as a matter of courtesy, to recognize the members of the 

opposition first and to give them as much opportunity as they 

choose to take to ask questions.  It is not my responsibility if 

they come to the Crown Corporations Committee without 

having done their homework, without having prepared, and 

without knowing why they are there. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is to the member from Morse.  During the past three 

years there has been a concerted effort by the Public Accounts 

Committee and this government to ensure that the work and 

reporting of the Public Accounts Committee and the 

government are timely and meet with the guidelines of the 

auditor. 

 

Recognizing, Mr. Member opposite, that you have been a 

member of both the previous government and a member of the 

Public Accounts Committee and with a very strong perceived 

conscience today for scrutinous accountability of principles and 

process, tell me why it is that in 1991 when we formed 

government, that the work of the Public Accounts Committee 

was nearly three years in arrears. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Because the chairman, who was a member of 

the opposition, did not call the committee together. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The time for the debate, the 75 

minutes and the 10-minute question period and comment 

period has elapsed.  We'll go on to the next item on the agenda. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 71 -- Ownership and Use of Firearms 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In 

addition to my colleague's response, it should be pointed out it 

was the NDP opposition of the day that 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

did not call those meetings. 

 

However, we are on to another topic, Mr. Speaker.  And to set 

the stage for my remarks, I want to read into the record the 

motion that I will be making in a few moments time.  And this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, is going to be made by myself and 

seconded by the member from Moosomin.  And it reads like 

this: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the importance of firearms to 

the daily lives of farmers, hunters, trappers, and aboriginal 

people, the accomplishments of Saskatchewan shooting 

teams at the international level, as well as the other important 

sporting and economic benefits of firearms, and that therefore 

this Assembly urge the government to support in principle the 

continued right of residents of Saskatchewan, both urban and 

rural, to enjoy the lawful, safe, and responsible use and 

ownership of firearms, including rifles, shotguns, and 

handguns, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be so moving. 

 

And to begin my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all 

that I guess we'd have to go to the United States and to take a 

look at their constitution to find out that there are countries that 

are more persistent, I guess, and precise in their regulations in 

terms of firearms; where the right to bear arms in the United 

States is actually enshrined in the constitution. 

 

And of course as such it is not in our case.  However, most of 

our constitution is a constitution that is tradition; it's unwritten.  

We follow somewhat the British form of constitutions where, 

in large part, it is rather unwritten but made up rather of 

tradition, precedent, heritage, and certainly lifestyle, Mr. 

Speaker.  So clearly it seems to me that the right to own 

firearms and use them responsibly is part of the tradition of 

Canada, and particularly in Saskatchewan in our rural areas. 

 

And I think all of us, as members of the legislature, are aware 

of some of the inherent dangers of irresponsible gun use.  And 

all too often, in fact, it has become a common occurrence in the 

media where guns are involved in all sorts of violent crimes, 

from murders to robberies to sexual assault, and so on.  And 

then we do have incomprehensible acts of violence like we 

saw, for example, in the Lepine mass murders in Montreal.  

And they are abhorrent I think to all of us, they are repulsive, 

and they are to be condemned. 

 

However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in each of these instances guns 

are not in themselves the problem, but rather the symptom of 

much deeper problems that exist in our society.  As we all 

know, guns themselves do not kill. 

 

I think this violence that we've been talking about now over the 

last few moments is endemic to a society that has lowered its 

standards, it has dulled its sense of right and wrong, and quite 

frankly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think it has lost its moral compass. 

 

This violence is endemic to a society where more people are 

living in poverty than ever before, and quite literally out of 

desperation are looking for a quick fix.  It's endemic to a 

society where there's increased crime, where individuals need a 

quick fix to satisfy their alcoholism or their drug use or their 

gambling addiction.  It's endemic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a 

society and to a society where there is racial intolerance, where 

young people with nowhere to turn become involved in gangs. 

 

Now these are the problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  These are 

the underlying causes.  These are the causes, not just the 

symptoms, and these must be the ones that are going to have to 

be addressed.  And then there is no reason why we cannot all 

reap the benefits from the responsible use of guns. 

 

I liken it somewhat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the rules that we 

have in hockey, and there is much talk about violence in 

hockey.  I have always been a strong proponent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that we do not necessarily have to change the rules in 

hockey.  They are there.  It's a matter of the will to enforce the 

rules that exist, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I am pleased to note that the member from I think 

Saskatoon Wildwood, if I am correct, or River Heights, pardon 

me, in her member's statement, made reference to the fact that 

we have over 1,000 police officers in Saskatchewan, and only 

around 13 times during the course of an entire year was there 

an official discharge of the firearms' use, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and in not one instance was there an injury to a human life. 

 

And of course unfortunately we can't say the same thing for the 

two skunks and rather a feisty steer that suffered the results of 

those shots.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think that illustrates the point 

that I'm trying to make. 

 

I'm going to spend a few moments now and go over, for the 

benefit of people who may be listening, some of the gun laws 

that exist in Canada right now, the most recent change being in 

1991 when this gun control legislation was passed.  And we 

take a look at the fact that there are different categories of 

weapons, and they are called weapons in most instances instead 

of handguns, and I think that is a misnomer to begin with. 

 

So we have the category of the unrestricted, like shotguns and 

rifles that must be reloaded after each shot, and we do know 

that there are still some semi-automatics that are allowed in 

hunting situations.  We have the restricted weapons as well.  

These are handguns, some semi-automatics, and so on.  And 

they need extra monitoring to make sure that they are handled 

properly.  And then of course we have that category, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of the guns that are banned -- banned outright 

-- and the new law added over 50 types of semi-automatic and 

military-style weapons, including assault rifles that can easily 

be converted over to an automatic function, 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

so they were banned. 

 

We also find that buying of guns was tightened up 

tremendously, where the new law requires all gun purchasers, 

who must be at least 18 years of age, to complete lengthy 

training courses, to complete lengthy forms, and it imposes a 

28-day waiting period before the permit will be issued to 

purchase that gun. 

 

All weapons, as far as the category of storing is concerned, all 

weapons must be stored unloaded.  If not stored in locked 

containers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they must have the bolts 

removed, trigger locks installed, or in some other fashion be 

disabled.  There's a 10-shot limit as far as the magazine 

capacity is concerned for handguns; 5 for shotguns and 

semi-automatic rifles. 

 

Now there are penalties in place.  And the penalties are that 

having a handgun -- simply having a handgun without a permit 

-- is punishable by five years in prison.  The first offence with 

firearms carries a one-year jail sentence to be served 

consecutively, and second and subsequent offences carry 

minimum 3 years and a maximum 14.  We have some of the 

most stringent law guns and gun regulations in the civilized 

world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right now. 

 

And I would just like to point out that some of the problems I 

think that we are facing in our society, in so far as gun law 

legislation, was begun 15 years ago by the then minister of 

Justice of Canada, the Hon. Warren Allmand.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think Warren Allmand is still behind the scenes 

pushing for stricter regulations. 

 

Then another situation, another problem arose, and that was 

under Kim Campbell. And as far as I was concerned, this was 

one of the reasons why I could not support her because of the 

strict gun law legislation that she was bound and determined to 

bring forward.  But even worse, right now is the current 

Minister of Justice, the Hon. Allan Rock, and Allan Rock has 

literally put us between a rock and a hard place in so far as the 

gun laws are concerned. 

 

Now what do all three have in common, Mr. Speaker?  All 

three have one thing in common.  They are lawyers, and they 

are big-city lawyers who have never really been outside of the 

major cities of this country, or if they are, it's still on the 401.  

And there's a total lacking, a lack of consideration and 

understanding of how the rest of Canada lives. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn you to an article, and I'm not 

sure of whether this is off the Leader-Post or the 

Star-Phoenix.  I don't have that on my paper.  But the heading 

says, "Confer with provinces over gun laws: Mitchell."  Now I 

want to spend a little bit of time on what the Minister of Justice 

of Saskatchewan has to say about that. But certainly one point I 

would agree with him is where he said: before these changes 

are instituted, there must be consultation with the provinces, 

and there must be good consultation with the provinces. 

And I have to admit that maybe this is going to occur because I 

understand that Mr. Rock is going to be in Saskatchewan 

within the next couple of days and will be meeting with our 

Minister of Justice.  And what I'm hoping that the result of this 

discussion this afternoon is going to be is that we will send a 

clear, unequivocal message to Mr. Rock as a united Assembly 

in some of the concerns that we have about his gun control 

measures as he is purporting them to . . . what he is intending to 

do. 

 

Now the alarming thing is that it seems to be that there's no 

rhyme or reason because at one time Mr. Rock is saying, well 

we're going to have an outright ban on all handguns, 

completely.  And we'll possibly ban all guns including rifles 

and hunting rifles in cities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And what he's proposing to do then is, well when the hunting 

season comes, you can have your rifle.  You can sign them out 

for the hunting season, but as soon as the hunting season is 

over, if you live in a major urban area you're going to have to 

bring them back in to a central depot somewhere in that urban 

centre until the next hunting season. Now it's scary when you 

hear a lawyer from Toronto talking that way and he's going to 

represent all of Canada, and it's just almost impossible to 

believe the restriction. 

 

Another problem here is the proposed restriction on the sale of 

ammunition, where you basically have to have your 

ammunition certificate in order to be able to buy that.  But 

more so, he says, well I really recognize that we have an urban 

Canada and we have a rural Canada, so I just had a good idea, 

he says; I have a good idea.  What I propose is we have a 

two-tier system, a two-tier system, one set of regulations and 

rules and laws for the urban centres and another one for the 

cowboys out in ranching country.  How is that for a situation? 

 

Well the people of this province are standing up on their hind 

feet and they're saying, enough is enough.  And I know that we 

have an organization called the Saskatchewan Responsible 

Firearm Owners who are now saying this is getting too much, 

it's getting to be ridiculous.  And I'd like to make a quote from 

Mr. Larry Fillo; he was the president of that organization, 

where he says: 

 

 We're paying $50 to the police to collect files on the 

economic, financial, and sexual history of every hunter and 

trapper and rancher and farmer and rural resident in Canada 

because they have a crime problem in Toronto and Montreal.  

It's absurd when you think about it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether that is an overstatement or 

not, he certainly is making the point that there does come a 

time when we are over-controlled. 

 

(1545) 

 

This firearms group is urging the members of the legislature to 

pass a resolution in support of their 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

stand.  And that's one of the reasons why we're having the 

debate this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to have one more quote, and I quote from this article, 

and it says: 

 

 Mitchell said the government will not make such a motion 

since gun control is a federal issue and he does not want to 

waste the legislature's time on an issue over which it has no 

control. 

 

But subsequent to that, I understand from members opposite . . 

. and I'm looking forward to hearing members from that side 

speaking to this motion that I have made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and if we have to make a slight change to the motion, so be it, 

but certainly I am hoping that it will be endorsed and passed so 

that we can send this message to the minister. 

 

Because things are over-controlled, they're getting out of hand, 

and all I have to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that right now I can 

still make an application to buy a firearm; but on May 1 I can't 

because my old firearms acquisition certificate is going to run 

out.  And I have with me here now the application for firearms 

acquisition certificate and it's a convoluted type of a situation . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member across says item 

35.  Do you know what item 35 is? 

 

I'll read it for you.  It's a good point that you make, Mr. 

Member across the way.  On question 35 is literally a total and 

complete invasion of privacy of the people of this province.  In 

fact, no self-respecting criminal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is ever 

going to fill one of these out.  And that's the sadness about this 

whole situation. 

 

Question 35: during the last two years have you experienced a 

divorce, separation or relationship breakdown?  Yes or no?  So 

if you are going to buy a firearm, we want to know this about 

you.  (b) Have you experienced failure in school, loss of job, or 

bankruptcy? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all I want to do is buy a .22, and yet we're 

having an invasion of privacy here where a false response to 

any of those questions put your ability to buy a firearm in 

jeopardy.  If you failed your grade 8 exam or if you failed your 

grade 10 exam and you're 18, you're going to have people 

coming around wanting to know, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there are three references required. 

 

As we understand it, by law, the people whose name you give 

as a reference will be interrogated by the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police), by the police.  They are going to go 

to each of your three references and they are going to 

interrogate them and say, what's this guy or what's this gal 

really like? 

 

And if one of them or if anyone in the community has an 

objection to you getting a firearm, it's hauled up, not before a 

court, but an investigation where any kind of statements can be 

made because they do not  

have to be proven to be . . . as in the case of court. But you 

certainly could become the talk of the town from all of the 

information that you're going to have to be giving out. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of this stuff is an invasion 

actually of privacy and that is some of the reasons we are 

saying, is it really needed?  What are we doing here?  Are we 

making the condition more difficult for the law-abiding citizen 

who just simply wants to be left alone, do his hunting, do his 

target practising, do his competitive shooting, and continue on 

with life. 

 

Another interesting thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 

federal government has also introduced a new firearm safety 

course, a new firearm safety course that all of us are going to 

have to be taking.  Guess what?  Who wrote that new federal 

safety course?  None other than another Toronto-based 

psychologist.  The training is a Toronto-based . . . is it 

somebody who has some experience?  Is it someone who has 

some experience with rural life?  No, it is not.  In other words 

what we're going to have is another duplication of this form 

that we have here where we see a very, very complex 

bureaucratic form that probably was more intended for the ease 

of bureaucracy rather than for what it was intended. 

 

So the thing that I think we have to also remember is that . . . 

We talk about firearms; some people mention them and talk 

about them as being weapons.  Well statistics are proving right 

now that there are .27, 0.27 per 100,000 people that are either 

injured or seriously injured in firearm-related accidents.  They 

go on to say that you are four times more likely to be injured on 

a fishing trip than you are by a rifle or by some form of firearm. 

 

There are other implications here, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Because of these restrictions, hardware stores who carry a few 

guns are going to be impacted because there's a new fee 

structure that will make it difficult or impossible for the local 

hardware simply to sell a few rifles during the year as a 

convenience to the customer or maybe even make a little bit of 

money because that fee structure that's going to be imposed is 

going to be so high that it's just not worth their while to 

continue on with it. 

 

Another thing that it does is it attacks craftsmen.  We have 

skilled craftsmen in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who 

make a few rifles or few black powder muzzle loaders and so 

on.  They are also going to have to make a substantial 

contribution to the federal coffers because of the fee structure 

that is being imposed. 

 

So we could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, on this.  I have a 

number of things that we could say, but one point I want to 

make and that is, where is the proof that guns are going to 

cause much damage in a larger-scaled scenario?  Because, 

because even the Auditor General, the Auditor General of 

Canada has said no one has ever attempted to assess how well 

or even if firearm legislation is achieving its goal or reducing 

violent crime.  So if this is the case, where are the 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

 studies?  Where is the proof?  Where is the evidence?  Where 

is the evidence that indeed this will work? 

 

Well the question is raised, who's paying the price for this 

scapegoating?  And I would say to people in Saskatchewan, 

you are.  The average, responsible gun owner is paying the 

price because they are the ones that are going to be truly 

affected by law.  It's not going to be the criminals; it's not going 

to be the criminals in the long run. 

 

So instead we're making criminals out of law-abiding citizens 

by making gun laws that are so complex that you can hardly 

look at a gun without being in danger of breaking some sort or 

some part of the law.  And I don't think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that we can allow this kind of thing to continue on. 

 

I think I'm pleased to say that . . . and I hope again that 

members of the caucus opposite us are going to be supporting 

this move to bring the federal Minister of Justice to his senses; 

that there's no point in overreacting.  There's no point in 

overreacting because as I have listed numerous economic, 

social problems that are going to result by this tightening up of 

the firearms regulations in this province and in this country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I would now then move, seconded by my colleague 

from Moosomin: 

 

 That this Assembly recognize the importance of firearms to 

the daily lives of farmers, hunters, trappers, and aboriginal 

people, the accomplishment of Saskatchewan shooting teams 

at the international level as well as the other important 

sporting and economic benefits of firearms, and that therefore 

this Assembly urge the government to support in principle the 

continued right of the residents of Saskatchewan, both urban 

and rural, to enjoy the lawful, safe, and responsible use of 

ownership of firearms, including rifles, shotguns, and 

handguns, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter the debate in the Assembly 

today regarding the motion brought forward by my colleague, 

the member from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think recent events certainly brought to our 

attention the fact that gun laws are something that are 

continually on people's minds, and that politicians would look 

at gun laws rather than maybe the major problem in our society 

regarding the violence that we continue to see taking place, and 

that is that we really do not appear to have a judicial system 

that is willing to stand up and finally admit that when a person 

has committed a crime that that person should be held . . . 

person or individual should be held accountable for their 

actions. 

 

Mr. Minister, we're aware of the drive-by shootings 

that took place in the last month or so, one in Ottawa, and then 

most recently in Calgary; and then the fatal shooting of a young 

teenage girl in a fast food restaurant in Toronto.  And as soon 

as we end up with shootings such as this, and with innocent 

people so horrendously losing their lives, Mr. Speaker, and 

basically in the prime of their life, and individuals just being 

cut down, the public in general, especially in our major 

centres,-- jump on the bandwagon. Politicians in the large 

urban centres get on the bandwagon and decide that the only 

way we're going to control this type of action is to control the 

firearms and the availability of firearms to people across this 

great nation of ours. 

 

And I'd like to quote from an article, the Leader-Post, 

Tuesday, April 26:  "Justice minister not attuned to crime 

fears."  And this article is talking about the federal Minister of 

Justice, Mr. Rock: 

 

 . . . Rock's only gesture to the Liberal promise of safer 

communities is to declare war on owners of guns, usually 

respectable people who have kept weapons as war souvenirs 

or for target practice in legitimate clubs.  If every weapon 

were scooped up, these people would comply, but that would 

not end bloodshed.  Crooks would steal, buy or make others. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think if we took a very serious look at 

the weapons that have been used and the guns that have been 

used, and indeed some of the firearms that have been used in 

the recent incidents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may find that the 

reality is these firearms would have been picked up by the 

individuals who use them whether or not we have such strict 

gun controls that it limits totally the use of firearms by 

individuals across our nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of groups that have worked 

very diligently and very long and very hard to establish and to 

set up some responsible guidelines and courses for people to 

follow and understand the use of firearms.  I think of wildlife 

associations across our province and no doubt even across 

Canada.  I think of local gun clubs, and I think of local 

organizations that have taken the time to establish and host 

courses so that individuals, young and old, could attend these 

courses and learn the proper procedures in handling of firearms 

-- learn how to handle them with respect, learn how to handle 

them responsibly. 

 

And most notably, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think one of the 

things we must also learn is the fact that in our society even as 

young people we have toy guns that kids play with, and what 

we see in the media and what we see on TV, children tend to 

imitate. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, one thing we must always learn, as 

we have learned in firearms safety, you never point a gun or a 

firearm at an individual, be it loaded or unloaded.  That isn't the 

proper thing to do because you never know when an accident 

may . . . you may end up with an accident because you may 

think a firearm is unloaded.  And certainly there have been 

cases where individuals have been hurt because they 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

thought the firearm they were working with was unloaded and 

it went off on them accidentally.  But those cases are few and 

far between.  And yet because one person should pick up a 

firearm and discharge it in a very harmful way, not mindful of 

the rights of other individuals, we now have people clamouring 

for stricter gun laws. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think that stricter gun laws are the way to 

address the growing crime we have, and the violent crime we 

are seeing not only in our province, but across this country.  

And I must admit and I must say we should be thankful that in 

the province of Saskatchewan we have been quite well or fairly 

well protected from the very violent crime we see in a number 

of centres in Canada, and most notably even in the United 

States of America and other areas of the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think when we talk about gun laws, we 

should be talking about the responsible use of firearms.  We 

should be talking of ways in which we can continue to maintain 

and encourage people to think responsibly when they think of 

and ask for the right to own a firearm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not exactly sure that rights as we hear them 

interpreted today . . . and I just wanted to bring to your 

attention.  This is an article, again in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix on Friday.  It's entitled "Charter of Rights a 

waste of time . . ." this was an Alberta MLA. 

 

 Municipal Affairs Minister Steve West said federal human 

rights law has been hijacked by special interest groups and by 

criminals who use it to frustrate the legal system and the 

courts. 

 

 "It doesn't work in application and it sets up expectations by 

some citizens and interest groups of absolute rights," he said, 

adding that rights cannot exist without responsibility. 

 

And I think that's one word we have continued to forget about 

and we've continued to leave out of all our discussion, whether 

it deals with firearms or whether it deals with justice, is the fact 

that, Mr. Speaker, we have laws in our nation, laws that are set 

out to . . . so that we, each and every one of us as citizens, will 

grow and live in a responsible manner, realizing that there are 

neighbours around us that we must give consideration to.  And 

I say, responsible manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this article was written it was written 

following the tragic death of an Edmonton woman who was 

awakened during the night when three young offenders entered 

her home and began to ransack and steal.  And she had been 

awakened and she went down to confront; she thought she 

would scare the intruders off.  The result was, Mr. Speaker, 

these young offenders turned on her and took her life. 

And the unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is these young offenders 

are going to hide behind the laws of our land.  They will 

probably plead innocent, and they will probably be protected 

by the law because they are young offenders.  And at the end of 

the day, the law will probably grant them, at the max, three 

years in prison for their actions. Three years, even though they 

have taken the life of an individual who had the same right that 

they do to a free trial.  She had the same right -- she had the 

right to live but she wasn't granted that right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look at some of our gun laws as we see them 

today and I look down the list of a number of the laws that 

were passed by the former government and by the former prime 

minister, and certainly the debate that took place at that time.  

And I know out in my constituency, I spoke out; the member 

responsible at the time, the federal member spoke out and 

raised a number of concerns in the federal House. 

 

However when it came down to the final vote, the vote in 

favour of the gun laws far outweighed the individuals who 

were speaking out against those gun laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at what the penalties are for 

carrying firearms: 

 

 Penalties: having a handgun without permit is punishable by 

up to five years in prison. 

 

Basically what that's saying, Mr. Speaker, is that anyone who 

has had a handgun over the past number of years, has used it 

for target practice, has used it in sport competitions, has used it 

for his own personal use and even around the farm or whatever 

-- he used it responsibly -- if that person doesn't happen to have 

a permit, the new laws indicate that that person could face up to 

five years in prison simply for owning a handgun. 

 

It says: 

 

 First offence with firearms carries one-year jail term to be 

served consecutively.  Second and subsequent offences carry 

a minimum three years and maximum fourteen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what in the world is happening to our laws?  

What in the world . . . where in the world is our justice system 

when simply by holding a handgun or happening to own a 

handgun -- which many people have through the years owned 

and treated and handled very carefully -- they could face a 

minimum of three years and up to a maximum of 14?  And yet 

you can take the life of an elderly lady and hide behind the 

Young Offenders' Act and get a maximum of three years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe one of the biggest problems in our 

nation today is that we have laws that are set out for us to 

follow, we have laws that are set out to address the growing 

crime and to address the seriousness of different crimes and 

different criminal actions. But at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, we find 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

that the criminal is actually getting a slap on the wrist and the 

law-abiding citizen of this country finds on a daily basis that 

their rights are basically being taken away one by one and that 

they really don't have any rights any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems that we're more interested in protecting 

the rights and protecting the criminal elements in our society 

than we are in standing up for the rights of the honest, 

law-abiding individuals in our province and across our nation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are so many more things that I could 

add, but I want to just bring to the attention of this Assembly an 

incident that took place recently -- or basically two years ago -- 

in one of my communities.  And the Dove family . . . when Mr. 

Dove was . . . his life was so abruptly and horrendously ended, 

Mr. Speaker, and the minor sentences that were handed out in 

that situation. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at laws that we have and 

the new laws that are being brought forward by the present 

Attorney General and Justice Minister Rock, those laws, as I 

indicated earlier, are basically being aimed at law-abiding, 

honest, responsible citizens.  But individuals who would take 

and flaunt the laws in our nation because our justice system has 

not stood up and has not applied the laws fairly, Mr. Speaker, 

individuals who are law-abiding begin to ask themselves what 

is going on. 

 

And one would have to say, and we trust that the Justice 

minister, and I trust that the Justice minister of this province in 

his meetings with the Hon. Minister of Justice, federal minister, 

Mr. Rock, will indeed stand up and bring to his attention the 

concerns that are being raised not only at the floor of this 

Assembly but by many people across this province, bringing to 

his attention that it's time we not only talked about rights, but 

it's time we talked about responsibility.  And it's time that our 

justice system indeed started acting in a formal, open manner 

and administered justice fairly and that people receive the just 

reward for the crimes they've committed. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the hon. 

members opposite for bringing this important motion forward 

for debate and I appreciate the opportunity to speak in support 

of this timely motion.  I would, however, at the end of my 

remarks like to move a "friendly" amendment that I believe 

complements and expands the original motion presented by the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hunting has been a way of life since the beginning 

of time.  For generations a traditional sign of adulthood was 

when the young boys were allowed to accompany their fathers 

and elders on hunting trips.  From the outset of such hunting 

expeditions, safety and proper care and handling of weapons 

was of utmost importance. 

During the past 100 years many things have changed. There has 

been an ever increasing sophistication in weapons and guns, 

and many laws governing the handling of firearms and the 

harvesting of game have come into place.  One thing that has 

not changed with the passage of time is the close relationship 

and excitement experienced by a young boy or girl on their first 

hunting trip with their father or mother. 

 

Unlike large eastern Canadian cities, many residents of rural 

Saskatchewan rely on firearms in protecting their livestock and 

property from predators and pests.  Throughout the province, 

trappers carry firearms with them on a regular basis in checking 

their traplines. 

 

In remote areas of the province people to a large extent still live 

off the land, hunting for food in order to survive. 

 

Hunting is a major activity in Saskatchewan each fall, with 

70,000 licensed hunters taking to the field.  The value of 

hunting to the Saskatchewan economy last year was over $49 

million.  Licensed hunters harvested over 73,000 big game 

animals in Saskatchewan in 1993. 

 

Saskatchewan has one of the most respected and successful 

hunter safety education programs in North America.  Over the 

years, 135,000 residents have successfully completed the 

hunter training course and about 5,000 new students graduate 

from the Saskatchewan course each year. 

 

A few years ago, the Saskatchewan hunter safety education 

program was recognized as being one of the best in North 

America.  The number of hunting related firearm accidents has 

declined from 106 in 1960 to 13 last year.  This remarkable 

achievement is attributed to the large number of gun users 

completing the hunter safety program. 

 

Many Saskatchewan residents collect firearms worth hundreds 

of thousands of dollars.  Each year dozens of gun shows are 

held throughout the province, generating public interest and 

respect for firearms.  Again, thousands of dollars are generated 

in the communities hosting gun shows. 

 

Shooting competitions are another very popular form of 

recreation, creating significant economic spin-offs.  Such 

activities range from home town turkey shoots to Olympic 

competitions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ownership and use of firearms is considered 

by some to be the exclusive domain of men.  Nothing could be 

further from the truth.  Many women own firearms, hunt game 

on a regular basis, and participate and excel in shooting 

competitions.  Over the years, Canada has had three 

competitive shooters bring home Olympic medals.  The three 

world competition medal winners were all women, including 

Linda Thom in pistol shooting, Susan Natreff in trap shooting, 

and most recently, Myriam Bédard in the biathlon. 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

Legitimate and responsible gun owners are the first to promote 

safety and the proper use and handling of firearms.  

Unfortunately, like in every other human activity where rules 

and responsibility provide some standards and public 

acceptance, there are those that choose to ignore and break the 

laws of the land.  Despite the strictest and more rigorously 

enforced laws, there will always be the criminal element in 

society who choose to ignore and break the laws for their own 

personal gain. 

 

Whether it is poachers illegally killing wildlife, vandals 

destroying property, or robbers using a weapon against 

innocent people, they are all criminals and should be dealt with 

through our justice system. 

 

Removing legitimately owned firearms from law-abiding 

citizens will not eliminate the criminal element in society who 

are intent on breaking the law.  Canada already has one of the 

most strict firearm acquisition and ownership laws in the world.   

Law-abiding gun owners do not need more restrictions and 

bureaucracy.  We sympathize with those who are facing and 

dealing with crime in our large urban centres.  We support 

rigorous law enforcement and stiff penalties for all criminals, 

including those who misuse firearms. 

 

Because there is such a vast cultural and environmental 

differences throughout all the regions of Canada, we urge the 

federal Justice minister to fully consult with all the provinces 

and territories before considering any amendments to the 

Criminal Code respecting firearms.  The bottom line, Mr. 

Speaker, is that if guns are outlawed, outlaws will still have 

guns. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following 

amendment, seconded by the member from Melville: 

 

 That all the words after "principle" be deleted and the 

following substituted: 

 

 that residents of Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, should 

continue to enjoy the lawful, safe, and responsible use and 

ownership of firearms in the province; and further, that this 

Assembly urge the Minister of Justice to advise his federal 

counterpart of the expressed wish of this Assembly that all 

provinces be thoroughly consulted on any proposed 

amendments to the Criminal Code respecting firearms, to 

ensure that the diversity of Canada can properly be reflected 

in a way that balances the need to protect the public with the 

lawful, safe, and responsible use and ownership of firearms. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great 

pleasure to be able to enter into this debate to 

talk about a very important issue to Saskatchewan, and 

specifically the area in the amendment talking about any further 

changes to gun legislation should be done in full consultation 

with all the provinces.  I think you can look at various 

provinces and things are different.  You can't always 

necessarily make a law that can fit all provinces and all 

provinces necessarily would be treated equally within a 

particular given law. 

 

A lot of comments have been made earlier on by various 

speakers about why they believe that any changes or any 

further changes to the gun laws should have wide open 

consultation with all the provinces. 

 

I just want to spend a few minutes talking about sort of my 

experiences and my family's experiences with hunting and the 

responsible, I believe responsible use of firearms in our family. 

 

Prior to Christmas the Melville Advance, the local newspaper, 

phoned me and wanted me to comment on what was my 

memorable Christmas gift that I got that sort of sticks out in my 

mind.  They were doing a little article in the paper.  And I said 

without hesitation, it was when I was eight years old and I got a 

.22 for Christmas. 

 

And that's sort of the rural way of life.  I used a .22 from a very 

young individual; I used it responsibly.  I was taught by my 

parents and my older brothers how to use a rifle or a .22 

responsibly. 

 

I remember my mother telling stories about her going out on an 

afternoon in the Depression with her .22 to shoot partridges for 

food to eat.  And I mean that was an important aspect of our 

life at that point in time. 

 

Later on in the early '70s, as an economic spin-off, my father 

had a little trap line, and he used his .22 as an important tool on 

the trap line.  And we used to take enough furs to the tune of 

about $3,500 just off of a couple of quarters of land that we had 

a little trap line on.  And that was a substantial bit of income to 

our small farm operation. 

 

So that talks a bit about some of the history of rural families in 

Saskatchewan, some of the economic spin-offs of it. 

 

And I just want to talk a little bit about -- and it's been 

mentioned earlier on -- about violence and why guns are used.  

And I think that by restricting or controlling the use of guns 

and making them harder to get, is not necessarily going to 

change people's attitudes towards violence. 

 

And when I think of a lot of the violent acts that have been sort 

of highlighted in the media in the last few years, it's mainly 

been violence against women.  And by having harder 

regulations against guns, that does not necessarily mean that 

people's attitudes are going to change towards women. 

 

And it was mentioned earlier on about Marc Lepine.  Marc 

Lepine shot a bunch of people with a rifle 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

because they were . . . simply the fact that they were women.  

And by the fact that he did, that shows violence, and I believe 

violence in particular in that instance -- and in a lot of instances 

-- violence against women.  And these are some of the attitudes 

that we have to look at changing, is our attitudes against certain 

segments of our society and educate people so that they 

understand what the implications are. 

 

I think another act of violence and use of weapons is poverty.  

When you are poor and you're hungry, I mean some people will 

use that crime element just to get some food.  And I think if we 

can alleviate the poverty, we can alleviate people's attitudes 

towards certain segments of society, crime rates will drop.  And 

that is some of the issues that we should be talking about, in my 

opinion, as opposed to talking about restricting the access to 

firearms, especially in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think it's important that this motion is debated today and 

that the Minister of Justice has that as his opportunity and has 

the backing of this Assembly in speaking with the federal 

minister, sort of to relay the feelings of what we feel the 

feelings are of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that I'm going to end my comments, and I will be 

supporting the amended motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just 

want to make a few comments on the amendment that's been 

proposed here today regarding firearms, that this Assembly 

recognize the importance of firearms to the lives of farmers, 

hunters, trappers, and aboriginal peoples. 

 

Firearms have always been a part of a large percentage of 

Saskatchewan families for whatever reasons they use them for.  

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many different kinds of firearms 

used for different types of hunting in Saskatchewan. 

 

Different types of firearms are used for game birds, and then 

you have different types of rifles and firearms that are used for 

big game.  And it's always been a major part of Saskatchewan.  

When we're talking about using smaller firearms such as .22s 

and .410 shotguns, this was usually used and still is used today 

by many people to hunt chickens and ptarmigans and spruce 

hens and things like that.  Then you have your large game, and 

a different type of rifle is used.  It will deal with the .30-30s for 

bush hunting and the .30-06 in the larger rifles for moose and 

larger game. 

 

I want to indicate the importance of rifles and being able to 

have rifles, especially in northern Saskatchewan.  Many 

Northerners rely on rifles, not only for game and for meat for 

the table, but they also use this for protection. 

 

There are certain times of year, Mr. Speaker, where it is 

important for trappers and fishermen to have a good weapon 

and know how to use it to protect themselves.  And I speak 

specifically of in the spring at this time of 

the year when the bears come out of hibernation and they have 

their young ones.  They're thin, they're hungry, and let me tell 

you, they're dangerous. 

 

I give you examples of trappers who will go out and will be 

trapping muskrats and beavers and otters along the rivers and 

lakes and have their tents.  And they skin the animals; they 

hang them up; the meat is there.  And a hungry bear comes out 

looking for fish along the open water of the river, and on many 

occasions, had those trappers not have had a weapon to protect 

themselves, not only would they have lost all their belongings . 

. . because when a bear takes a notion that they're going to go 

into a tent, they'll usually tear a hole to go in, and they'll 

destroy everything that's in it and will never ever come out the 

same hole.  They'll tear another hole in the tent to come out.  

And they literally destroy it.  And if a trapper or anybody gets 

in their road, well so be it.  They will maul them and kill them. 

 

And I give you a good example of just how important rifles are.  

An individual on Doré Lake was coming in in the evening, and 

he happened to have a shotgun in his hand, and it was in the 

spring. And he all of a sudden come upon a bear and startled 

the bear.  And the bear had cubs, and he didn't know that; he 

was just walking along. 

 

But she charged him, and he turned around and he shot -- it was 

just getting dark -- he shot, dropped the shotgun, and continued 

to run as most people will do, from a bear.  And as I said, it was 

getting dark.  And in the morning he came back to retrieve his 

gun . . . and he had blood all over him.  The blood had 

splashed; this is how close it was.  And he went out there in the 

morning to retrieve his . . . he had a shotgun, and the shotgun 

was lying there and the bear was lying on top of the shotgun, 

and it was dead.  And that just gives you some reality of just 

how dangerous a bear is in the spring and how important rifles 

are for their protection. 

 

And I say the same thing, and it is even worse, in the rutting 

season for the moose, because a bull moose is one of the most 

dangerous animals that we have on this planet.  They're large, 

and they're very vicious.  And I think when we talk about 

restrictions and the federal government coming out with some 

restrictions, we have to be very careful as to how that is 

handled. 

 

Trappers use different types of weapons when they're out 

trapping fur.  They use a different weapon or a rifle when 

they're trapping muskrats, and they use a different type when 

they're going out after otters. 

 

But I think that it's important that individuals in this province 

learn how to handle guns properly.  We have gun clubs around 

the province.  We have firing ranges, and they're utilized at all 

times.  And young and old alike are taught how to handle safely 

the weapons, the rifles -- I shouldn't use the word weapons.  

They are rifles.  And I think that this is good.  Training is so 

important.  Like my colleague from Melville, he indicated he 

learned how to handle a rifle from his 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

 mother and father, and I did the same thing.  Both my mother 

and father used to hunt up in the Big River area and Doré Lake.  

My mother on many occasions took the shotgun and went out 

and killed partridges for meals.  She killed the big game.  But 

she also taught myself and my other brothers how to handle a 

gun, along with my father.  So we were taught at home. 

 

But I think it's important that we have these gun clubs and rifle 

ranges around the province so that young men and women from 

all walks of life are able to learn how to handle a gun and to 

handle it safely because it's so important to handle that rifle in a 

safe manner. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to urge our Saskatchewan 

Minister of Justice to urge the federal Minister of Justice to 

clearly consult all provinces before any amendments to the 

Criminal Code respecting firearms be implemented, to ensure 

that the diversity of Canada can properly be reflected in a way 

that balances the need to protect the public with the lawful, safe 

and responsible use and ownerships of firearms. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'll take my seat.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the 

member from Rosthern for bringing forward this resolution on 

the control of firearms in Saskatchewan.  I believe the 

presentation of resolutions by private members is an excellent 

way to bring issues into the Legislative Assembly in a positive 

way so that there can be a level of debate which opens people's 

thinking on the issue and allows us as elected members to 

absorb the variety of public opinion on issues that concern the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Firearms, like motor vehicles, can be extremely valuable tools 

for Saskatchewan people or they can become dangerous ones 

which can result in death and destruction.  We have very strict 

and wide-reaching rules about what people can and cannot do 

in a motor vehicle in order to protect public safety. 

 

In spite of those rules, 170 people were killed in traffic 

accidents in Saskatchewan in 1991.  Some of those accidents 

are simply unpreventable, but many result from a conscious 

decision on the part of motor vehicle operators to break the 

laws set out for their protection.  I suppose we could consider 

the abolition of motor vehicles but would the detriments 

outweigh the benefits? 

 

Of course the concept of abolishing the rights to own or operate 

motor vehicles is consider absurd by virtue of the fact that the 

number of people killed or injured by vehicles is minute when 

one considers the number of trips taken. 

 

But what about guns?  What are the benefits of gun ownership 

for society as a whole?  In what situations are they necessary?  

To whom?  Can we live without 

them?  Do people have a right to own them?  Will they exist 

whether or not they are prohibited by law? 

 

The facts are that in 1990 there were 65 shooting-related deaths 

in Saskatchewan.  In 1991, the figure dropped to 54.  

Interestingly, one death was a legal intervention, or police 

shooting; three were homicides and deliberate shootings 

resulting in death; and 51, or 94.4 per cent of the deaths, were 

suicides and self-inflicted injuries. 

 

There has been a steady decline in the incidence of gun-related 

deaths from 1.2 per 100,000 in 1950 to .27 per 100,000 in 

1990.  Still, there is a public perception that guns contribute to 

violent crime and it must be addressed. 

 

What must be determined is what role illegal weapons play and 

how, if at all, legislation directed at registered gun owners will 

impact on the illegal weapon.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that we 

must take a balanced approach to what could become an 

extremely emotional issue for the province.  Because shootings 

are such dramatic incidents, they make headlines in a way that 

physical beatings do not. 

 

What we must realize is that there is an extremely high 

prevalence of physical violence within many homes in 

Saskatchewan that should be of far greater concern to us than 

the rather isolated number of gun-related deaths.  At the same 

time, I want to make it clear that one needless death as the 

result of an illegal or careless use of a firearm is too many.  

And we must keep that clearly in focus at all times in 

discussing this issue, when trying to arrive at some resolution. 

 

The fact is that many of us live in different realities in 

Saskatchewan.  For those who live on farms and in the North, 

reality is that a gun can serve as an immediate protection 

against imminent danger posed by wild animals.  A suffering 

animal can be put out of its misery in a moment with a single 

shot when veterinarians are often hours away. 

 

Some Saskatchewan communities earn a substantial economic 

benefit from hunting and fishing, and few guides in the North 

will take a fishing expedition out without a reassurance of 

having a firearm at hand in the event of having a bear or moose 

stop by the camp-site to share in the day's catch.  Thousands of 

hunting licences are issued annually, yet the number of 

gun-related accidents and deaths outside of violent crime was 

relatively low. 

 

In cities we are exposed to a different reality where firearms are 

concerned.  City residents, who comprise a large percentage of 

the provincial population, have no need to protect themselves 

against wild animals, and few rely on a weapon to stock their 

freezers with wild game to feed their families.  However, I 

must stress that because this is not a reality for city dwellers 

does not mean that it should be dismissed. 

 

City residents more closely associate the presence of guns with 

violent crime and gun-related accidental deaths because that is 

their reality.  Six o'clock news 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

headlines and front-page coverage underline the dangers of 

guns.  Those dangers are real.  They are of enormous concern 

and we have to deal with them. 

 

Therefore, I contend that there are two separate and 

recognizable issues with firearms.  How do we develop laws 

and regulations respecting firearms that acknowledge the 

realities of those who rely on the safe use of firearms for 

protection and sport hunting as well as private collectors' rights 

to own special collections, with a full view to ensuring the 

safety of society by restricting the unlawful and violent use of 

firearms? 

 

In order to develop a thoughtful strategy and ultimately useful 

legislation, we must look at the situations in which firearms are 

used and the situations in which they become dangerous. 

 

I believe that regulations restricting weapons used in rural areas 

for hunting and protection have served society relatively well, 

and in spite of a few necessary adjustments, we may not require 

major changes to these laws.  But what about the use of 

firearms for violent crimes?  This opens a Pandora's box of 

issues and all of them need to be carefully examined. 

 

Is the increase of the incidence of violent and armed criminal 

activity reflective of deficient gun laws?  Or is it indicative of 

the frustration and social unrest that is brewing in many 

provinces and across Canada? 

 

I would certainly like to have more detailed information about 

the incidence of violent crime involving shootings, and how 

that breaks down demographically in terms of the victims, the 

criminals, the locations of the crimes around the province, and 

the economic conditions as they relate to the people involved. 

 

Although I recognize that we cannot cure all the ills of poverty, 

I believe that there is likely to be a direct correlation between 

desperation and violent crime.  I'm convinced as well that 

movement towards increased gambling activity may put direct 

upward pressure on the level of crime and violence as people 

take desperate action to recoup losses. 

 

It is of interest to note that in order to obtain a firearms 

acquisition certificate, certain questions must be answered.  I 

believe that the questions themselves point at many of the 

societal concerns which should be addressed as part and parcel 

for the issues surrounding gun-related deaths and injuries. 

 

To get a licence to have a gun you must answer these 

questions: in the past two years have you experienced divorce, 

separation, relationship breakdown, failure in school, loss of 

job, or bankruptcy?  If you answer yes, your application is 

reviewed in detail. 

 

The question this poses to me is what if someone who has a 

gun, has a gun licence, experiences divorce, separation, 

relationship breakdown, failure in school, loss of job, or 

bankruptcy?  Does the government come around and check to 

see how people are doing, 

whether they may have developed a reason to use that hunting 

rifle on themselves or someone else? 

 

According to the Association of Saskatchewan Responsible 

Firearms Owners, more than 35 per cent of households contain 

firearms.  This says that there are many places that could be 

broken into by someone wanting to acquire a firearm illegally 

and make it untraceable to them, which could be used in a 

violent crime such as robbery or a shooting. 

 

What I'm saying is that all suggestions should be on the table 

for complete and thorough discussion before policy is 

formulated.  If conditions under which guns exist could be 

restricted while respecting the rights of the owners, particularly 

in urban areas, I believe we could set the stage for far more 

serious penalties for those who fail to comply with perhaps safe 

storage requirements. 

 

I'm not saying I have the answers.  What I'm saying is that I 

believe firearms serve a purpose of considerable value for those 

who have earned the right to use them responsibly for very 

distinct and restricted purposes. 

 

I also believe that there are many innovative and effective ways 

we can use to restrict the access of the criminal element and to 

prevent many of the unnecessary deaths which occur through 

gun-related accidents. 

 

Through the collective cooperation of legislators, firearms 

collectors and enthusiasts, law enforcement agencies, sport 

shooting associations, and citizens concerned with the dangers 

presented to society by the very existence of firearms, I am 

certain that we can come to a workable solution to this 

problem. 

 

Ultimately guns will be acquired by those wishing to perpetrate 

violent crime.  The onus is on us as legislators to make those 

individuals far more identifiable by restricting possession of 

guns to certain clearly defined circumstances.  Once that is 

done, it will be far easier to question the people about where 

they acquired a gun and why they have it in their possession. 

 

Think for a moment about it being illegal to have a gun in your 

home.  How much of a problem would that solve and how 

many problems might it cause?  And if having a gun in your 

home would result in confiscation of the weapon and a stiff 

penalty, would that encourage people to comply? 

 

If you were only able to pick up your hunting rifle from a 

security depot operated by the wildlife federation or the police, 

what chance of success would that offer to someone looking to 

break and enter in search of finding a firearm?  That would 

create additional responsibility for gun owners, but it would not 

be done with a view to hassling people.  It would be done with 

a view to reducing violent crime and saving lives. 

 

The representatives of gun lobbies with whom we've talked 

were reasonable people, and I feel that they would be willing to 

discuss and evaluate some of 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

these suggestions that might allow hunters and collectors to 

continue their hobbies while reducing the threats firearms pose 

to society. 

 

I am committed to development of public policy that protects 

the needs of the majority without showing disrespect for the 

legitimate rights of the minority.  For that reason, Mr. Speaker, 

I urge the creation of a committee to investigate the issue of 

firearms control with a view to creating that balance in public 

policy respecting the issue. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to be able to add my voice to those who have spoken in 

favour of some logic when it comes to gun control. 

 

Laws, Mr. Speaker, are for responsible people and there are a 

number of people who are not responsible and who cause 

responsible people a lot of grief.  And I contend, Mr. Speaker, 

that hunters are responsible people.  And we can see that 

through the many activities that they partake in, through the 

rules they've established as hunters, through the programs that 

have been established to school young people as to how to 

handle firearms, the responsible use of firearms, gun safety, 

and in fact learning from hunting with others as to what the 

unwritten rules of gun control are, and that is knowing that the 

barrel of a gun is a deadly weapon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the target shooters are responsible 

people.  Those people who use their guns to target shoot as a 

form of entertainment and a skill that is recognized worldwide, 

as in the Olympics, as some of the members before me have 

said, it's very important to our countries. And guns have been 

within our society for a long time, and target shooters are a 

very important part of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are very many responsible people who 

handle guns and who use weapons for their own entertainment, 

for recreation, and who are very conscious of the weapon that 

they're holding in their hands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, guns are a very important part of our economy.  

As I look around the province of Saskatchewan and I see the 

number of people who are gun collectors, the number of gun 

shows that there are around the province and that the economy 

of this province -- and I know some of the other members have 

given a lot of these numbers -- the economy responds to people 

moving and trading and selling and buying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that small part of the economy, that is the gun 

shows and the gun traders of this province, provides a 

necessary aspect of the Saskatchewan base to ensure that we do 

have a viable province here, and it's an activity that has gone on 

for a long time and it's an activity that is very well monitored. 

 

And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, what we have here by Mr. 

Rock is a reaction -- it's a reaction to a problem of enforcement.  

The problem isn't that the responsible 

people can't have guns -- but that's what Mr. Rock says -- the 

problem is that there is an enforcement problem. 

 

In Montreal and Toronto and some of the larger cities of the 

country, there is a definite enforcement problem whereby the 

policing agencies simply do not have enough people, enough 

time to control the underground supply and movement of 

weapons. 

 

But I ask this question of Mr. Rock and the federal government 

and indeed our Liberal friends over here who should have some 

influence on this. Is the solution to an enforcement problem in 

basically what I call eastern Canada, is the solution to increase 

the limitations of gun control, or is the solution to take a new 

look at the enforcing of weapons? 

 

We have a registration; we have all the rules that we need right 

now, Mr. Speaker.  But the reaction is . . . and I'm sad to say 

that the reaction is a political reaction because we know where 

the population is, and we in the western . . . and I'm not 

creating an east-west rift, but I think that the federal Liberal 

government is, and Mr. Rock in particular. 

 

He's got an election coming up in Montreal and Quebec and in 

the province of Quebec, and there are a number of people who 

in that province do not want people to have guns.  The 

population of Ontario is totally Liberal except for one Liberal . 

. . totally Liberal MPs except for one.  Mr. Rock is reacting to 

the pressures from those societies, and that is not the right thing 

to do. 

 

(1645) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I'd ask the Liberal government in 

Ottawa to do is don't react to the political problems that you 

have by first of all taking away the livelihoods of many of our 

hunters in Saskatchewan, taking away the livelihoods of many 

of our target shooters, or taking away the livelihood of many of 

our gun traders via gun shows. 

 

That is not the right reaction because what you're doing is 

you're pitting one part of the country against another part of the 

country.  And I'll tell you that I'm tired of this.  And I thought 

I'd see a fresh new face on the Liberal government in Ottawa 

where they wouldn't try to split the country up because we saw 

that so long with the previous federal government. 

 

So I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be able to stand in this 

House and join with the number of colleagues who I think . . . a 

number of them have solidly put forward arguments that 

explain to Mr. Rock and the federal Liberal government that we 

do not want to see you playing politics with our livelihoods, 

with our entertainment, with our recreation.  That's not what it's 

all about. 

 

So the answer, as the previous speaker, the Liberal member for 

Regina North West . . . is not another commission.  All we have 

to do is talk to the people who own guns and the police 

officers, and we know 



1868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 1994 

the problem.  But another commission isn't the solution because 

all that is, is a postponement of the problem, because this issue 

is not going to go away.  And it's been researched that now all 

the numbers are available -- as the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley put forward -- as to the number of the crimes 

that have taken place and the reduction, the value for the 

economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask, in supporting this amendment, I 

would ask that the federal Liberal government, and Mr. Rock in 

particular when he's out in Saskatchewan, put aside his partisan 

politics, listen to the hunters, the target shooters, the gun 

traders, and indeed the society -- take a look at the society we 

have out here.  And don't react to a problem that you might 

have in another part of the country by coming down hard on a 

province and a region that has a very, very good record, very 

good record of handling arms and safety. 

 

In fact, as one of our members said, Saskatchewan has the best 

gun safety program in Canada.  And that was witnessed just 

recently when the federal Liberal government tried to make 

changes.  And we went through a whole other hassle about 

registering guns until thankfully, through convincing 

arguments from our government -- the Minister of Justice -- the 

federal government did recognize that we had the best program 

and so we could keep our program.  And we kept our gun 

_safety program and all we had to do was add a couple of 

features to make sure that it was passed in Ottawa. 

 

And that's the kind of cooperation we need.  But we don't need 

the scare tactics through the media, by the federal minister, that 

throws everybody into a panic and a panic because they say this 

isn't rational.  We need a rational approach to the gun control 

and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do support this amendment, along with the other 

colleagues in this House.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Because time 

is short, I'll keep my remarks brief.  I support the original 

motion, Mr. Speaker, and I will support the amendment by the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley even though it does water 

down the original motion. 

 

I have to disagree though with some of the comments made by 

the member from Regina North West in her delivery.  And I 

want to take issue with one particular item.  She talks about 

storage sites where guns would be collected.  Mr. Speaker, 

we've seen a number of times across North America where 

thieves have broken into military armouries and stolen 

firearms, and that will happen if firearms are all collected into 

one particular spot, Mr. Speaker.  It won't work. 

 

I will support the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and thank you. 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also wanted to rise 

today to support the amendment and the motion.  I myself have 

never been a gun owner and I was raised on a farm in which we 

never did have a gun.  But our farm was located near a marsh 

and a small lake called Bratt's Lake.  It was a prime hunting 

spot, good farm land, and also a place that bird-watchers came.  

What I learned is that all these interests were not in conflict; 

that hunters, farmers, and nature enthusiasts could all get along 

responsibly. 

 

Balance is always what is important.  Gun legislation must 

balance and recognize the seriousness of the issue relating to 

violence in our society with the need and responsible use of 

firearms in our society.  Legitimate and responsible gun owners 

are the first to promote safety and the proper use and handling 

of firearms. 

 

Many members today have already stated the importance of 

responsible gun use to our province's culture and to our 

economy.  And we do sympathize with those who are facing 

and dealing with crimes in our large urban centres.  We support 

vigorous law enforcement and stiff penalties for all criminals, 

including those who misuse firearms.  For an effective gun 

control program, we must balance the need to protect the public 

with the need to avoid unreasonable interference with 

law-abiding shooters, hunters, and gun collectors. 

 

In conclusion, I just want to urge the federal government to 

take under full consultations before there is any further 

expansion of the gun control program, and that all changes 

must balance the interests of all Canadians. 

 

I must agree with my colleague from Indian Head-Wolseley 

who said that if guns are outlawed, outlaws will still have guns.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too will keep my 

comments brief because most of what needs to be said has 

already been said.  But it certainly would not be proper to finish 

this debate without the member for Maple Creek making a 

comment, because in south-west Saskatchewan we do have 

probably the biggest claim to fame for being a rural area of any 

part of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in terms of guns, the reality of life is that guns are a way 

of life in our community.  You most likely can find most 

people toting one in their half-ton truck, or if they haven't got it 

in their half-ton truck they certainly don't have it very far away. 

 

They don't have any higher crime rate down there than you 

have any place else in the world.  In fact, I think maybe we 

have less crime because we know how to treat criminals down 

there -- we just run them right out of the country.  And we 

definitely support guns and we do support controlling guns and 

not letting criminals run around with them.  But for people that 

are trained and properly using these weapons and 



April 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

know how to handle them, we see nothing wrong with them 

whatsoever. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to support the 

motions and the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:55 p.m. until 4:56 p.m. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Lingenfelter Sonntag Shillington 

Roy Johnson Scott 

Atkinson Kujawa Kowalsky 

Stanger MacKinnon Kluz 

Penner Knezacek Cunningham 

Jess Upshall Carlson 

Hagel Swenson Bradley 

Neudorf Koenker Martens 

Pringle Boyd Lautermilch 

Toth Renaud Britton 

Murray D'Autremont Draper 

Goohsen Serby Bergman 

Whitmore-- 37 

Nays 

-- Nil 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would make a 

motion: 

 

 That the debate of today on the just voted-on motion be 

forwarded to Ottawa to the federal minister in charge. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 

Regina Centre: 

 

 That moved that the transcript of this debate be forwarded to 

the federal Minister of Justice. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Did the member ask for leave?  Does 

the member have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 


