




















































Hansard: April 14, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1549 

 April 14, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to 

present petitions again.  I will read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

From Goodsoil, Medstead; several communities -- Glaslyn; I 

see Saskatoon in here; Pike Lake; looks like they're coming in 

from all over the province now, Mr. Speaker.  So I'm happy to 

present these today. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the cost 

involved with digging up underground storage tanks and 

replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Kisbey, Arcola, 

Carlyle, Rapid View, Dorintosh, Weyburn, Lake Alma, Canora, 

Bethune, Goodsoil, Moose Jaw -- across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages of petitions that I would like to read the prayer into the 

record, if you will allow it: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up of underground 

tanks, with the exception of 

those tanks which have been proven to be leaking, and cost 

sharing or other alternative agreed upon by all parties 

affected. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from over in my country:  

Macklin, Evesham, Primate, Saskatoon even, Salvador, Hudson 

Bay.  As in other petitions, Mr. Speaker, they cross almost 

across the province.  I would like to lay these on the Table at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

petitions signed by individuals from across this province urging 

the government to give consideration to their actions regarding 

underground fuel tanks. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned individuals from 

communities like Fleming, Rocanville, Montmartre, and 

Kendal, Mr. Speaker, and Shaunavon;  individuals from 

Humboldt, Meadow Lake, and Fulda.  I so present them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I as well have petitions 

with respect to the environmental concerns of underground 

storage tanks and the costs in dealing with digging those 

underground storage tanks up.  They come from across the 

province -- communities like Margo, Gronlid, Codette, 

Weyburn, Nipawin, Mr. Speaker; Kamsack, and Hudson Bay.  

I present them now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions 

concerning the issue surrounding underground fuel tanks.  

Today I present on behalf of people from Willow Bunch, 

Regina, Bengough, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw; people from 

Hudson Bay, Saskatchewan; Lemberg, Saskatchewan; Pelly, 

Kamsack, Danbury, Norquay, Pleasantdale, Lac Vert, Melfort 

-- people from all over the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

that I want to present to the Assembly on behalf of constituents 

of mine from Herbert, dealing with the underground tank 

storage.  And they come from Herbert, they come from Stewart 

Valley, Swift Current, Naicam, Prince Albert, Spalding, Cando, 

and various part of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to lay these on the Table today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 

colleagues in presenting petitions to the legislature this 

afternoon, dealing with underground tanks, and the Workers' 

Compensation, and Occupational Health and Safety Act.  And 

the prayer has already been read, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these petitioners come from such places as Waldheim, 

Hepburn, Laird, RR (rural route) Saskatoon, Dalmeny reeves 

are here, Neudorf, 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

Neudorf, Neudorf -- a whole bunch of people from that fair 

community, Mr. Speaker; Rapid View, Naicam, Naicam, Lac 

Vert, and virtually from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would like to lay this petition on the Table.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

table in the legislature a petition with respect to underground 

tanks.  And I'll just briefly read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them, and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or other alternative agreed 

upon by all parties affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several pages of petitions from people in my 

riding -- people from Torquay; and people across the province 

which include Yorkton; the north-east part of the province; 

MacNutt; Francis, Saskatchewan; several other communities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying that the 

Assembly urge the government to change the regulations 

requiring the replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

On behalf of all of the government colleagues, including the 

Premier, and particularly the members of the legislature from 

the city of Saskatoon, I want to welcome Mayor Henry 

Dayday, to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 

 

I know that Mayor Dayday is in Regina to attend a number of 

meetings.  I hope he enjoys the proceedings; and on a personal 

note, as the Minister of Education, I want to welcome a former 

mathematics teacher in the city to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I note that the member 

did welcome Mayor Dayday on behalf of all Saskatoon MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), but I would be remiss if 

I did not also personally welcome a former colleague of mine 

Mayor Dayday and I served together on Saskatoon City 

Council for 12 long years, and I welcome you here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I would 

be remiss if I did not join my colleagues in the legislature this 

afternoon in also welcoming Mayor Dayday.  Henry and I have 

have had the pleasure of being at very many openings together 

in the past and I look forward to renewing that acquaintance in 

the short future. 

 

With no disrespect to the hon. member opposite, but we want 

to, as the official opposition, welcome you here as well, Mayor 

Dayday. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 

members of the Assembly, seated in your gallery, a group of 15 

grade 7 and 8 students all the way down from Dorintosh 

Central School. 

 

I'll be meeting with them later, but seated with them also is 

their teacher, Mr. Brent Zapshala, and their chaperons, Ron 

Bannister, April Schwartz, Willa Osborne.  And I see also Don 

Pevach is with them also. 

 

And I would also like to wish a special happy birthday to April 

today.  So if everyone would join with me in welcoming them 

and wishing April a happy birthday, please join with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and through 

you, I'd like to introduce to the members of this Assembly, a 

gentleman sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Tom Sokalski.  He's 

from Wapella; he's the postmaster in Wapella there and he's got 

a number of concerns and he's taken the time to come and view 

the proceedings today.  I'd like to ask the members to welcome 

him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through you 

to members of the Assembly, I'd like to introduce today Allan 

and Lorraine Voegeli sitting in the west gallery, along with 

Richard Gibbons, constituents of mine from the fine 

constituency of The Battlefords.  And I'd like members to 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  I would also 

like to introduce a number of my colleagues from the credit 

union who are down today during the credit union convention. 

 

Seated on the far side, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is Rudy and 

Ella Leiter from Goodsoil; Rudy is the 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

director in Goodsoil.  Seated next to them is Gilles and Yvonne 

Colbert from Unity.  Gilles is an old friend of mine; he's the 

manager of Unity.  And also seated next to him is Dan Palsich 

who is the president of the Lloydminster Credit Union. 

 

Now I'm not sure of the next two, but I've got the names -- is 

Chris Scoular and Gerald Rewerts, who I believe are directors 

with the Cut Knife Credit Union.  Seated next to them as well 

is a colleague of mine, Mitch Rokochy, the manager of Cut 

Knife.  And seated next to him is Gary Perry, the current 

manager of Turtleford Credit Union. 

 

We worked together for many years in the Credit Union 

Managers' Association and they scrutinized me there, and here 

they are to scrutinize me here today.  So I welcome you and I 

hope I shape up and do okay for you. 

 

So if everyone would join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to acknowledge the two people from Unity.  Unity 

is a long way from Regina and we don't get the opportunity to 

introduce guests too often.  And the Colberts from Unity, I 

have to be good to them.  As you know, he's the credit union 

manager and many times we need some help now and again.  

So help me give him a good welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Wildlife Habitat Project in Assiniboia 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  On Monday, the 

member from Indian Head-Wolseley announced National 

Wildlife Week.  He said that the theme for this year is, 

biodiversity works for wildlife; you can too.  We can all do 

something for wildlife. 

 

One basic thing we can do is to increase and enhance wildlife 

habitat.  The Scouts and Guides of Assiniboia are working with 

the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation to do just that.  The 

project is beginning this spring in the area of the old Willows 

reservoir near Assiniboia. 

 

The project involves tree and shrub planting to enhance the 

habitat already there, and the groups involved hope to attract as 

many wildlife species as possible by establishing a completely 

natural site which will include nesting sites for bluebirds, 

purple martins, burrowing owls, and other species.  After this 

first phase, future plans involve pheasant release, winter 

feeding, fish release, bat house installation, and bird banding. 

 

I congratulate these young people, their leaders, and the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for working together to 

create this project.  These Scouts and 

Guides will learn responsibility, cooperation, and respect for 

the environment.  They will, we hope, learn that we are all 

creatures of the world and that a world that cannot support its 

wildlife cannot support itself.  Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Update on Rafferty-Alameda Dams 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member for 

the Estevan constituency, I'm happy to rise today to update the 

Assembly on Rafferty-Alameda dams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alameda is full and Rafferty is filling up, and the 

representative from Sask Water, quoted in today's 

Leader-Post, says it will continue to fill from now on.  We're 

very proud of the projects, Mr. Speaker.  They save water, they 

protect people from floods, they cool power plants, and they 

facilitate recreation, wildlife and agricultural resources. 

 

John Bachorcik, a rural councillor, states, and I quote: 

 

 I'd like to rent a tour bus to show those skeptics that Mother 

Nature has proven them wrong. 

 

Similarly, the chairman of the Dr. Mainprize Regional Park 

says, and I quote: 

 

 It's the water that's drawing everyone's attention.  They're just 

looking at the water and (they're very happy with it). 

 

And we're about to open Dr. Mainprize Park, Mr. Speaker.  

Finally I'd like to remind the Assembly of the words spoken by 

the member from Regina Elphinstone on the Rafferty-Alameda 

project just last June.  And he said, I quote: 

 

 You could have walked across Rafferty dam probably 

without even standing on your tiptoes, and not got your chin 

wet.  There's no water there, there hasn't been any water 

there, and there's no water within miles of the boat launch, 

and there never will be. 

 

That's Hansard, June, 1993. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if the member from 

Elphinstone still wants to walk across Rafferty, he might want 

to take these with him. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member for 

Estevan is out of order, and if the member from Regina 

Elphinstone is going to use those as exhibits, he's also out of 

order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

comment on the water in the Rafferty dam.  I want to say that I 

and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It is very clear in the rules that 

we have adopted, the member cannot comment on another 

member's statement in 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

statements by members.  We have accepted that.  Order.  I will 

recognize another member for members' statements. 

 

Saskatchewan Writers 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, in this Assembly we're often reminded that we have 4 

per cent of Saskatchewan's population and over 40 per cent of 

its agricultural land.  We're not so familiar with another fact -- 

that 4 per cent of the population has, over the years, produced a 

greatly disproportionate number of Canada's major writers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you could get the members of the opposition to 

come to order, I would like to continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, W.O. Mitchell, Sinclair Ross, John Newlove, 

Lorna Crozier and Eli Mandel for instance, are all from 

Saskatchewan and all have written eloquently out of their 

Saskatchewan experience.  To celebrate our literary heritage, 

and more importantly, to encourage its continuity, the 

Saskatchewan Writer's Guild is holding its 25th annual 

conference this weekend in Moose Jaw, in conjunction with the 

Saskatchewan School Library Association.  Under the theme, 

WRITE (Write, Read, Imagine, Teach, Explore) Saskatchewan, 

the three-day conference will feature a number of seminars on 

new writing in Saskatchewan, as well as readings by several of 

those new writers. 

 

The Writer's Guild is a unique organization in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, one that serves the needs of its 700 members, who 

include beginning and novice writers, as well as established 

authors.  Mr. Speaker, facing the blank page alone, as the writer 

does, is a courageous and necessary act, and I congratulate the 

Saskatchewan Writer's Guild for bringing together and 

promoting these artistic individuals who give so much to 

Saskatchewan's cultural presence. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Commercial Production of Gold at Contact Lake 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's gold in the 

lakes and forests of northern Saskatchewan, so I'm happy to 

note the Cameco Corporation in Saskatoon will proceed with 

the commercial production of gold at its Contact Lake project.  

Cameco is the operator and two-thirds owner.  Uranerz 

Exploration holds the other third. 

 

The gold deposit at Contact Lake, 63 kilometres north-east of 

La Ronge, will become the largest gold mine in Saskatchewan 

history so far.  The deposit will produce 338,000 ounces of 

gold in six years, with double the geological reserves still in the 

surrounding area.  That's a lot of gold nuggets. 

 

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is jobs -- jobs for Northerners 

and jobs for Saskatoon.  Over 100 people will be employed on 

site; at least half will be Northerners.  It's good to see a major 

corporation like 

Cameco honour this government's long-standing commitment 

to put northern people into northern jobs. 

 

As well, Kilborn engineering of Saskatoon will provide 10,000 

person-hours of engineering services.  This means jobs and 

economic development for Saskatoon.  It also means valuable 

and valued engineering expertise will stay in the province. 

 

Cameco's $39 million project means shared benefits, Mr. 

Speaker.  These benefits will help the entire province.  It means 

golden value for everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Law Day in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to inform the 

Assembly that today is recognized as Law Day in 

Saskatchewan.  This day was initiated by the Canadian Bar 

Association and developed in a hope to promote public 

awareness of the legal system. 

 

It is a time when the public can interact with the legal 

profession on a casual basis, or I might say an unpaid basis, Mr. 

Speaker.  And this type of contact in the provision of 

information by the legal profession helps the public to become 

more aware of the processes involved in the system. 

 

The theme for the day this year is, access to justice.  And as we 

all know, Mr. Speaker, many people are disillusioned with the 

idea that the legal system can help them, because they often see 

that you have to be wealthy or maybe qualify for legal aid to 

have access to the legal system.  And the activities of Law Day 

will help promote a better understanding of the legal system 

and what access people actually have. 

 

Activities will include mock trials, high school lectures, 

seniors' lectures, free legal consultations on areas like criminal 

law, family law, wills and estates, and personal injury law. 

 

And I'd like the members to join with me in congratulating the 

Canadian Bar Association and the legal profession for taking 

the time out to keep the public informed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina General Hospital Palliative Care Unit 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

congratulate the Regina District Health Board on the steps it's 

taking in the area of palliative care.  The board yesterday 

officially opened a 10-bed palliative care unit at the Regina 

General Hospital to complement its community-based 

palliative care programs. 

 

The new unit was made possible through a consolidation of 

existing services, and with the added assistance of community 

donations.  Palliative care, which is very important to all of us 

at some time in our 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

lives, is the care provided to the terminally ill.  It's a vital 

component of health care and it's very important that people 

receive the kind of warm and supportive care that they need at 

that stage.  I'm pleased the Regina Health District recognizes 

this need and that health districts across the province are 

placing increased emphasis on palliative care. 

 

Palliative care, particularly when it's provided in the comfort 

and familiar surroundings of a person's home, can make all the 

difference.  And anyone who's ever had a relative or a friend 

spend their last days alone in an institution, would understand 

just how important it is. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask the members of the 

Assembly to join me in congratulating the Regina District 

Health Board for its efforts in this area.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Canadian Grain Exports to United States 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This 

afternoon I want to direct a few questions to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  And, Mr. Minister, today we see how well you 

and the federal Liberal Agriculture minister are sticking up for 

the Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

After all their tough rhetoric, the federal Liberals are about to 

cut Canadian grain exports to the U.S. (United States) by 1.7 

million tonnes, which will have a tremendous negative impact 

upon the Saskatchewan farming community. 

 

And it's interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that just a short two 

months ago, Canada was on the verge of getting 2.5 million 

tonnes export limit, but Mr. Goodale's superior negotiating 

skills appears to have reduced that by a third, down to 1.7 

million tonnes. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to ensure that Saskatchewan 

farmers are not the victims of unfair U.S. trade practices?  

What are you doing to stand up for the Saskatchewan farmers 

in the face of this massive and potentially disastrous sell-out by 

the federal Liberals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in light of the debate 

yesterday, I think I clearly outlined the concerns that we have.  

I think the member opposite is absolutely right; a cap of 1.7 

million tonnes on wheat from Canada is not acceptable.  We've 

made that very clear to the federal minister, as did all the 

provincial ministers at various . . . as recently as about two 

weeks ago when we had a federal-provincial ministers' 

meeting.  There was a unanimous decision there to support and 

encourage the federal minister to take a very tough stand and 

not to accept caps. 

 

And when he left that meeting, he made a very strong 

statement about retaliations and standing up for Canadians' 

rights.  I don't know what the state of the negotiations is in 

Marrakech, but we certainly have encouraged the federal 

minister not to make any concessions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, to you 

again, Liberal government officials say that Canada's exports to 

the U.S. must be lowered because we have benefited over the 

last two years because of flooding -- flooding, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I don't know, perhaps the Minister of Economic 

Development might be able to loan out his newly acquired 

aqualung and snorkel to the federal minister, who may have 

been under water for a little bit too long.  Because I suggest to 

you, Mr. Minister, that that is a bogus argument, this idea of 

flooding.  And it's just going to sell Saskatchewan wheat 

producers short. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is, as you probably know as well, there is 

virtually no wheat being grown in the flood plains of the United 

States.  Yet the Liberal government is allowing U.S. trade 

negotiators to use this as an excuse to limit our wheat exports. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to ensure that the interests of 

Saskatchewan farmers are not going to be negotiated away by 

what is appearing to be an incompetent federal government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for that question.  He is absolutely correct.  The large sales of 

wheat into the United States are almost exclusively the result of 

the Americans exporting their own wheat into world markets at 

hugely subsidized prices -- into our particular markets, into 

Mexico, which has been our traditional market, using EEP 

(export enhancement program) as up to $60 a ton, to take away 

our markets and to lower the world prices.  And that's created 

the shortage of wheat in the United States and increased the 

price, of which we have been able to take some advantage of. 

 

We've done all we can to make that point with the federal 

government.  I suggest that maybe you talk to the Leader of the 

Third Party and see if they can have some influence on their 

federal colleagues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was hoping, Mr. 

Minister, that you, as the Saskatchewan Agriculture minister, 

would take it upon yourself to do exactly that.  And I would 

encourage you to do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

But I might add, Mr. Minister, that not only is Canada getting 

the short end of the stick in this matter but Saskatchewan is 

getting the shaft.  Let's bring it closer to home.  Because that 

new quota of 1.7 million tonnes, do you know that 200,000 

tonnes of that 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

figure is going to be from Ontario?  Now, Mr. Minister, the 

appalling aspect of it is, that that is, 200,000 is about 15 per 

cent of that total.  And yet Ontario only produces 5 per cent of 

the Canadian wheat.  So there is an impropriety there.  It's 

something that's out of sync. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, while Mr. Goodale is protecting the interests 

of Ontario farmers and producers, that is at the direct expense 

of Saskatchewan farmers.  And what are you going to do about 

that to stop him?  Mr. Minister, what are you going to do to 

ensure that Canadian grain exports are allocated fairly to all 

provinces based on the provinces' production? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is 

correct, that any limits on wheat is obviously going to affect 

Saskatchewan more than any other province.  And one of the 

agreements . . . in fact, all the other Ag ministers in the country, 

provincial Ag ministers as well, supported the concept that we 

should not be trading off farmers in one part of this country for 

farmers in another part of this country and that the wheat 

dispute should be settled on its own and not traded off with 

other areas. 

 

And certainly Mr. Goodale left the ministers' meeting with the 

strong conviction that he was going to stand up for our farmers.  

If he's not doing that over there, and I don't know the details 

and I haven't seen any agreement that is being signed, but 

certainly he left here with the commitment to look after 

Saskatchewan farmers, and if he's not doing so, we will 

certainly be raising that issue with him very, very strongly. 

 

And I would urge members of your party as well as members 

of the third party, who should have some influence, to raise 

those same issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, your Labour 

Standards Act contains some sections which are not only 

detrimental to business investment and job creation, but can 

only be described as irresponsible. 

 

Some of the sections in your Bill contain hidden surprises; 

surprises which only come to surface after extensive review 

and investigation.  Mr. Minister, your labour legislation 

contains a new definition of the word spouse.  We have been 

informed that your new definition means that the same-sex 

partners would have the right to bereavement leave as well as 

injury and illness leave. 

 

Now can you confirm this, Mr. Minister, and can you inform 

the Assembly how much this will cost small business in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- My response to the member from 

Maple Creek is that these are very detailed questions.  If the 

afternoon goes as one might expect it to, we'll perhaps be into 

Committee of the Whole later on in the afternoon.  I'll be glad 

to provide you with the response when I have the officials here 

to assist us. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll be happy to 

repeat myself later this day.  But, Minister, your department has 

offered a definition opinion.  And their definitive opinion on 

this issue is this: that they say that the . . . that's exactly what 

your new definition of spouse accomplishes -- same-sex 

couples cohabiting for two years or more would be eligible to 

receive bereavement leave as well as injury and illness leave.  

This represents an additional cost for business who must foot 

the bills, quite frankly, for this and other parts of your Bill. 

 

Now it has also . . . has opened the door for other benefits, such 

as tax breaks to be extended to same-sex couples.  Mr. 

Minister, even the federal government does not allow this 

definition.  In the federal tax guide the term spouse is 

specifically defined as a person of the opposite sex.  Your 

legislation contains no such phrase. 

 

Mr. Minister, very simply, why are you extending expensive 

labour benefits to same-sex couples at the expense of 

Saskatchewan business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the member is referring to the 

section that I think he is, there is a section in the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's hard to know. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's not easy to know on the basis of 

that question.  If you're referring to the section I think you are, 

that simply incorporates into The Labour Standards Act the 

relevant sections of The Human Rights Act. And The Human 

Rights Act takes precedence over all else. 

 

So if you're referring to the section that I think you are, it's 

simply a reminder that The Human Rights Act is an Act which 

takes precedence over others.  That's all that section is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to the Human Rights Code 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Justice.  Mr. Minister, during our debate over your changes to 

the Human Rights Code you were consistent in only one thing, 

and that was your solemn assurance to me and my colleagues 

that same-sex couples would not receive spousal benefits as a 

result of your amendments. 

 

On June 22, 1993 you said, and I quote: 

 

 The plain fact is that the amendment that is before the House 

does not speak to the 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

entitlement to spousal benefits for same-sex partners and the 

question just simply doesn't arise. 

 

Mr. Minister, again and again you said that there would be no 

implications for same-sex spousal benefits, and that's where 

you drew the line.  Well it appears, Mr. Minister, that your 

word on this issue is the same as it has been with the provincial 

judges. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you not agree that you have again reneged 

on your commitments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm offended by the question put in 

those terms.  Of course my interpretation of what we're doing 

continues till today.  The Human Rights Code speaks for itself.  

Those matters were extensively debated in this House.  We all 

had access to legal opinions on them.  We dealt with them at 

great length.  The statute speaks for itself. 

 

We all know that the Human Rights Code applies to all 

legislation passed in this House unless we specifically exempt 

particular legislation from the operation of the code.  That's the 

way it works. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the House 

amendments that the Minister of Labour intends to introduce to 

The Labour Standards Act indicates that the new Human Rights 

Code is precisely why spousal benefits are being extended to 

same-sex couples. 

 

That minister intends to introduce a subsection that says, and I 

quote: 

 

 Add reference to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Act which 

serves to alert employers to the fact that more stringent 

requirements may exist under The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Act. 

 

I think it can't be any more plain, and I believe, Mr. Minister, 

you have an opportunity to really explain that. 

 

Will you advise the Minister of Labour to copy the same 

definition of spouse used by the federal government.  Will you 

recommend that common-law spouses must be of the opposite 

sex? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I think we'll get into some of the 

technicalities of that during committee.  I mean those are 

obviously very detailed questions and would require a further 

explanation on your part as to just what question it is that 

you're asking. 

 

The member knows that the Human Rights Code takes 

precedence over all other legislation passed by this House.  

That's the situation.  We all know what it means.  We passed it 

here.  It speaks for itself.  I mean I'm not standing here in 

question period to explain in 

detail interpretations of the Human Rights Code.  We know 

what the general situation is.  If the member has legitimate 

concerns about the interplay between the code and The Labour 

Standards Act, we'll have all kinds of opportunities to discuss 

that during committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Employment for Graduates 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Economic Development today.  Very 

shortly, 7,500 young men and women will be leaving 

Saskatchewan universities, our colleges and technical schools, 

and that's not to mention the 12,000-or-so young people who 

are completing high school.  And they're looking to your 

government to create the kind of atmosphere that is going to 

result in jobs for them -- jobs that will enable them to become 

productive citizens of our province. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to ensure that the young 

people of Saskatchewan have jobs in our province this spring 

so that they don't have to leave Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to thank the member for the question.  As the member 

will know, the Government of Saskatchewan has issued a 

Partnership for Renewal document that talks about the six 

niches in our province where we have great potential for 

creating jobs. 

 

I happened to be at a book launch this morning with the Prairie 

Implement Manufacturers Association, or PIMA, and there are 

wonderful things happening in this province in the Humboldt 

and St. Gregor area when it comes to the opportunities for 

young people in our province who have been educated in our 

technical schools and our universities. 

 

At present, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is in 

discussions with the federal government because we believe 

that we can jointly, by getting rid of duplication and waste at 

both the provincial and federal level when it comes to overlap 

and duplication of education and training programs, deliver 

through a single-window kind of career centre the kinds of 

opportunities that she's talking about.  It calls for some 

flexibility on the part of the federal Liberal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister 

-- and I again direct my question to the Minister of Economic 

Development -- there has been a considerable amount of 

bragging in this House about the fact that the unemployment 

rate really means nothing as far as what you've been raising 

here because there are 12,000 people working than when you 

became government in the province of Saskatchewan. 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

An Hon. Member: -- Twelve thousand less. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Twelve thousand fewer, is what I meant.  

In the past month alone, 2,000 jobs -- 2,000 jobs -- have been 

lost in Saskatchewan.  What happens to the 7,500 people who 

leave our post-secondary education facilities this spring? 

 

I mean you're talking, Madam Minister, about Humboldt and 

St. Gregor and I'm talking about a total of 19,500 people who 

make up more than the entire town of Humboldt and St. Gregor 

put together.  Will they have to be, in fact, added to the 

unemployment rolls in Saskatchewan?  Please tell us today 

what the specific plans are of your government to give them 

some hope in finding employment this summer -- not the things 

you're discussing now, but what plans you have in place to take 

care of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in 

answering the question to the member opposite.  Obviously the 

federal government and provincial government through the 

infrastructure program are working on a number of projects in 

the province.  That member opposite, being the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, could obviously speed up that process by talking 

to the relative ministers in Ottawa and help free up the money 

quicker so that those projects could get going at a faster pace. 

 

I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite 

knows full well that Prime Minister Chrétien made job creation 

the highest priority during the last federal campaign, and we 

still await very carefully and cautiously for some of the 

programs that would help provinces, not only here but even 

more importantly the Liberal provinces in the Maritimes that 

have unemployment rates that would be two or three times 

higher than the Saskatchewan rate, to help create employment 

right across Canada. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite, she is the person 

who promised a project a week about two years ago, or 18 

months ago, and I have yet to have one project that she would 

bring forward to this Assembly that would help keep jobs and 

create jobs in this province. 

 

So rather than play politics, I want to say to the member 

opposite, we are available at any time to meet with you to deal 

with all of those projects that you're keeping on file in your 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  It's interesting, Mr. Minister, 

that your government has been in power for a thousand days 

and the federal government has been in power for a hundred 

days, and you haven't done one tenth of what they've been 

doing.  And tomorrow they're announcing things for the youth 

of this country. 

 

The question is: what initiatives do you have -- specific 

initiatives -- do you have within the infrastructure program or 

any other initiatives that are 

going to stimulate the economy of this province and provide 

some hope for the young people here? 

 

This is about your job; your responsibility for creating a good 

economic climate in Saskatchewan.  And I have checked about 

the infrastructure program and there's only one government that 

is creating problems for things not moving forward.  

Absolutely no reason whatsoever that more initiatives could not 

be undertaken in the province of Saskatchewan except for the 

incompetence of your government.  So what are you going to 

be doing for the 19,500 young adults in this province who need 

help this week?  What are you doing for them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, clearly the member 

opposite continues to play politics with a very important issue, 

that being jobs. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well she's doing her job. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's true that . . . well the member 

from Shaunavon says that's her job.  But I want to say to you 

clearly that the job of being Leader of the Liberal Party should 

be more than playing politics.  I want to make that clear.  

Because what you are talking about is an important issue, that 

being the creation of jobs in this province. 

 

But when I look at what the federal Liberal government is 

doing, whether it's on the negotiations on grain moving into 

U.S. markets and the lack of active work being done in that 

area, this leads very directly to jobs for students on the farm.  

Not a few jobs but hundreds of jobs for students which are in 

jeopardy because of the lack of action by the federal Minister 

of Agriculture when it comes to grain moving into the United 

States.  And I have not heard one word from the Leader of the 

Liberal Party on that issue that means many, many jobs for 

university students in this province. 

 

Instead of playing politics, I say to you, come to us with those 

many projects you have.  You made a guarantee you would 

have one a week in this Assembly.  I say to you, bring even 

five during the balance of this session and then maybe we could 

say you are actually serious about your words as opposed to 

just playing politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there's only one person who plays politics in this House on an 

endless, endless basis, and it's you.  You have blamed, you've 

blamed your failure to creating economic growth on everything 

from the debt to the former government to the federal 

government and even on the third party.  Your government has 

reduced the budget on the New Careers Corporation.  You 

cancelled the youth entrepreneur program in your very own 

department. 

 

Now one out of every five young people in this province today, 

that is leaving the province, is between the ages of 20 to 24 

years of age.  What is your 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

plan for stopping this horrendous outflow of talent?  What's 

your plan?  Not what's everybody else's plan; what is your plan 

as the Minister of Economic Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say clearly to 

the member opposite, and it's possible that she is one of the few 

people in this province or in fact one of the few leaders in the 

country who have not read the Partnership for Renewal plan 

which is getting accolades, not because of our department, but 

because of the involvement of the business community in that 

plan. 

 

Mel Watson, the president of the chamber, calls it the Bible for 

economic development in this province.  Now you may say that 

he is not accurate in his comments when he talks about the 

economic development plan that business, government, and 

working people developed for this province. 

 

Is it working fast enough?  Obviously we need more jobs.  But 

when we compare it to the plan of the Chrétien government for 

creating jobs, or even your good friend Frank McKenna whose 

unemployment rate is not 7 or 8 per cent but 13 per cent -- 

come clean with the people of the province.  The Liberal 

governments across Canada are having very, very serious 

problems with unemployment.  And you, my friend, are no 

better.  It's politics.  What we need are solid commitments to 

job creation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Health Council Meetings 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, one of your two costly 

health care committees is currently touring the province in 

Saskatchewan right now in an attempt to put a better face on 

your government's botched health care reforms.  A couple of 

the committee meetings have already been held, even before 

the announcement that they were going to take place, did take 

place. 

 

Madam Minister, what's the point of holding consultation 

meetings when no one knows about them?  You announced this 

process on Monday.  That evening your high-priced committee 

held a meeting in Arcola.  The reeve of the RM (rural 

municipality) of Brock has informed us that he wasn't even 

notified of the meeting.  The Moose Mountain Health District 

was not notified of the meeting until the very day of the 

meeting, and virtually no one in the town knew about it.  As a 

result, Madam Minister, it was attended by a grand total of 

eight local residents, exactly half the number of the 16 

committee people who were there. 

 

Madam Minister, why don't you just call off this high-priced 

public relations exercise and give the residents of 

Saskatchewan a real opportunity for input in the process by 

holding health board elections this fall, as you promised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'd like to thank the member for the 

question, opposite, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to point out to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly on the opposite side, 

because they're clearly don't understand what's taking place, the 

meetings are not being held by the government nor the 

Department of Health.  The meetings are being held by the 

Provincial Health Council, which is a body separate from 

government, and which is a body that has been . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Madam Minister is doing fine but I don't think 

she can be heard either by her colleagues who are carrying on a 

conversation across the Chamber or by the members opposite.  

We have about three or four conversations going at the same 

time, and I wish people would give the minister a chance to 

answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In 

health reform the Government of Saskatchewan has defined 

health as going far beyond hospitals, institutions, and doctors, 

but going into areas such as environment, housing, water, and 

sewer.  And we want to look at the impact of other influences 

on our health beyond the traditional health care system.  That is 

what wellness is all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Provincial Health Council has been given the mandate to 

talk with people throughout the province on what they feel is in 

their community that impacts health, that goes beyond the 

traditional health care system.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's what 

the Provincial Health Council is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of the amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

Thirty-two per cent of the paid non-agricultural Saskatchewan 

workforce is unionized.  Ninety-one thousand of those workers 

are protected by the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act; the 

remainder are covered by federal legislation.  The Trade Union 

Act covers 1,025 employers which represents 3.5 per cent of 

employers in the non-agricultural sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

The current Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, was passed in 1972 

and amended in 1983.  Much has changed in the workplace and 

in the world economy.  Our Trade Union Act needs to reflect 

those changes.  The proposed amendments to The Trade Union 

Act will complete the government's plan to reform our 

province's labour legislation.  We will once again be 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

in a position where our labour legislation is fair, balanced, and 

up to date. 

 

As I said in my remarks about The Labour Standards Act, there 

has been a tug of war between business and labour over labour 

legislation in which governments have been unfortunate 

participants.  Another analogy is the pendulum.  Under various 

governments the pendulum has swung back and forth; the aim 

of this government is to stop the pendulum in the middle.  

What we want is to provide a framework in which labour and 

business can resolve their problems. 

 

To accomplish this, we want to remove points of conflict in the 

current legislation wherever it's possible to do so.  To review 

The Trade Union Act, this government established The Trade 

Union Act Review Committee in March of 1992.  It was to 

review the collective bargaining legislation and the state of 

labour relations in this province. 

 

The committee, chaired by Professor Dan Ish, a respected 

academic from the College of Law in Saskatoon, had equal 

representation from organized labour and employer 

organizations.  The committee solicited written briefs from 

interested groups and individuals and held public hearings in 

June 1992.  The committee continued to meet through the fall 

and winter of 1992 and submitted recommendations to the 

minister in the summer of 1993. 

 

Ultimately the chair and labour and management 

subcommittees each submitted separate reports.  Their attempt 

to reach a consensus on even a limited number of issues was 

not successful despite the best efforts of both the committee 

and Professor Dan Ish. 

 

In a further attempt to seek consensus, a joint committee was 

struck, composed of a mediator, Ted Priel; a representative of 

business, Mike Carr, of Intercon; and a representative of 

labour, Hugh Wagner, of the Grain Services Union.  The 

committee was asked to give advice on specific issues related 

to amendments to The Trade Union Act. 

 

Again the aim of this committee was to seek consensus.  We 

are pleased with the degree of success that was achieved.  The 

various positions were recorded by the government and we 

intend to follow these recommendations where there is 

agreement.  Where no agreement is reached, the government is 

left to decide the issues, based on the needs of the province as a 

whole and on our view of what is fair to both sides. 

 

The committee was able to reach agreement on approximately 

60 per cent of the issues.  I regard this as an indication that 

we've made some real progress in showing that cooperation can 

replace conflict. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since then we have been able to add to the success 

of the Priel committee in other signs of a more cooperative 

atmosphere in labour relations in this province.  I'm pleased to 

be able to say that there is currently only one strike under way 

in Saskatchewan at the present time and you have to go back a 

fair time 

in Saskatchewan's history to find another period when we only 

had one strike in progress. 

 

I'm also pleased at the cooperative development of regulations 

between business and labour for the new Occupational Health 

and Safety Act, a process which we hope to repeat in The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

In a number of ways, Mr. Speaker, we have begun the process 

of developing a more cooperative relationship between 

business and labour.  I think moderate people from both 

business and labour appreciate that. 

 

There are, however, political lobbyists whose interest it is to 

ensure that no improvement in labour law or in the relations 

between business and labour takes place.  It serves the interests 

of these people and, I may add, of the opposition, both while in 

government and in opposition, to try to continue to divide 

people, to continue with tactics that the previous government 

used with such disastrous consequences for the province over 

the last decade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most people in this province recognize that we 

must work together.  That is why we as a government engaged 

in the most extensive consultation process in history over this 

province's legislation.  One of the issues where no agreement 

was reached was replacement workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about this because 

replacement workers has been a key, and I think perhaps the 

most emotional issue, in this legislation.  The use of 

replacement workers is a principal cause of violence during 

labour disputes.  It creates lasting bitterness in the 

communities.  I wish time permitted me to relate some of the 

incidents which I had during the very extensive labour tours we 

had around the province.  I wish time would permit to recount 

for you some of the comments which I'd heard about strikes 

which took place in their community. 

 

Replacement worker legislation has been effective in Quebec 

and in B.C. (British Columbia) in preventing such violence.  

Fortunately, the use of replacement workers is relatively rare in 

Saskatchewan.  However, as we saw in B.C. and Quebec, you 

can't regulate replacement workers without bringing in some 

form of essential services legislation.  That is a very 

complicated business and fortunately for us, it isn't a road we 

feel we have to travel at this moment, because replacement 

workers are relatively rare. 

 

I want to add as well, the U.S. House of Representatives has 

passed a Bill which would ban replacement workers, the U.S. 

Senate has passed the Bill which would ban replacement 

workers; and those two Bills have gone to the joint 

House-Senate committee to fashion a single Bill.  A telephone 

call which a member of my staff placed to the Speaker's office 

suggests that work is actively ongoing in finalizing that piece 

of legislation. 

 

But we felt it was not right for Saskatchewan at this time.  

We're going to continue to monitor the issue, 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

and if the problem develops and flares up in a major way, we 

may have to revisit the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after considering everything we'd heard 

throughout the province, we've attempted to put together a Bill 

which balanced the interest of all concerned.  The Bill 

addresses four major areas of concern:  one, the need to 

promote collective, productive bargaining and the cooperative 

resolution of disputes; the need to update the rules governing 

strikes and lockouts; the need to provide a framework in which 

to address workplace change resulting from the restructuring of 

the workplace and the economy; and the need to improve the 

efficiency and effectiveness of labour relations regulatory 

agencies. 

 

(1430) 

 

I want to spend a moment elaborating on each of these points.  

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, we propose to create an 

environment where collective bargaining is productive and 

where disputes are settled in a spirit of cooperation.  To 

accomplish this, we will clarify and strengthen provisions that 

require all parties engaged in collective bargaining at all times 

to bargain in good faith. 

 

Secondly, we will introduce important new provisions which 

facilitate the settlement of first contracts.  Presently there are 

outstanding problems with agreements in this province; 83 of 

727, or 12 per cent of all bargaining units, are without a first 

agreement in Saskatchewan.  Successful collective bargaining 

of a first agreement between a new union and an employer is 

crucial since it establishes the playing-field for future relations. 

 

However it can also be the most troubled time.  Neither side 

has experience in collective bargaining.  Often feelings run 

high during a collective . . . during a certification drive.  In the 

past decade, 21,968 person-days were lost in first-contract 

disputes and that made up an incredible 15 per cent of all 

strikes and lockouts. 

 

Under our proposal, despite the absence of an existing 

collective agreement, either party will be able to request the 

assistance of the Labour Relations Board if negotiations break 

down.  The board will make sure that conciliation is attempted; 

if, however, conciliation is unsuccessful, the board will refer 

the issues on the dispute to binding arbitration. 

 

Third, we propose to enhance labour relations services and to 

encourage alternative dispute resolution. We will start by 

reforming the arbitration process.  Subject to particular 

collective agreements, arbitration is always an option available 

for the resolution of disputes, although the costs are shouldered 

by the parties involved.  We will provide two new options to 

speed up the process and to greatly reduce costs. 

 

We will allow arbitration boards to be replaced by a single, 

mutually agreeable arbitrator and we will introduce a voluntary 

expedited arbitration process in 

which limited time frames are laid out for each stage of the 

process. 

 

At the same time, we will empower arbitrators to also act as 

mediators to obtain negotiated settlements rather than an 

imposed arbitration.  We will also clarify the application of 

arbitration.  It will be confirmed that disputes during the term 

of the agreement must be settled by arbitration rather than 

strikes or lockouts. 

 

Furthermore, arbitration will be made available before a first 

collective agreement to deal with claims that newly unionized 

employees have been terminated without just cause. 

 

As an alternative to arbitration, we will introduce two new 

options for dispute resolution.  Disputing parties will be able to 

jointly request that the Minister of Labour provide a grievance 

mediator to help them find the solution to a particular 

grievance.  In addition, the minister may, at any time, appoint a 

special mediator to investigate a dispute and to assist in its 

resolution.  I will shortly return to the subject of special 

mediators and the role they can play during strikes. 

 

As our fourth measure to promote productive and cooperative 

collective bargaining, we propose to prohibit the unilateral 

termination of expired collective agreements.  In this way, Mr. 

Speaker, we'll ensure that when a contract expires, the 

employers and unions will sit down together to collectively 

bargain the renewal of this contract. 

 

Saskatchewan has seen how devastating to labour relations it 

can be when one party decides on its own to impose new terms 

and conditions of work without bargaining those changes with 

the other party. 

 

The second issue which we must address to help unions and 

employers better reach agreements is the creation of an 

improved framework for the regulation of strikes and lockouts, 

which is both clear and fair.  The right to strike and lockout are 

rights held by employers and employees all across Canada.  

They are important rights since frequently they represent the 

only means available during a contract renewal process to put 

significant pressure on an uncooperative party. 

 

We must recognize however that both employers and the 

employees suffer when work stops.  Our aim must be therefore 

to seek ways in which to resolve work stoppages while offering 

some protection to those who are most vulnerable.  It is, for 

example, much easier to settle a strike if the worker is able to 

go back to work. 

 

Our government therefore seeks to reduce or remove the points 

of conflict over strikes and lockouts in the following ways:  

first, striking or locked-out employees will have the right to 

return to work after a settlement.  We will provide a clear 

process for reinstating employees in the same positions that 

they held before the strike to the extent possible, given 

available work.  Any employees laid off due to 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

 work will be entitled to the same notice or pay in lieu of notice 

as would have been required under other circumstances. 

 

Secondly, we propose to allow unions to keep up employee 

contributions to benefit plans throughout strikes or lockouts.  If 

these payments are made, employees will be entitled to the 

benefits to which they would have been entitled before the 

strike. 

 

Our third proposal is to provide the means to help settle strikes 

quickly.  Once a strike has continued to 30 days, we will allow 

the employer, the union, or perhaps a group of employees, to 

request the Minister of Labour to appoint a special mediator to 

assist in the resolution of a dispute.  The special mediator may, 

at his or her discretion, call an employee vote on the acceptance 

of an employer's final offer and may also request that the vote 

be conducted by the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the third area of concern which the government 

will address with this Bill is the need to provide a framework 

for workplace adjustment resulting from the restructuring of the 

workplace and the economy.  More and more businesses are 

introducing new technologies in order to remain efficient and 

competitive.  The government can only applaud and encourage 

these initiatives since such measures are essential to our 

economic activity. 

 

However we must not forget that such measures often have 

significant impacts on existing workforces.  We propose to 

make important amendments to the Act which will provide a 

flexible means of encouraging workers and employers to work 

together, to cope with the effects of technological change, and 

to ensure that affected workers are treated fairly. 

 

Since 1972 the Act has contained provisions which address the 

effects of the new workplace technologies on workers and job 

security.  These provisions are being updated to encourage 

employers and unions to continue to work together to address 

technological change. 

 

Unless delays will result in permanent damage to the operation, 

an employer won't be required to give prior notice before 

introducing technological change and before removing or 

relocating work outside the bargaining unit.  The union will 

then have the opportunity to negotiate an adjustment plan 

which could cover issues such as the consideration of 

alternatives, retraining, severance pay, pensions, and notice.  

Bargaining impasses will not have the effect of preventing 

employers from implementing technological changes. 

 

There are other types of adjustments that can have significant 

impacts on employees.  In particular, changes of ownership or 

management can put collective agreements in question.  We 

propose to clarify and strengthen successorship obligations.  

When businesses change hands, contracted services are 

retendered, or businesses enter into Saskatchewan jurisdiction, 

the employer will have to respect existing 

collective agreements.  Employees will have the democratic 

right to join a union and employers should not be able to thwart 

that right by the artificial creation of companies.  If there is any 

doubt as to obligations, we will employ the Labour Relations 

Board to decide any questions concerning the application of 

these provisions. 

 

Furthermore, we propose to discourage employers from 

operating through related companies to avoid agreement 

obligations.  The board will have the power to deem related 

businesses to be one employer and be bound by the same 

collective agreements. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, under the title of improving 

administration of the Act, comes the fourth and the final major 

concern which government wishes to address in amending The 

Trade Union Act.  It is the need to improve the efficiency and 

effectiveness of their labour relations regulatory agencies.  To 

do that, we will broaden the board's powers to ensure the 

promotion of a cooperative atmosphere in labour relations. 

 

First of all, we propose to ensure that the Labour Relations 

Board and the services provided under the Act will reflect a 

balanced perspective which favours neither labour nor 

employer interests.  Handling trade union issues through the 

Labour Relations Board depoliticizes them, gets them out of 

cabinet, out of the legislature, and into a quasi-judicial process, 

where everyone can have a fair hearing. 

 

Unlike the previous administration, we will work with business 

and labour to ensure that the labour regulations board 

appointees -- that should have read the Labour Relations Board 

appointees -- are fair-minded, with fixed terms, and represent 

business and labour equally. 

 

Contrary to all the ballyhoo which one hears from the lobbyists 

which roam the halls of this building, we're not politicizing the 

Labour Relations Board, Mr. Speaker, we're taking the politics 

out of it.  We're doing that by making the members permanent 

members and by giving them fixed terms so they won't be 

subject to the pressure of the moment of the day. 

 

We're considering improving the Labour Relations Board by 

implementing a rotation system on the same model as is used in 

courts.  And I may add, the model is also used in some 

collective agreements, whereby arbitrators are named and 

thereafter used on a rotational basis.  What we intend to end up 

with is a balanced and fair framework that builds labour peace 

in this province. 

 

Second, we propose to increase the ability of the board to 

discourage unfair labour practices and other violations of the 

Act.  Recently several court decisions have created uncertainty 

regarding the board's powers to enforce the Act.  Attempts by 

the board to more broadly interpret its general remedial powers 

have been struck down by the courts. 

 

It is the government's view that the board was always 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

intended to have sufficient powers to enforce the Act.  The 

changes to the Act in section 5 clarify that view.  The Labour 

Relations Board will now be able to order compensation for 

monetary loss that results from a violation of the Act and order 

that violations be rectified. 

 

However, in order to prevent undue influence in the operations 

of a workplace on the part of the board, the offending party will 

under most circumstances be given an opportunity to submit a 

rectification plan for the board's consideration.  Other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, which have utilized that latter 

method of encouraging the offending party to come forth with a 

plan have found it to be an excellent instrument for enforcing 

the legislation. 

 

Preventing unfair labour practices is particularly important 

when these practices interfere with the opportunity of workers 

to freely choose to unionize and to exercise the rights conferred 

upon them by this Act.  In order to discourage this practice, the 

board will be given limited powers to order certification or 

decertification if any party has been found to have significantly 

interfered with the free, democratic right of employees to join a 

trade union. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we will clarify that it is an unfair 

labour practice to interfere with, restrain, intimidate, threaten, 

or coerce an employee in the exercise of his or her rights 

conferred by this Act by any means, including communication.  

At the same time, we'll ensure that employees have access to 

impartial information by empowering the Department of 

Labour and the labour relations officers employed therein to 

provide any requested information to employers or employees 

respecting their rights under this legislation. 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, in some way these changes to The 

Trade Union Act are consistent with our overall plan of labour 

legislation reform and with our overall economic development 

strategy.  The Trade Union Act, along with The Labour 

Standards Act and labour Bills which were passed earlier in 

this government's term of office, are all based on the 

assumption that there is a need for a better relationship between 

business and labour if we are to adapt to a rapidly changing 

world, and if fairness and equity is to result when we do make 

that application and that change. 

 

(1445) 

 

To compete in the global market-place, to build a more 

prosperous and better society, changes must be made in the 

workforce.  It is essential that we develop a mutually beneficial 

approach between labour, government and business to benefit 

all concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Trade Union Amendment Act before you 

today will provide benefits to employers, to unions, and most 

of all, to the public.  The Bill will provide a framework with 

which employees, employers and unions can reach agreements 

and begin to work in a more cooperative way.  It will 

improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

Finally, the Bill will encourage employees and employers to 

work together to cope with the changing workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will create the productive and 

cooperative climate for labour relations in Saskatchewan in 

which the winners will be employers, employees, and most of 

all, the public.  It'll make this province more attractive to 

workers, to their families, and to business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of The Trade 

Union Amendment Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from the 

clapping that was given by the members on the government 

side of the House, it would appear that at least the choir agrees 

with the minister and his new Labour Standards Act. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate that we raise a 

few concerns and bring to the attention of people across this 

province that The Trade Union Act does more to The Trade 

Union Act than what the minister has indicated. 

 

The minister talked about consultation.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

other day I was at a five-year anniversary ceremony at Printco 

Graphics and I happened to be talking to a number of business 

people.  And one businessman said that the only consultation 

he knew of that took place, took place basically behind closed 

doors with a few selected people in small numbers.  It wasn't 

really the wide-open consultation that the Minister of Labour 

would try to lead us to believe or even would indicate to the 

public and ask them to believe, that we've been out there 

consulting with large bodies of people. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the questions raised by my colleague, 

the member from Kindersley, regarding the special health 

commission that is going around the province . . . and the fact 

that even down in the community of Carlyle they were 

supposed to have this open, public meeting and they ended up 

with eight people other than the few individuals that had gone 

down to meet with the groups to seek their input regarding 

health boards and health districts. 

 

And that would appear to me what's basically taken place, and 

it just confirms what the business community has been telling 

us time and time again, that few if any really had . . . or had a 

real opportunity to meet with the minister or with any of his 

colleagues to address the implications of The Trade Union Act 

as we see it laid before us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess one of the major concerns we have and 

business people have and I think we have to all ask ourselves 

is, when we look at the Bill and we start discussing the pros 

and cons of the rights of 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

individual employees, what rights do employers have?  What is 

their responsibility?  And I think most business men and 

women across this province feel they have a responsibility to 

treat their employees with respect and to show them respect 

and to treat them fairly.  In fact I don't know of any employers 

in my area where the employees would even suggest that they 

form a union, because they feel they have a solid working 

agreement with their employer. 

 

And one of the concerns we have is the fact that an employer 

takes the time, takes the effort, puts the money out of their 

pocket, develops a business to create job opportunities in this 

province for people to find employment.  And yet what does 

this Bill do?  This Bill basically limits and ties the hands of an 

employer who would endeavour to create those job 

opportunities. 

 

I think what we have seen in the past, Mr. Speaker, there are 

indications and there certainly are instances where people have 

stood up and employees have taken some ownership in their 

business, in their workplace.  Printco Graphics is a solid 

example of what employees can do for themselves if given the 

opportunity. 

 

And I want to commend that group of employees in the Printco 

Graphic business for the work they have done in working 

together, pooling their resources.  Not only are they employees, 

Mr. Speaker, but they're also employers; they're part owners of 

their business.  And they're doing a solid business in the city of 

Regina and certainly in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another concern we have, Mr. Speaker, is about employees 

who really do not want to unionize.  There are a number of 

indications in this Bill that the Labour Relations Board will 

have the ability, if an employee raises a concern and would 

suggest that his or her employer has . . . would file a grievance 

against his or her employer, that would suggest that that 

employer has been unfair in their labour practice.  And the 

Labour Relations Board in its power, the power given to it by 

Executive Council . . . and I must point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Labour Relations Board will be none other than another 

political committee set up by the members of Executive 

Council.  In fact it would just be another committee where the 

members could appoint people like the Jack Messer's of this 

world, to make decisions and to have rule and authority over 

people right across this province. 

 

And what if an employee decides they do not want to unionize?  

Let's take a look at the Woolco example in Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker.  Those employees came to us, asked for a 

decertification; they asked the Labour Relations Board for a 

decertification.  It would appear that the majority of the 

employees wanted that decertification.  And yet what 

happened, Mr. Speaker?  The Labour Relations Board voted 

against it. 

 

In fact they stood up for the few people that were manipulating 

the individuals and wanted to form the union, with the result 

that the employees of Woolco in Moose Jaw are now on the 

outside looking in.  In fact 

I'm not exactly sure if that business continues to exist, but the 

last time I talked to some of the employees, they indicated that 

they're working on a daily basis.  They don't know exactly 

when the store will close. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if we're talking about democracy, if we're 

talking about fairness, if we're talking about the rights of 

individuals -- and we had a bit of that brought up in the debate 

this afternoon regarding the human rights Act -- if we're talking 

about democracy, then the same principles should apply if 

employees want to decertify or do not want to have a union as 

they do to unionize. 

 

And I don't see anything in the Act that would allow that.  It 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this whole Bill just reaches out 

and just tries to draw in the unions or the unionized employees 

across the province of Saskatchewan.  And I think I should 

remind people in this Assembly that the majority of working 

people are not in unions, and many of those people -- the 

majority -- want to remain in that position.  They want the 

ability to act on their own behalf and to deal with their 

employers that they are working for. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the complexities of 

this Bill, that it would require that we take more time to review 

the Bill.  And that we, as we've already begun in discussing the 

implications of The Trade Union Act, we need more time to do 

that as well.  And I think it's appropriate at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 54. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

The Chair: -- Before we deal with clause 1, I might ask the 

minister to introduce the officials who have joined us here 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Seated to my left is the deputy minister of Labour, Merran 

Proctor; behind Ms. Proctor is Jeff Parr, an official with the 

department and in charge of labour standards. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister.  I have before me a list of amendments which are 

called proposed House amendments to amend The Labour 

Standards Act.  And I assume, Mr. Minister, that this is the 

submission that you have made to the legislature this afternoon 

and that these are the amendments that you are contemplating 

making to your proposed Act.  Would you verify that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's affirmed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Further to that, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 

can you also confirm that this is the extent to 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

which you are going to be proposing House amendments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's also affirmed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you then further affirm that, also this 

afternoon, that you will be also tabling the regulations pursuant 

to this Act and in conjunction with this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, we're not going to be doing that.  

I had earlier spoken to the member from Maple Creek.  This 

subject has a kind of a tortured history, a tortured history.  I had 

indicated to the member from Maple Creek some time ago and 

it had been my intention to table regulations which would not 

prejudge the work of our committees, but would sort of be 

something in the public domain which would indicate what we 

were thinking. 

 

As the discussions progressed with both business and labour 

over this Act, both sides indicated that they were 

uncomfortable with us tabling regulations.  Both sides 

understood our position and I will discuss with you the general 

framework.  I'll discuss with you how we generally see those 

regulations affecting, but neither side wanted to be saddled 

with regulations which prejudged the matter.  And both sides 

asked that we not table regulations but we leave it to the 

commission and the committees to do that on their own without 

their work being prejudged. 

 

(1500) 

 

I later explained to the member from Maple Creek that I had a 

change in mind, and I say that now.  I offer any apologies the 

change may have caused, any difficulties the change may have 

caused.  But I simply say to members opposite, the parties I 

think are increasingly comfortable with the process by which 

much of the detail is in regulations which they participate in.  

They didn't want their hands tied by us tabling, prematurely, 

regulations, so I will not be tabling regulations to the extent 

that I think we know what we want.  I will tell you what I 

foresee the . . . any individual section, if you want to point to it, 

I'll tell you what I foresee the regulations being so far as our 

thinking has matured on that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think that's going 

to be quite good enough just for you to give us your impression 

of what you think and what you foresee.  We want to see those 

regulations; you have said that you will indicate and bring them 

forward to us. 

 

I refer you to April 5 in debate with the Labour critic from this 

side, where you made the very same salient points that you 

have just made.  And by your claim, both sides did not want to 

have these restrictive measures brought about them by putting 

the regulations in ahead of the Act itself and being 

presumptuous.  But, Mr. Minister, those are your words. 

 

That comfort level that both sides have on this issue 

has not filtered down to us.  But you, having made that very 

same statement as you just did now back on April 5, I would 

assume then that you would have stuck to your word, what 

you're saying now and that is no, you're not going to get those 

regulations.  But just pursuant to your comment that we don't 

want to fetter these sides in any way, you made this comment 

when . . . 

 

I quote from Hansard of April 5.  Mr. Goohsen says: 

 

 Mr. Minister, I'll arrange to give you leave this afternoon 

(that is to go to Committee of the Whole, what we are doing 

right now) if you will table those regulations.  Will you do 

that today? 

 

You, sir, got up and said: 

 

 Yes, I think I can authoritatively say, if you'll give us leave to 

go to Committee of the Whole today on labour standards, 

we'll do that. 

 

I'm quoting you.  I'm quoting you.  The member from this side 

of the House asked, if we give you leave to go to committee, 

you will give us the regulations?  And you said, yes, sir, I'll do 

that. 

 

We sat down, we let it go to committee, on the assumption -- 

not as your assistant there, the member from Rosemont, is 

trying to tell you, that you said amendments, this was . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . assistant, I would call him. 

 

 Mr. Minister, I'll arrange to give you leave this afternoon if 

you will table those regulations. 

 

You said, yes, sir, it's a deal.  And so we quit asking and 

speaking on second reading and adjourned . . . on that issue, 

and it went to Committee of the Whole. 

 

It is now in the Committee of the Whole.  You have given us 

some of the amendments.  I have just seen them now.  I have 

just seen them now, for the first time.  So that will entail some 

detailed study.  Obviously, Mr. Minister, you are not going to 

keep your word in that, that you will be providing for us the 

regulations as you promised -- as you promised -- so that we 

can indeed have a meaningful discussion. 

 

So where are we at if you, as the Minister of Labour of the 

province of Saskatchewan, tell us, let it go to the committee 

and we'll give you those regulations? And here we are again, 

Mr. Chairman, supposed to talk in detail about this Labour 

Standards Act.  We're supposed to be talking about the House 

amendments.  We have them; we haven't had time to study 

them.  And we will also be having a copy of the regulations, as 

you have promised, sir.  So what we as an opposition are going 

to be doing now is holding you to your word.  And you 

obviously don't have your regulations with you. 

 

We're going to give you time, Mr. Chairman, because pursuant 

to rule 55.1 I hereby request the proceedings on Bill 32, An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act, be suspended for three 

sitting days. 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  At the request of the official 

opposition, under rule 55.1, proceedings on Bill No. 32, An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act, are hereby suspended for 

three sitting days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's with certain tongue-in-cheek that 

I say I move the committee rise and report progress and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: --  The minister has moved the committee rise, 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again.  Is that agreed?  

Carried. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

am instructed by the committee to report progress on item no. 

9, Bill No. 32, and to ask for leave to sit again.  And I would 

advise, Mr. Speaker, that at the request of the official 

opposition under rule 55.1, proceedings on Bill No. 32, An Act 

to amend The Labour Standards Act, were suspended for three 

sitting days. 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Wednesday next, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Wednesday next? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's my understanding it would be 

inappropriate to say next sitting because they've moved the 

three-day hoist.  I think therefore it's Wednesday next is the 

first date upon which this could be considered. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The interpretation is that on that 

particular Bill it will be next Wednesday.  But if the member 

says, when shall the committee sit again, then the committee 

can't sit until next Wednesday. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think you're correct.  Next sitting, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the Minister of Justice 

to please introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have seated 

beside me Brent Cotter, who is the deputy minister; and behind 

me, Twyla Meredith, who is the director of administrative 

services.  Ron Hewitt is seated beside Mr. Cotter; he is the 

assistant deputy minister in the registry services division.  

Doug Moen, to my right, who is the executive director of 

public law and policy; and Kathy Hillman-Weir, who is the 

executive assistant to Mr. Cotter. 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, and to 

your officials, we welcome you and look forward to a fair 

discourse this afternoon as we enter into the debate on Justice 

and Justice estimates. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to start with a few questions that have 

come to us via viewer mail.  I think some of these questions 

may have been . . . in fact I know were forwarded to your 

office.  And it's unfortunate that Mr. Sokalski wasn't able to 

remain; he had indicated that he was interested in getting a 

response to his questions. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now what I'd like to start with, you may or may not be aware, 

Mr. Minister, of a problem that the community of Wapella has 

run into in the fact that they let a tender for construction of a 

water project and upgrading their facility.  And in the process 

of that tender, the community and the council decided to accept 

a tender which wasn't necessarily the lowest tender -- it 

certainly wasn't the highest tender -- but they accepted the 

tender based on their understanding of tender policy.  And they 

accepted the tender from an individual who was closer because 

they felt that if something happened to their project, if they 

needed to call back the contractor at any time, it probably 

would be less costly to have someone a little more local, a little 

closer to the community, rather than a contractor further afield. 

 

Well as a result of the tender and as a result of the contract 

being let, the tender, the corporation from Moose Jaw sued the 

community of Wapella and went to court regarding the tender.  

Because he had argued that his was the lowest tender; therefore 

he should have received the contract.  And he want back to I 

believe it was a case back in the early 1980s where a judge had 

ruled that just because you had on your tender, the lowest or 

any tender not necessarily be accepted, doesn't really apply. 

 

What it has done, Mr. Speaker, is put the community of 

Wapella in a financial situation, a bind, where they were forced 

to, through a pretrial, and I believe . . . I have talked to some of 

the lawyers who felt they just . . . it really wasn't in the interest 

of the community to proceed any further.  But they were left 

with the situation where they had something like $30,000 all of 

a sudden out of their pocket, which they didn't have any 

knowledge of or were wondering exactly why should they have 

to put up this funding. 

 

I would like to first of all read the question from Mr. Sokalski 

and allow you to respond, Mr. Minister.  And then we'll get 

into some other questions regarding this process and what other 

communities may have faced on the same principles. 

 

And this question, it reads: 

 

 I would like to ask the hon. minister responsible: does he feel 

at this time, in all 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

 honesty and fairness to the people of Wapella, that justice 

was served at the pretrial held recently at Moosomin where 

Judge Armstrong handled the case of Mike Robinson, owner 

of Service Plumbing and Heating, Moose Jaw, v. town of 

Wapella. 

 

A yes or a no, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for the question.  

And I have the question in my hand because the gentleman, Mr. 

Sokalski, circulated copies of the material that you have, and I 

received it during question period today. 

 

I don't know how to answer Mr. Sokalski.  The dispute is a 

civil dispute and it's not one in which the Department of Justice 

has any interest or role.  It is an action, I presume, for breach of 

contract and it went to a pretrial procedure which is a pretrial 

hearing, which is a hearing established by the Court of Queen's 

Bench pursuant to their rules and presided over by a Queen's 

Bench judge who meets with the parties and tries to sort out the 

issues in the action for trial.  While the judge is doing that, the 

judge will normally make an attempt to explore the possibilities 

of settlement, which is no doubt what Mr. Justice Armstrong 

did in this case, and in the result settled it. 

 

All this takes place without any involvement of the Department 

of Justice or of course the government.  And nobody can force 

people to settle.  They make those decisions on their own.  If 

they don't want to settle, then they don't and they then go to 

trial and take their chances before a trial judge.  Obviously in 

this case, lawyers and officials for the plaintiff, Service 

Plumbing and Heating, and the defendant, the town of Wapella, 

must have decided that they should settle.  And whether that is 

a just result or not is not something on which I could properly 

comment at all.  It's a decision that they've made and not one in 

which I play any role, nor does my department. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the reason I'm raising the 

question is because there are a number of concerned taxpayers 

who felt, even through a public meeting where they had voiced 

the same opinions that Mr. Sokalski . . . and the same 

questions, they felt their community certainly hadn't given 

them any answers.  And that's why it's been brought up with me 

today.  In fact it's been something that we've been waiting for 

an opportunity to question and raise in the House because of 

the questions that are involved. 

 

Just a couple more questions I'd like to read into the record:  do 

you feel that in all fairness the taxpayers of Wapella, who are 

struggling to survive in today's hard economic times, should be 

slapped with a $30,000 liable lawsuit based on a no-fault 

situation?  Yes or no, please. 

 

And the third question, do you feel that at this time and in the 

future that the freedom of choice by the buyer when in the 

process of handling tenders should be eliminated?  Yes or no, 

please. 

Now, Mr. Minister, what I'm referring to here -- and I've got a 

number of copies -- and I think this is a question that we'd like 

to raise with the department, is the process.  Now it would 

seem to me that there must be some form of process or 

something where the Justice department has been called 

regarding tenders.  And what I raise . . . I think the area that 

was raised by the judge at the time and by the Crown and by 

Mr. Robinson, that the wording or the insertion of the words: 

the lowest or any tender will not necessarily be accepted. 

 

And I've got a number of tenders across the province.  And I've 

also found that a number of communities have basically ended 

up in the same-case scenario where they have been taken to 

court simply because they didn't accept the lowest tender.  And 

as they've been based on the fact that . . . And I'm not exactly 

sure why the lowest or any tender not necessarily accepted 

wouldn't be a legal and binding part of the tender process that 

says if a tender comes in and a community is looking at all the 

avenues with which they are trying to spend their dollars 

efficiently, they're going to measure and weigh, not only weigh 

the costs but weigh their options. 

 

And as in the case of Wapella, they chose the contractor who 

was closest, even though his tender . . . and in this case, the 

interesting part in this case is that the tender wasn't that 

significantly higher.  The one that was chosen was only about 

$200 more than the lowest tender. 

 

(1530) 

 

And what I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, is what recourse do 

communities have?  You go before a judge and the judge 

simply rules, well this doesn't necessarily apply; this 

terminology doesn't necessarily apply.  And if it doesn't apply 

and if it doesn't really mean anything, then I'm wondering why 

we have so many tenders that continue to be let based on the 

fact that the lowest or any tender will not necessarily be 

accepted, when communities at the end of the day could be 

taken to court if they don't accept the lowest tender.  And they 

would go to court and they would say yes, but we informed you 

before when we asked for your tender, that we would not 

necessarily accept the lowest tender.  We're going to look at the 

tenders in the context of the tender policy and the job we ask to 

have completed. 

 

And what I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what recourse do 

communities have in this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Apparently during the pretrial hearing, 

Mr. Justice Armstrong made the comment that this disclaimer, 

if we can call it that, the lowest or any tender not necessarily 

accepted, is no longer effective as a result of another decision, 

another, earlier decision of the same court.  And he made the 

observation that most of the lawyers in Saskatchewan aren't 

aware that that case was decided and that in effect that is the 

law now. 

 

And we have been requested to take a look at that 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

decision.  Not Mr. Justice Armstrong, because he was just a 

pretrial judge trying to work out a settlement if he could, but 

the earlier decision, the name of which I don't know.  But we 

know about the case. 

 

We take a look at that case and determine whether this 

legislature should take any action to remedy that situation.  

Certainly it has been the practice for many, many years in this 

province to put that disclaimer onto a tender form, and that 

protects the owner, in this case the town of Wapella. That 

would normally have protected it from this kind of an action. 

 

But I think the member makes a useful suggestion, and that we 

will take a look at that and determine whether any legislative 

action is advisable. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think the point 

that has to be made though is the fact that . . . And yes, you're 

right, the judge did refer to an earlier case.  However, I'm not 

sure how many communities . . . maybe you could indicate how 

many communities have fallen under the same provisions 

where they have ended up in court simply because they used 

this disclaimer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We don't have any idea; none at all. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, based on the arguments presented 

by the lawyers at the time and the judge in his ruling at the end 

of day where he ruled that the town really didn't have much to 

stand on because the disclaimer really wasn't legally binding, 

I'm wondering if it wouldn't be appropriate to inform 

organizations that they should quit using this disclaimer, that 

they should cease to use it because they may end up in a 

situation where they feel they're covered, and yet we have cases 

now where we find out that this disclaimer doesn't cover them, 

and that they could be taken to court if they do not in fact 

accept the lowest tender. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- My department has alerted the 

Department of Municipal Government of this situation and 

informed them as to the effect of the decision.  I'm not able to 

tell the member what action the Department of Municipal 

Government may have taken with respect to it.  But certainly 

municipalities should be aware that the disclaimer, as we've 

been calling it, is not effective. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that even 

the provincial government should be mindful of this disclaimer 

and the fact that it doesn't really hold a lot of water. 

 

I have a tender here by SaskTel for a garage at Gravelbourg 

and they have the disclaimer right in their tender.  Now if 

SaskTel doesn't happen to accept the lowest tender, and if any 

of the other contractors are aware of the fact that there is a case 

such as the Wapella scenario that's been already ruled upon, 

contractors could go . . . and SaskTel could find them in the 

same position that Wapella was in which then becomes a cost 

to SaskTel or SaskPower or any 

government agency. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, as well, when we look at 

the debate that took place last spring regarding the spruce 

budworm and spraying of the spruce budworm in northern 

Saskatchewan, and the fact the Department of Natural 

Resources accepted a bid that was some $150,000 higher than 

the lowest tender, that possibly the contractor who submitted 

the lowest tender should have been looking through the court 

documents and they could have taken the government to court 

at that time for not getting that tender.  We might have been left 

with something like a $100,000 fee for damages. 

 

And I think it's imperative, Mr. Minister, that in the case that 

we're talking of here, we're talking about municipal 

government, and you've indicated that you've talked to 

municipal government regarding this, but I think it would be 

appropriate that your department would certainly make people 

aware, and even government agencies aware, of this fact so that 

government agencies, like Crown corporations like SaskTel or 

SaskPower, don't fall into the same-case scenario and you find 

out that these organizations find that at the end of the day it's 

actually costing them . . . costing more for the job that they've 

applied the tender to. 

 

And I wonder if you could make a commitment that your 

department will do whatever it can to inform people or to . . . 

whether it takes . . . I'm not sure what it takes -- but I think it's 

the responsibility of the Department of Justice to inform people 

that this may happen if they continue this process of releasing 

tenders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member makes a good 

point.  We think that all of the branches of government are 

aware of this decision because the legal advisers in the 

government are certainly aware of it.  But I think that it's a 

useful suggestion that we ensure that this is brought to the 

attention of people.  And we will follow up with Municipal 

Government to make certain that they understand the 

implications of this and the importance of it. 

 

And at the same time, we will look at the problem to see 

whether law reform in this area would be a good idea.  It strikes 

me as I stand here that it would be; but of course, as you know, 

you have to do a lot of analysis and consideration before you 

can actually produce a Bill on it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I certainly 

would give you support if . . . and to your department in 

looking into that case scenario.  Some communities may not 

think $30,000 is a lot of money, but for a community like 

Wapella, where they've been losing population, they've lost part 

of their school, they're struggling to maintain their community 

to the best of their ability, then to have an extra . . . be saddled 

with an extra expense certainly isn't easy.  And I believe the 

government's aware of that as well.  When all of a sudden you 

get an extra bill tagged or thrown against your budget, you 

know what 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

it can do to the deficit. 

 

The other thing as well, Mr. Minister, is the fact that even 

private individuals could get caught up in this if you're really 

not aware of it.  So I think it's something that we should take a 

look at and see if there are areas we can address it so that you're 

protecting . . . there is a law in place that protects people and 

gives them that ability . . . if the wording needs to be changed. 

 

The other case scenario is okay, we just say delete the words 

"highest or lowest tender not necessarily accepted."  Then what 

do you do?  If you let a tender out and you get five or six 

companies apply for the job and you happen to choose the 

middle one, you didn't really state that the highest or lowest 

tender is not necessarily accepted simply because it's been 

ruled against.  Every company, whether they're the highest bid 

or the lowest bid, may even be able to come against you.  So I 

think it's something that we should take a look at and see how 

we can address it. 

 

Another question, Mr. Minister, questions to the Premier, 

comes from Cicely Booth from Carnduff and she says, why are 

you so strict on rifles?  Why not do something about knives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That is a very good question.  Of course 

we start with the observation that we don't do anything about 

rifles or knives because they're matters of the criminal law and 

that's a matter for the federal government. 

 

They have certainly legislated often and recently in connection 

with the rifle question.  And from recent newspaper reports, 

they are considering further legislation with respect to 

handguns.  We have had a difficult time accommodating to the 

rifle legislation, as the member will know, and in Saskatchewan 

we have approached this question of rifle control as a measure 

not aimed at Saskatchewan.  It's aimed at the big crime centres 

and trying to control firearms in the crime centres. 

 

But we're left in Saskatchewan picking up the pieces or the 

consequences of that measure, and it has caused difficulty with 

our citizens and continues to do so.  We've tried to make it as 

painless as possible, but at the end of the day the law is the law, 

and you still have to enforce it even though there is some 

discretion. 

 

With respect to knives, a powerful argument can be made that 

something should be done, something further than the law now 

provides, which is a meagre sort of provision in the Criminal 

Code.  I say that because the member knows that the incidence 

of knife-related violence in bars in Saskatchewan is pretty high, 

getting higher -- quite a concern.  We can't legislate with 

respect to that.  This legislature could not pass a law that dealt 

directly with that question because it would be struck down at 

the first review.  It's a matter of criminal law. 

 

The only way we could possibly get at it would be in a very 

indirect and relatively ineffectual way of trying to 

do it through the liquor licensing provisions, and in effect 

delegate responsibility to the bar managers or owners to do 

something about the knife-toters, people that are carrying 

knives.  Now that's not a very effective way to deal with the 

problem. 

 

On the other hand -- and there always seems to be an on the 

other hand with these matters -- if the federal government were 

to legislate with respect to knives in a similar way to the way in 

which they legislate with respect to guns, then the member 

would know what kind of difficulties we would have with that, 

considering the number of hunters in this province, the number 

of game animals taken in each year, the large aboriginal 

population who do subsistence hunting.  You get into fishing 

also.  We would have all kinds of complications.  Now that's no 

reason for not doing it, but it's not something we in this 

legislature can do very much about. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I appreciate the 

difficulty we're facing here regarding this whole question.  

There's no doubt when I attended the meeting at Preeceville 

regarding . . . where the gun collectors and gun owners held a 

rally, and I'm not sure, they may have even had another one 

recently.  They were talking of having another one. 

 

And you're absolutely correct.  It seems that the lawmakers at 

the federal level . . . and I'm not sure if it's strictly even just the 

bureaucrats getting the pressure and facing the challenge -- but 

I think what we see facing us is the heavy populous areas, that 

we in Saskatchewan really are in a situation where we don't 

have a lot of voice and a lot of control over.  And I just think of 

recent actions that took place in the city of Toronto, where a 

young lady was gunned down just for no reason at all.  And I 

can . . . as soon as I saw that on the news, I could hear the 

people screaming for stricter legislation regarding handguns. 

 

And I'm not exactly sure how we address it, Mr. Minister.  I 

think what we need to do though is take the time to talk to your 

counterparts in Ottawa and relay to them that the types of 

legislation that have been brought forward, and certainly the 

type of legislation that was introduced and passed by the 

former government and by the former minister, Ms. Campbell, 

was legislation that I wasn't happy with.  This type of 

legislation, whether it's with guns, Mr. Minister, or whether it's 

with knives, forgets about the law-abiding citizens that own 

handguns or own rifles. 

 

And in some cases it's for sporting activity, and some cases, as 

you said, with the aboriginal community and a lot of people 

who like to hunt and the tourism aspect of our province. If 

we're going to allow for restrictive gun legislation, we're 

basically hurting ourselves as a province as well because of the 

tourism and the recreation that comes about with gun use. 

 

(1545) 

 

At the same time, while we restrict guns to individuals, Mr. 

Minister, it doesn't necessarily take a gun or a knife out of the 

hands of the person who may choose 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

to use that weapon in an aggressive manner.  And I even think 

of knives.  I believe it was in the city of Calgary where a young 

student, I think it was around the age of 14, died after a knife 

was pulled on him.  You wouldn't think that . . . it's hard to 

believe that a young person would have a knife and decide to 

get aggressive with a knife.  But there's lots of kids running 

around with knives and using them for whittling away and kind 

of playing with them. 

 

I'm not exactly sure how we'd go about it, but I think, Mr. 

Minister, one thing we must continue to do is to inform the 

federal government, inform our other counterparts, that we 

shouldn't just jump on the bandwagon because there are citizen 

groups out there that are demanding we just take away all the 

guns and all the knives out of the possessions of people.  If we 

do that, I'm not sure how we're going to cut our steak tonight 

because any knife could be picked up and used as an aggressive 

weapon.  In fact maybe we'll go to plastic knives or whatever. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to stand up and raise some of 

these concerns, raise some of these questions with the federal 

government and let them know that while they're thinking of 

the innocent bystander out there, they should also be mindful of 

the people who are legitimately treating rifles and guns and 

knives with respect.  I would ask that your department take the 

time to reflect this, and I'm sure that in the near future that 

certainly there will probably be opportunities as Justice 

minister, as you sit down with your counterparts across this 

land, that you have that ability to raise the concern. 

 

Because I'm afraid what's going to happen in western Canada, 

we're going to be just rolled over by the big debate that is 

heating up in southern Ontario and certainly Ottawa and the 

Montreal area, and I wonder if you could respond, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, the member is right on, 

and I agree with his suggestions.  The idea of a steak-knife 

acquisition certificate boggles the mind. 

 

We have found in this province that our training course with 

respect to firearms has been an enormously effective approach.  

I was saying our training program is an effective approach 

because the numbers of firearm accidents have reduced 

dramatically over the years.  We have long-term statistics on 

this.  And in 1960 the number of firearm accidents were a 

hundred; whereas last year they were 13 -- 13 in Saskatchewan, 

as compared to a hundred 30 years ago. 

 

And the reason, in our view, is the very effective training 

program that we've had in effect in this province.  It is an 

amazing statistic that we have trained 135,000 people in this 

province in the safe use of firearms.  That's an amazing number 

in a population of a million people. 

 

We have no fewer than a thousand people who have given 

voluntarily of their time to act as trainers in firearm safety.  So 

there's a whole network of people 

out there who think this is important enough to volunteer their 

time to train other people in the safe use of firearms. 

 

Now I don't know what lessons there are in that for the federal 

government.  But certainly from a provincial level we think 

there are valuable lessons to be learned from the facts that I've 

just outlined. 

 

This whole thing -- the member's quite right -- takes a balanced 

approach and a sensible, practical approach. 

 

When I have looked at the Canadian initiatives for gun control, 

I have often asked myself, whose guns are we trying to control?  

We make it very, very difficult for the ordinary citizen to 

pursue a hunting hobby or to pursue a gun-collecting hobby, 

while at the same time you have to know that the hard-nosed, 

that the hard-core criminals in this country would have little or 

no problem obtaining illicit guns. 

 

So who are we controlling with this legislation?  And yet the 

public demand for this kind of legislation is quite high, and I 

quite understand the federal governments of all political stripes 

moving on this from time to time over the years, but they must 

be practical about it and must consider the effect that that has 

on the ordinary, innocent, non-criminal Canadian citizen, 

Saskatchewan citizen, who has a hobby that involves firearms 

or, in the member's example, knives.  Now I quite agree with 

the member. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I wholeheartedly 

agree with you too because certainly I've had a number of 

people in my community have called, especially regarding the 

new legislation that was introduced and the requirements 

regarding even trying to handle gun safety courses.  And a lot 

. . . the uncertainty that's in the province and I believe we have 

a reprieve until, I'm not sure if it's June 1, regarding the 

implementation of some of these laws.  So I trust that in the 

meantime we're doing more consultation and trying to come to 

a consensus on suggestions that we can present to the minister 

regarding those concerns. 

 

One more question, Mr. Minister, that I happen to have in front 

of me right now, from the questions to the Premier, comes from 

Zelma Deg from Gravelbourg, and I believe her intent is:  why 

does the Justice minister not hire investigators to look into 

cases before taxpayers' -- and I believe she wants -- dollars are 

spent on court cases that are costly? 

 

Maybe what I could add to that, and I'm just going to add a bit, 

but I don't like to usually add to a member's question, but it 

would seem to me from this that the individual is asking for the 

Justice department to make deeper inquiries into cases before 

we allow them to get to court and end up with a substantial 

court case before us. 

 

And I'm not sure if the individual is thinking of say the 

Milgaard trial or the Carney Nerland trial, or cases like this.  

I'm not exactly sure but we do know that certainly 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

going to court and the process of time involved can be costly.  

And we do have a Bill before this Assembly that calls for 

mediation in the case of marital problems.  I'm not exactly sure 

how to answer this one, but maybe you might have a comment 

on it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It is difficult to know, as the member 

observed, what the questioner has in mind, but in large cases, in 

difficult cases, of which the Martensville charges would be an 

example, the department works closely with the police in 

preparing for the trial.  In effect our investigative force is the 

police force, either the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) or the municipal police forces, depending upon the 

circumstances. 

 

The obligation of the Crown, as the member will know, is to 

gather and present evidence to a jury or to a judge if there is not 

a jury.  And the obligation of the prosecutor is to put that 

evidence before the court in an objective manner, mindful of 

the fact that the accused is presumed innocent until a jury finds 

that person guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. 

 

And it is not, so far as the state is concerned, a question of 

winning or losing, it is a question of presenting the material 

before a jury and having the jury rule upon it. 

 

Now we have professional prosecutors on staff who have spent 

an entire career in this field and who are as expert as they can 

be on the various kinds of cases that they have to handle. 

 

And we have of course, with the RCMP, one of the most highly 

trained investigative forces in the world.  And we have 

competent, very competent police forces in our cities -- 

surprisingly so, considering the size of the city and the 

resources that are available to them. 

 

So I think generally we do a good job on investigations. There 

are cases where that may not be immediately obvious or where 

skilled counsel are able to punch holes in it or for one reason or 

another cast doubt upon the evidence.  But viewed from the 

Department of Justice perspective, the investigations are 

generally very well done, both by the RCMP and by the 

municipal police forces. And we feel no need at all for any kind 

of supplementary investigations to sort of check the police. 

 

We do welcome the opportunity, and we work very vigorously 

on large cases or important cases where our advice is sought 

early on from police forces, to assist in the development of the 

evidence.  And that happens frequently. 

 

But at the end of the day all you can do as a state, as a 

Department of Justice, is to put your evidence before the jury 

and let the jury decide whether on that evidence, a person who 

is accused of a crime should be found guilty of that crime.  And 

that's how the system works and that's how we're bound to 

work it.  We have to proceed within those rules which are long 

established and well established and have served our society 

rather well over many centuries. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a matter that I want to raise that is an old matter, and it 

deals with a constituent of mine. 

 

On Wednesday, March 9, an article appeared in the paper and it 

deals with a gentleman by the name of Mr. Howard Gowan.  

And I just want to point out some of the things that appeared in 

the article regarding his involvement with the RCMP and 

treatment in the Weyburn psychiatric service unit 27 years ago: 

 

 Twenty-seven years ago, farmer Howard Gowan was taken 

from his farm by the RCMP and interned in the Weyburn 

Psychiatric Centre, where he underwent a month of 

electro-shock and drug therapy. 

 

 Twenty-seven years ago, his wife Madeleine was left by 

herself, without any warning, to care for five young children 

and a farm. 

 

 Twenty-seven years ago, an RCMP commissioner admitted 

the force acted outside its authority and apologized in a letter 

for any "inconvenience." 

 

 Today, the Gowan family still suffers from the experience -- 

Madeleine can hardly speak of it without tears.  Though often 

they would just like to forget, they continue to fight for 

compensation. 

 

 Most of all, they want a police force that answers for its 

actions. 

 

Mr. Minister, as I've looked through the information that Mr. 

Gowan has provided for me, there are a number of things that 

appear very clear to me.  One is that the individuals who did 

the investigation, both as individuals who were psychiatrists 

within the framework of the Department of Health at that time 

in Swift Current . . . did not investigate any of the observations 

that Mr. Gowan made. 

 

He made observations as it related to his sister being involved 

as a world-class professional trick roper.  They thought that he 

was just speaking out of the top of his head, when in fact his 

statements were accurate.  He indicated at one point in time 

that he had worn Commander Middleton's uniform in a parade 

in Swift Current and they didn't take the time to investigate 

that, which was also true. 

 

They concluded from all of those observations that he was not 

able to handle his affairs and so they indicated . . . without any 

warrant for his arrest, without a warrant for his arrest, they took 

him to the psychiatric ward in Swift Current to be assessed.  

They then proceeded to take him -- again without a warrant -- 

to Weyburn and subsequently he was released about a month 

later.  And all of those things have been a part of what his 

family has had to go through.  And I know Mr. Gowan 

personally and I've known him for a long time. 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

(1600) 

 

There is other history that I want to bring to the attention, and 

this . . . I'm bringing this to your attention, Mr. Minister, 

because I believe that there are certain things that society has to 

deal with and has to respond to, to that area of society that 

someone either abuses a privilege or abuses some control or 

force that he has in his hands.  And that's why we have 

warrants.  That's why we have certain containment legislation 

within the framework of law. 

 

And the information is fairly detailed.  Mr. Gowan was only 

allowed access to that information a short time ago, that 

indicated that even at that time the individuals who were 

involved in the arrest had done it knowingly without a warrant, 

in fact wrote about it in their reports that they had arrested him 

without a warrant, and that they had taken him to Weyburn to 

be treated there without a warrant.  And the individuals 

involved are also mentioned in that.  And it has taken Mr. 

Gowan almost 25 years to have that information made available 

to him. 

 

Now one of the other things that he has also got on file at his 

home is a letter that the Premier, then the attorney general in 

1976 -- this occurred in 1967; 10 years later the present Premier 

was the attorney general -- and he wrote a letter regarding this 

information to a gentleman in Swift Current and said: 

 

 Officials have examined the files of my department relating 

to the incident involving the RCMP and Mr. Gowan.  The 

files are very complete, and on the basis of the detailed 

information contained therein the Government of 

Saskatchewan at the time of the incident did not see fit to lay 

criminal charges against the officers involved. 

 

 As no additional information has come to light to change that 

view of the facts, I'm satisfied that although the affair was a 

regrettable one there is no basis for criminal charges. 

 

 Should you wish information on the RCMP officers involved, 

I suggest you write directly to the force. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I believe he received that answer in 1993.  

And I also want to say that I raised that question -- I raised it 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 1993.  And I also want to say 

that I raised that same matter with the Department of Justice 

when our party was in government.  And the answer that I got 

from the Justice minister's office was that . . . and this is a letter 

written by the member for Estevan, who was the premier, under 

information received from the attorney general's office. 

 

 I understand that matters you have raised involve the RCMP 

in the '60s and those concerns were dealt with at that time.  

The RCMP files relating to incidents during that period of 

time have long been destroyed. 

And, Mr. Minister, what I believe is important in this 

discussion, that we need to have are some other factors that 

occur in the history of not only this case, but there was a case in 

Montreal where individuals through the armed services were 

given compensation for some of the experimental drugs that 

were used in their cases.  And they were each given $100,000 

in compensation for those kinds of things that happened at that 

time. 

 

Now I personally believe that our society owes Mr. Gowan 

compensation for these kinds of things.  And I'm not going to 

ask you here today to spell out if that compensation could be or 

could not be given.  But I want to raise it with you, Mr. 

Minister, because I'm going to continue to raise it as he has 

raised it for the last 27 years, that it is an important part of what 

I believe we should be thinking about in how to compensate 

these kinds of individuals for the misuse that there was of 

authority, and a clear acknowledgement on the part of the 

RCMP that there was a negligence on their part in dealing with 

it and that they apologized for -- and the word that they use in 

their documents, that they apologized for the word 

"inconvenience" it may have caused them. 

 

I just think it's important for us to understand that some of this 

inconvenience was related to by Madeleine, which is Howard's 

wife.  She said that . . . she recalls the day of her husband's 

release: 

 

 He was like a walking skeleton. 

 

 Many of his past memories, everything from his family to his 

work to his hobbies, had been erased from his mind and he 

had to be taught over, Madeleine says. 

 

 The RCMP sent the family an apology three months after 

Gowan's release.  In a letter addressed to Madeleine, 

then-RCMP commissioner E.L. Martin expressed his "sincere 

regrets . . . trusting that you have not been inconvenienced." 

 

Now that is a very, very serious error on the part of society.  

Now this was not . . . this didn't have anything to do with your 

party being in power at the time in 1967, nor mine.  So I think 

in order to have some view of this established, I want to ask the 

minister if he would take it upon himself to review this case 

with the view of in some way compensating for this 

individual's problems that he has had in relation to the society 

not being fair with him and not treating him in a way that 

would initiate some positive responses on his behalf. 

 

And I raise this because he has raised it with me on any number 

of occasions.  And also I asked him whether I should raise it 

here and he asked me to do that.  So I am raising it here on his 

behalf, and I will continue to raise it, Mr. Minister, as we go 

through the next year or two for that same consideration. 

 

And again I point out, if I would have had an opportunity to 

have the information available to me 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

when I was on that side of the House, I would not be asking 

you to do it today because I would have asked at that time.  But 

it was only given, as I understand it, in November of '93, and 

that information we always thought was gone, and it had not 

been there. 

 

So I'd like to have some observations from you on his matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I am familiar with this case because I 

believe that I wrote to Mr. Gowan and I think when the 

member refers to a letter received in 1993, it must be my letter. 

 

The Premier wrote in 1975 when he was attorney general and 

obviously that letter wasn't delivered in 1993.  I mean we've got 

slow mail service in this country, but not that slow. 

 

So I think it must be my letter.  And I've sent upstairs for a 

copy of it and I'll be able to discuss that, the letter that I wrote 

to him, when the copy comes down.  But in the meantime, let 

me embark on some kind of answer for the member. 

 

These old cases are -- by old cases I mean they've been around 

for so many years -- are difficult to, for people like you and I, 

to deal with here in our time, dealing with the actions of others 

long since gone or long since retired from their careers; it's so 

difficult to reconstruct events, and it is awfully difficult to bring 

these cases to a close because they've been raised over and over 

again over the years through any number of routes and 

agencies.  And that's certainly been the case with Mr. Gowan, 

as it has been with any number of other people who have 

visited the member and visited me and visited other members 

over long, outstanding grievances which have not been settled 

by the system. 

 

One of the problems that the province has always had with this 

complaint of Mr. Gowan is that he is complaining about the 

actions of the RCMP.  And that's, of course, a federal police 

force and we are simply not responsible for any of their actions 

or, if I may use the term, alleged misdeeds.  We're simply not 

legally responsible. And you can say to Mr. Gowan that his 

complaints ought to be taken up with the RCMP and with the 

federal government. 

 

Now I don't offer that as a solution to the situation because I'm 

certain that that advice has been given to him any number of 

times over the years.  Indeed I think that the now Premier so 

suggested in 1975, and I think that I so suggested in my 

correspondence with him.  But certainly if there is any 

resolution possible it must involve the RCMP.  And so it is into 

that channel that I think this complaint should be moved. 

 

I said to the member that I have a lot of sympathy with these 

cases because there is a psychology that surrounds them that 

doesn't enable people like Mr. Gowan to let it go.  I mean it is 

so important to him that it must be dealt with and he will know 

no peace until it has been dealt with.  So I have a good deal of 

sympathy. 

And I'd say this to the member.  I'm prepared to work with you 

to try and see what channel is the most productive.  And in that 

respect I think, for example, I could be certain that the federal 

Minister of Justice is aware of this, that the Solicitor General is 

aware of this, because he's responsible for the police.  Indeed 

he himself will be in town this weekend and early next week, 

and I could arrange to have a note put in his hands about this 

case. 

 

I'm certainly prepared to work with you to try and do what we 

can for this gentleman, to see if there is a productive channel 

that could be followed which could lead to a resolution of his 

long-standing problem. 

 

I have the file on this matter.  I've written to him twice.  I wrote 

to him in 1992 and a copy of that letter was sent to you, to the 

member, and I held out no particular hope for him.  I drew to 

his attention that the matter has been reviewed by the 

Ombudsman and several times by the Department of Justice, 

and considering that 25 years have elapsed, there appears to be 

little that can now be accomplished by further discussion or 

another review. 

 

That was on July 17, 1992.  Again I wrote to him almost a year 

later on June 24, 1993, and again I sent the copy to the member 

in which I also didn't hold out very much hope.  I said: little 

can be done at this late date as files no longer exist and we are 

unable to locate many persons who were involved in your case.  

I wrote again on July 17, 1992 and . . . oh, I'm sorry, I referred 

to that letter earlier, July 17, 1992.  Those are the two pieces of 

correspondence that I've had. 

 

Oh yes, Mr. Moen refers me to an earlier letter to you on 

February 14, 1992, and you will have that letter before you.  

There's no profit in discussing the contents of that letter before 

the House. 

 

But I'd be glad to meet with the member and sincerely try and 

figure out what channels we can direct Mr. Gowan to follow.  

And if we can find a channel that might produce some measure 

of satisfaction for him, then I'd be prepared to cooperate with 

that. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You mentioned a number of things, Mr. 

Minister, that I want to add to.  And Mr. Gowan has written 

hundreds of letters, made just as many phone calls to all levels 

of government, police, and any independent agency he can 

think of.  Human Rights Commission.  Former provincial 

Ombudsman, Ernie Boychuck, not only supported his claim, 

but they have both recommended compensation for the actions 

taken against him. 

 

Mr. Gowan has tried courts.  He's failed.  He made four 

presentations to the Macdonald Commission on RCMP 

wrongdoing.  He, as I indicated earlier, and you mentioned too 

that he had been in contact with the attorney general in the 

mid-'70s and when he was provincial attorney general; Kim 

Campbell when she 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

was Justice minister, and others.  But nothing seems to have 

been done to eliminate or solve the problem. 

 

And I think that it's time to identify some of the concerns that I 

think we should be identifying. 

 

One is, is the RCMP, when it is acting on behalf of a 

Saskatchewan Mental Health Act complaint, is that under the 

jurisdiction of the Canadian government, or is that under the 

jurisdiction of the provincial government? 

 

And when RCMP act on the basis of a complaint laid by the . . . 

that fall under the provincial Acts and don't comply with those 

Acts, are they then acting on behalf of the federal government 

or a federal police force?  And if so, then I would consider that 

to be . . . well I don't think that that's necessarily fair that we 

would lay that responsibility on them.  And I think that that's an 

important thing that we need to consider. 

 

And that's why the issue has moved from the federal 

government to the provincial government, to the federal 

government, to federal agencies of the federal government, and 

then to provincial agencies of the provincial government. 

 

And I think that we need to take a serious look at solving this 

problem.  We can pass the buck here for a long time, and Mr. 

Gowan is 67 years old, and it will soon be of no effect for 

compensation to him personally if we delay and defer and 

delay and defer to any length of time. 

 

I just want to add one other thing that I think is important to 

consider.  I know that there was a person from Yorkton who 

had a problem with a highway contract in Saskatchewan under 

your administration, and nothing was done about it even though 

we had legal people saying that the individual, under law, was 

not required to be compensated.  Yet you, under your 

administration, in the last few years have decided to 

compensate that individual for those losses that he received. 

 

And I think that because this is a part of a compliance under the 

Saskatchewan Mental Health Act, that individuals acting on 

behalf of that Act then have the responsibility to comply with 

that Act, and therefore are within the framework of provincial 

jurisdiction.  And I would say that that has to be considered as 

a part of it.  And I would hope that you would have some 

observations about that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well even acting under The Mental 

Health Act, it's my understanding that the RCMP are 

responsible for their own actions.  And I won't add to that; I 

just simply say that. 

 

But I want to restate my offer which I think the member is glad 

to accept, that we would get together perhaps after this session 

is over and see if we can work out some method of resolving 

this long-standing problem, particularly, as the member has 

mentioned, considering the fact that Mr. Gowan is 67 years old 

and the time available for resolving it is obviously 

short.  And I'd be prepared to meet with the member and see if 

we can't figure out a way to get him onto a productive track and 

relieve him of the frustration that he obviously feels with 

respect to this long-standing grievance that he has. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to, just for the record, read into the 

record the response that Mrs. Gowan received from the RCMP 

so that the public know too that they knew that they erred.  This 

is written by E.L. Martin, commanding officer, F Division of 

the RCMP.  And this was written from Regina, November 7, 

1967.  It says: 

 

 Mrs. Howard Gowan: We have conducted a thorough 

investigation into Mr. Gowan's . . . 

 

Some of this is very blurred. If you excuse me I will interject 

those words that I think are there. 

 

 We have conducted a thorough investigation into Mr. 

Gowan's problem.  We would like to extend our sincere 

regrets to you in the circumstances surrounding it, trusting 

that you have not been inconvenienced in the interim. 

 

 We acknowledge that our member, strictly speaking, acted 

outside the authority in The Saskatchewan Mental Health 

Act.  Although examination of the circumstances at this time 

would probably not adequately compensate your concern, we 

hope you will accept our explanation in the same spirit in 

which we offer it. 

 

And he's not being light, but it leans that way, Mr. Minister. 

 

 Our member had, on the day previous to conveying Mr. 

Gowan to the mental health clinic, contacted you by 

telephone requesting that Mr. Gowan call at the detachment 

office the next morning.  Mr. Gowan was good enough to 

come in later the same day.  Unfortunately however, our 

member was absent and an explanation could not be offered 

him. 

 

 The following day it was learned that Mr. Gowan had not 

come to town, so having received professional advice, our 

member travelled to your farm and asked Mr. Gowan to 

accompany him to town.  Your husband accepted, whereupon 

he was examined at the clinic. 

 

 It was the intention of our member to contact you as soon as 

possible after the examination.  You were informed two 

hours later by personnel from the clinic and shortly thereafter 

by a sergeant at the Swift Current detachment.  The member 

who attended your husband was unable to see you that day 

but travelled to your home the following day offering an 

explanation to your husband's brother in your absence. 

 

 In spite of failing to comply strictly with the 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

provisions of The Mental Health Act, we trust you will agree 

Mr. Gowan required medical attention. 

 

It's again an assumption, Mr. Minister, that he wasn't saying 

things that were relevant.  They didn't take the time to go look.  

And I have documents that show that the police didn't take the 

time to do that.  And I think it's shoddy investigation at the 

best.  And even to not to try and understand the individual . . . 

He wasn't a person that was outside of the community that just 

walked in; he was well known in the community and had 

grown up there.  His parents had lived there. 

 

 And so in spite of failing to comply strictly with the 

provisions of The Mental Health Act, we trust you will agree 

Mr. Gowan required medical attention.  Our member, acting 

on professional advice, had in mind only the welfare of your 

husband, yourself, and family, and the general public. 

 

 We do offer you most sincerely our regrets at your not being 

informed immediately and as well for the failure of our 

member to comply strictly with the statutory procedure. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why I think it's time, as I said earlier, 

that we address this issue as sincerely.  And I will take you up 

on your offer to talk about this.  And if there is anybody that I 

need to speak with, I will take that as advice that I want to have 

you provide to me and some help that we can have for this 

individual as he tries to solve what society did to him 27 years 

ago. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I will certainly contact the 

member, I suggest when the session is over, and we'll get 

together and see what we can do about this. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, I just have a 

few questions with respect to this Saskatoon Community 

Mediation Services.  It's come to my attention that they feel 

that they are being underfunded by your department.  I think 

they've been repeatedly asking for $5,300 to fund the 

operations of that mediation service.  At least that's the 

information I've been given.  And they've been told no at every 

opportunity and every request.  In their view, and I think the 

view of a lot of people in Saskatoon, they provide a very 

valuable service.  And I wonder if you could shed a little light 

on that for us please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The officials met with the people from 

the Saskatoon Community Mediation Services last Friday and 

discussed this matter.  The $5,300 that the member has 

mentioned has been approved, and a cheque has either gone or 

is about to go.  So that will look after their funding in the short 

term.  We are waiting for material from them, a proposal and a 

budget, with respect to further funding.  I think the situation is 

in hand.  Maybe the member has more recent information than 

I have, but at the moment that's the information I have. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, no I don't 

have anything further to that.  This letter came to 

me a couple of weeks ago, I guess, and at that time they had 

been requesting and hadn't seen any funding up to that point.  

And I guess I just want to get it on the record that I think they 

are doing valuable work, intervention type work, primarily with 

first offence type of individuals, Mr. Minister.  I think it's 

valuable work, and it's also the work that's being accomplished 

on a very, very small budget. 

 

It's my belief that the work they're doing is valuable and further 

funding should be given to them to carry on with that work.  

And I appreciate the fact that you have decided, your 

department has decided to fund that group, and I would be 

hopeful that you would continue funding them in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the work that the mediation 

service does is very valuable work and we are very respectful 

of them.  We are considering a number of projects that would 

involve them with funding from the victims fund and we are 

considering the way in which diversion projects will operate 

and how that may involve the service.  So we're actively 

engaged with them in a whole variety of things for the future.  

They do a good job and we have no reason to expect that things 

won't work just fine as far as the service is concerned. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

my colleague, the member from Morse, raised a concern and it 

just jogged my memory over it, a call that I just received the 

other day.  And this relates to RCMP service across the 

province.  And I don't think it's strictly RCMP service, it can be 

any police service for that matter.  And it's the approach taken 

by men and women in their line of duty with how they deal 

with the public. 

 

And what I've found, Mr. Minister, that certainly in our area the 

police we have and the people that I've talked to and the 

members of the different detachments have taken a very 

proactive form of dealing with the public, of getting out and 

mixing with the public and letting them know that they're not 

only there to uphold the law, but they're there to be their friend 

and to be part of the community and to work with them. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now the call that was raised was a concern raised by a 

gentleman who happened to be travelling home from an 

appointment in Regina.  It was around 11 in the evening, and 

just outside of Montmartre in the process of travelling home, he 

started losing his lights.  And he was hoping he could get home 

because he didn't know exactly what the problem was; he had 

his young son with him. 

 

And just outside of Montmartre he noticed  a police car with 

another vehicle pulled over and thought, well I'm probably 

going to get pulled over too, and sure enough as he got to the 

community, he was.  Which was fine, because he expected that 

would happen because of driving without lights.  And when he 

was pulled over he got out of the vehicle and he thought, 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

well this officer is coming; he's got a flashlight.  I don't have a 

flashlight and I'll flip open the hood and see what's wrong with 

my lights.  And what he found when the officer got there was 

that the fan belt was gone and that's why he was losing the 

lights. 

 

And I think that would have been fine and the gentleman would 

have accepted it, except the officer became somewhat abusive 

because he had stepped out of his vehicle.  And this is not the 

first time I've had complaints regarding the detachment there in 

the way they speak to people.  And I'm not exactly sure 

whether we have ways of communicating.  I think it would be 

appropriate . . . and certainly the Saskatchewan government 

puts a fair bit of money into policing in the province; the 

federal government puts the larger portion.  But I think it's 

appropriate  that when men and women are in positions of 

authority . . . and even you and I as members, if we were 

abusive with the public in our position even if the public, say, 

became very abusive with us, it's not appropriate for us to 

return the favour.  But I guess in one form, we turn the other 

cheek and take it again because we're public figures. 

 

And it would seem to me that . . . And also what happened in 

this case, there's another area that took place as well.  In the 

process of this officer becoming somewhat abusive and angry 

that he had even stepped out of the vehicle and not waited for 

him, and asked for his licence and got his licence and went 

back to the car.  And the next thing he knows he's being 

dragged out of the truck.  And he asked, well what are you 

doing this for?  And he says, well you're coming back to the car 

with me. 

 

And what he found out when he got back to the vehicle, that all 

of a sudden the officer says there's an outstanding . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Chairman, by leave, to introduce guests in 

the gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Chairman, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 14 students 

from Arborfield School that have just came in.  And with them 

are their teachers, Mr. Mamer and Mr. Thesen; their chaperons, 

Beth Gray, Mary Hudon; and bus driver, Diane Ralph. 

 

I would like you to join me and welcome them here warmly all 

the way from Arborfield.  It's hours drive.  I came down earlier 

today myself and I wouldn't want to be travelling all the way 

down on a bus, on a school bus.  So let's welcome them here 

today. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Deputy Chairman, and I too would 

welcome the folks from Arborfield and trust that they gain 

some knowledge of how our Assembly operates. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Minister, the gentleman was then 

informed he had an outstanding warrant for his arrest, and he 

was trying to think where in the world would this have come 

from.  And then the officer indicated that it was back in 1985, 

and all of a sudden things started to click.  He had at that time 

been in a battle with his former wife, and they had parted ways.  

And unfortunately his wife had laid a charge and a warrant had 

been issued, but the charge had never been followed through. 

 

And so in the process, what happened, this gentleman is getting 

home, he's a farmer, he's got calves, he's got a 7-year-old son 

with him, he's dragged into the police station.  They told . . . 

they're going to lock him up for the night.  And he said, well 

I've got to get home; I've got to look after my cattle.  They 

finally called the justice of the peace and I guess they went 

through the process of agreeing that he wouldn't run away and 

they'd check further into the claim. 

 

And so the next morning he called city police here in the city; 

he called the Crown prosecutor.  And what they found out was 

it was a charge that should actually have been stricken from the 

books; it should never have been there.  So he's dragged 

through this process.  And in the meantime, an RCMP officer 

isn't very -- well I can understand where the RCMP officer 

came from too, and he indicated that. 

 

And I'm wondering, a couple of questions here. Is there any 

way of portraying to our police officers that they should be 

setting an example?  And I know they face difficult situations, 

but there are a lot of people across this province who may get 

pulled over every once in a while.  It's not a reason for an 

individual, be they male or female, to become abusive. 

 

And secondly, the Crown prosecutor called up and said, well 

he's sorry for what happened, but it was no big deal.  Well to 

this gentleman it was a big deal.  He was hauled through . . . 

basically put through the wringer.  And I'm wondering if there's 

any format of dealing with cases like this. 

 

If a charge has never been laid, it must drop at some time, and 

obviously it should be stricken from the record.  Why would 

something like that have continued to be on the books when the 

charge was never laid and it seems to be outstanding.  I don't 

. . . exactly what happened, but there must be some process that 

addresses these types of cases. 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is a disturbing story from a number 

of points of view.  I will say to the member, Mr. Chair, that we 

will convey his remarks to the commanding officer of F 

division.  And I know assistant commissioner Proke very well, 

and I know that he will want to investigate the matter that the 

member mentions.  Perhaps the member can privately give me 

the name of the individual involved to assist in dealing with the 

matter. 

 

For the information of the House, there is a process for 

complaining about RCMP actions, a formal process, and that 

remains as an option for the person that the member is referring 

to.  So the department will refer the matter to F division, and if 

the citizen wishes, a complaint could be made through the 

RCMP complaints process, which is quite an effective process 

involving a person operating at real arm's length from the 

RCMP. 

 

There is also supposed to be a policy where these old warrants 

aren't acted on automatically if the citizen objects or offers any 

resistance to it, you know.  It's not supposed to work in the way 

that the member has outlined to us.  So we will mull that over 

too, and see in what way we can remind everyone concerned 

that these old warrants have to be treated with some care. 

 

But we'll act, as I indicated, tomorrow morning. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, because as I had 

indicated, the gentleman in question -- I'd be pleased to give 

you his name -- certainly had some sympathy for the officer 

when he had called in and found this complaint.  And of course 

this gentleman wasn't even aware of it. 

 

And in fact he wasn't even aware that it was a complaint at the 

time because it never was laid against him.  They had parted 

ways and they had settled, and everything, he thought, was over 

and settled with. 

 

One other complaint that is raised, and I'm not exactly sure if 

you can give me an answer on this, but another young couple, 

and I'm not sure if it was the same officer but it was the same 

detachment, happened to be pulled over on a traffic violation, 

and they were quite convinced that the officer was laying a 

charge far exceeding what they felt they were going, and they 

had asked the officer if they could see what his read-out 

indicator was indicating.  And the officer said . . . just flatly 

refused them that option.  Is that option available to citizens?  

Can they ask to go back to the car?  It seems to me you see 

most of the time most officers call a person back to their own 

vehicle and generally will show them what the radar detector is 

showing as far as a read-out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I just don't know, Mr. Chair, what the 

answer to that question is.  Probably it's left to the individual 

officers to deal with it.  I do know that the police officers 

greatly prefer that the individual don't get out of the car 

because there have been incidents where other cars have struck 

them.  You park on the shoulder of the road and get out right 

into the traffic lane and it's dangerous, so I know the RCMP 

prefer that the person stay in the car.  But the rest is . . . we're 

not aware of any policy that the RCMP have with respect to 

examining the radar equipment and determining what the read 

is. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well like you say, Mr. Minister, I'm not exactly 

sure what the policy is too, but it would seem to me that if . . . 

whether it's the RCMP or whether it's the city police or 

whomever it may be or whoever would . . . if a person would 

question whether or not they've ticketed them with the right 

offence that no officer would be opposed to allowing a driver to 

observe what basically they clocked him.  Because they 

basically keep it on there until they finish writing out the ticket, 

so it almost seems that there's a refusal and you begin to 

wonder.  And I think that's where the other question that's 

raised is . . . I don't think you've got anything to hide.  You're 

going to refuse a person whether it's an individual trying to 

hide it from the police or vice versa.  So that was the reason I 

raise it. 

 

And maybe there's another case where if citizens feel they've 

been unduly treated -- I think you've indicated there is a forum 

and I'd appreciate the contact or whether it's an appeal process 

and then we can pass it on -- if the citizens wanted to follow up, 

they know who they could contact, and I'd appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm just going to turn my attention for a few 

minutes to the Carney Nerland inquiry.  We're all aware of the 

situation.  We're all aware of the circumstances, the fact that an 

Indian trapper, Leo LaChance, was shot at Mr. Nerland's Prince 

Albert gun shop.  And we all know the circumstances, too, and 

that Mr. Nerland was well-known for his supremacist leanings.  

There seemed to be no regret on the part of Mr. Nerland 

regarding his actions.  He continually argued that it was 

something that just happened; it was an accident. 

 

And of course as the courts at the end of day dealt with it . . . 

We're also aware of the fact that there was three-person public 

inquiry that was instituted and found that the police and 

prosecutors didn't search long or hard enough for possible 

racist motives in the shooting, which was an unfortunate and 

serious shortcoming, I believe, as the inquiry indicated. 

 

We also are aware of the fact that during the inquiry it was 

revealed that Mr. Nerland was an informant for the RCMP 

which leads and has led a lot of people, not only in the Prince 

Alberta area but certainly across the province and I think 

amongst our aboriginal community, to suggest that Mr. Nerland 

may have received special treatment as a result of this. 

 

Now I know I've raised a number of concerns and a number of 

questions that have come up regarding the Carney Nerland 

inquiry and a number of the questions that probably continue to 

exist out there. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, I'm asking, is what did the 

commission's final report consist of?  I would be pleased if you 

would provide some details to the Assembly.  How much did 

the commission cost? 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

Would you provide details on that.  And who were the 

members of the commission and how were they chosen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll deal with the three questions the 

member asked in that order.  The commission found no fault 

with the way in which the police and prosecutors handled the 

case and no fault with the charge of manslaughter which was 

brought against Nerland.  It voiced some doubt about the 

prosecutors accepting too readily the conclusion that LaChance 

was outside the gun shop when Nerland's gun discharged.  

There was conflicting expert evidence presented to the inquiry 

about that situation and the condition of the bullet. 

 

The commission was of the opinion that there could have been 

a further investigation into this aspect of the case, although it 

appeared to recognize that the Crown acted properly on the 

evidence that it had at the time. 

 

The commission found that racism played a role in Nerland's 

actions, and in that respect the Crown could have been more 

sensitive, the prosecutors could have been more sensitive, to 

the issues of racism and ensured that that fact, that evidence, 

was clearly before the judge at the time that the judge was 

assessing the sentence.  And the result might have been that 

Nerland would have received a more severe sentence, although 

the commission found that the sentence that was given was 

well within the range of sentences for that type of offence. 

 

(1645) 

 

The commission recommended training for prosecutors to 

ensure that they're more sensitive to the issue of racism and 

race relations.  And in fact the first of such training sessions is 

scheduled for this spring. 

 

As to the cost, it is, as we calculate now, just under $430,000.  

Those expenses were made over two fiscal years and they total 

that amount. 

 

The make-up of the commission and the way in which they 

were appointed -- let me just pause at this point to say that the 

whole structure of the commission, including the mandate and 

the make-up of the commission, was worked out in 

consultation with the Prince Albert Tribal Council and the city 

of Prince Albert.  And the terms of reference were shared with 

them before they were incorporated into the document, into the 

order in council that set up the inquiry. 

 

The make-up of the commission was also done in participation 

with those two groups.  And in effect here's what we did.  We 

asked the city of Prince Albert to name a representative on that 

commission, and they nominated Dean Peter MacKinnon.  We 

asked the Prince Albert Tribal Council similarly to suggest a 

name, and they suggested the name of Delia Opekokew, who is 

originally from Saskatchewan, from the Canoe Lake First 

Nation, and is a practising lawyer in Toronto. 

And the government named the chair, who was Ted Hughes, a 

former judge of the Court of Queen's Bench in this province 

and a former deputy minister in British Columbia and a 

well-known commissioner in a number of very difficult 

high-profile cases around western Canada. 

 

And that name was also checked out with the city of Prince 

Albert, with the Prince Albert Tribal Council, and everybody 

was quite satisfied with it.  So we set up the commission with 

those commissioners and they went to work. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I take it then that this 

430,000 would be remuneration to the officials that were 

involved on the commission for their work. 

 

What would some of the other costs have been that would have 

been . . . that's a fair, a substantial sum of money, and that may 

be part of what was reflected a little earlier in that question that 

we received from the lady -- I believe it was down at 

Gravelbourg -- regarding costs.  And yet if you do an 

investigation or an inquiry, it doesn't matter how you try to 

determine costs or how you look at the process of justice, it's 

going to cost some money. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could break it down a little 

bit?  What constituted all the costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The bulk of the costs were the fees paid 

to the counsel for various persons who had standing before the 

commission.  That is the general practice in this province and 

elsewhere with respect to public inquiries, is that the 

government picks up the costs for the people who want to be 

represented. 

 

And if the member will remember, there were tables full of 

lawyers representing various parties to the inquiry.  For 

example, the Queen's Bench judge, Judge Gerein, had standing 

before the commission because it was his conduct which was 

also being examined, and he had to be represented by counsel.  

It's not fair at all that he would be expected to finance that out 

of his own pocket. 

 

Similarly, our prosecutors were the subject of inquiry, and we 

paid for the counsel that they indicated they wanted to 

represent them.  And so it was with other parties that were 

interested.  So the bulk of these costs are lawyers' fees as well 

as the per diems and expenses of the members of the 

commission. 

 

In addition to that, we had the facilities that were necessary in 

order for the inquiry to be conducted. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's obvious that when 

you start getting into inquiries and you involve lawyers, you're 

going to run up a pretty good tab. 

 

Dean Peter MacKinnon, is this gentleman . . . is he a dean at 

the university at Saskatoon, the husband of the present Minister 

of Finance? 



April 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, he was.  He's been the dean for 

some five or six years now.  And he was, I emphasize, 

nominated by the city of Prince Albert, and we accepted their 

nomination. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I was going to say, Mr. Minister, you're off the 

hook; the city of Prince Albert appointed him. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we talk about inquiries and of course we're 

quite well aware of the fact that across the province there are a 

number of other individuals who have been calling for 

inquiries.  And as I stand here and suggest that maybe there are 

other areas where we should have had some inquiries into the 

actions of officials, I do so realizing that inquiries cost some 

money.  But at the same time, I believe it's very important that 

the Department of Justice and in your position as minister, that 

people see at the end of the day that justice served them as well 

as it's physically possible to do. 

 

And a couple of people I just want to bring to your attention, 

one I don't think we're going to get fully into.  But the first one 

I'd just like to ask is when we look at the fact that we had a 

commission regarding the Leo LaChance situation, I'm 

wondering . . . we're well aware of the fact that David Milgaard 

has been constantly lobbying for the government to look into 

his situation and has asked for a commission to review the 

Milgaard situation. 

 

I can't help but feel, Mr. Minister, if I ended up in a situation 

where . . . and I don't know whether Mr. Milgaard is totally 

innocent or what; I don't know.  But we've seen in the past 

where innocent people have ended up being dragged into courts 

because they happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong 

time. 

 

And at the end of the day, even in this case with Mr. Milgaard, 

one would wonder if Mr. Milgaard has been treated fairly, 

considering the number of years that he spent in prison for a 

crime which, at the end of the day, the justice system has 

basically determined that maybe they didn't have enough 

evidence, maybe he was . . . whether or not he may or may not 

have been guilty or involved. 

 

But it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, it's the type of thing 

where you should almost at least have some kind of a review 

process to follow up on.  Because these types of circumstances 

will continue to raise questions, especially when individuals 

like Mr. Milgaard continue to lobby for a process such as this.  

And I'm wondering if you could give reasons why you decided 

at the end of the day that we didn't really need an inquiry into 

this circumstance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The reason why we decided that we 

would not order an inquiry in the David Milgaard situation is 

that in our view we had just had a most remarkable inquiry into 

the facts surrounding his situation, and that was conducted by 

the judges of the Supreme Court of Canada.  And they 

conducted that inquiry pursuant to an order of the then Justice 

minister, Kim Campbell, under section 690 of the Criminal 

Code. 

And it was, as I said, a most remarkable inquiry.  We ourselves 

in the department forwarded 14 boxes of material, if you can 

imagine -- 14 boxes of material to the Supreme Court.  In 

effect, every scrap of paper that we had on the case dating back 

for the whole 22, 25 years, whatever it was -- 24 years. 

 

In addition, the Supreme Court sat for 14 days on that review 

and allowed the parties, the various people interested, including 

David Milgaard, to bring before the court any evidence they 

wanted to. All of the evidence that was around was inquired 

into or the opportunity was there to inquire into it. 

 

There literally was nothing left to ask about or inquire into at 

the end of the day.  If anything was overlooked, it was 

deliberately overlooked by counsel for David Milgaard.  If 

there were avenues that should have been explored, the 

Supreme Court was prepared to allow them to be explored and 

to have the evidence brought before the court.  The court didn't 

drive the inquiry so much as the various counsel decided what 

evidence should be placed before the Supreme Court. 

 

At the end of the day the Supreme Court said this about the 

guilt or innocence of David Milgaard.  They said, applying a 

criminal law standard, which means proof beyond a reasonable 

doubt, they were unable to say whether or not he was guilty or 

innocent.  Even applying the civil standard, which is a much 

lower standard of proof -- on a balance of probabilities, was he 

probably guilty or probably innocent? -- even on that test the 

Supreme Court was not prepared to find him innocent. 

 

Now he now comes to me and says, I was wrongly convicted; I 

want to be found innocent.  The only way I can be found 

innocent is to structure a public inquiry for that purpose to find 

me innocent.  And to him I replied, the Supreme Court, after an 

exhaustive inquiry covering 14 days and all sorts of material, 

were not able to answer the question, are you innocent, on 

either of the tests that I've just described -- proof beyond a 

reasonable doubt or proof on a balance of probabilities.  And if 

the experienced judges of the Supreme Court are not able to 

answer that question after all that effort, how is a public 

inquiry, structured in Saskatchewan to cover exactly the same 

ground as the Supreme Court, expected to deal with the 

question of the innocence or guilt of David Milgaard. 

 

So I concluded that there was no basis for an inquiry, that there 

was nothing left to inquire into considering that the Supreme 

Court had just done what it did; and that we in no way could 

justify loading that kind of an expense onto the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan to answer the question of Milgaard's innocence 

or guilt. 

 

We simply . . . I suggested that he just try and get on with his 

life, get this behind him; and we stayed the charges against 

him. More than a year has passed, so it's a dead letter now, we 

couldn't resume the prosecution no matter what kind of 

evidence we came across now -- assuming you could come 

across any 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 1994 

evidence in a case that is 24 or 25 years old.  We just regard it 

as a closed book. 

 

But that was the reason for not having an inquiry and I think it 

was the proper decision. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


