






















































Hansard: March 01, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 531 
 March 1, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
I will at the conclusion of my comments move a motion that 
the third report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly be concurred in. 
 
First I want to preface the motion with just a few comments.  I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is with some pride that we do 
this.  This is the first substantive change to the rules, I think, 
since 1980.  I think that's accurate. 
 
The rules of this committee, I think everyone agrees, badly 
need overhauling.  Nothing remains unchanged for that length 
of time, and anything which doesn't change with the changing 
times soon begins to create some real difficulties.  So I think 
among the members of the committee there was agreement that 
rule changes were needed.  And I think among the members of 
the public, that's also agreed upon.  We need to modernize and 
change this. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that for my part -- and I 
think I speak for some other members of the committee -- this 
is part of an ongoing process in rule changes.  We spoke, Mr. 
Speaker, although it was, I shall characterize it as a spirited 
meeting last night, there did seem to be an agreement at the 
end, at least that we needed to meet again at an early date, and 
begin to discuss what further rule changes might enhance the 
effectiveness of this legislative institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rule changes which will be debated and voted 
on, were concurred in by at least the official opposition and 
government members at least twice.  It is more difficult to 
speak for the third party in these matters, but they were at least 
concurred in by the official opposition and the government 
members twice. 
 
Initially, Mr. Speaker, all of these rule changes were 
formulated in the committee, beginning actually in 1992.  They 
were passed, were implemented for a interim period, and I 
think by and large most members of the legislature, they may 
speak for themselves, I think most members of the legislature 
felt these rules worked pretty well. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, they were tried on an interim basis 
and were a casualty of a quite separate but quite bitter argument 
in here over changes to GRIP(gross revenue insurance 
program).  I think it's fair to say that those rule changes were a 
victim of that. 

But, I think it's also fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that no member of 
the committee . . . few members of the committee, few 
members of the House, disagreed with the substance of the 
rules themselves.  While there is some concern by some 
members about one here or there, I think I can say, Mr. 
Speaker, that generally there's no quarrel with the substance of 
the rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we again began to meet in this session to deal 
with these rules.  And the rules were approved by the members 
of the committee yet another time.  Here I speak only for 
government members, but it was certainly our understanding 
that these rules would be brought into the Assembly on an 
interim basis and we would continue to discuss other matters 
which had not got the same degree of consideration as these.  
These have been considered over two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we discussed the rules which we're moving, we 
agreed upon them, and we asked that a draft report be prepared.  
Now if there's any other without . . . with what appeared to be 
the general agreement of everybody on the committee; 
certainly no objection was taken to preparing a draft report for 
the consideration of the members of the committee.  Now if 
there's any other interpretation to be placed upon the preparing 
of a draft report but that you're going to implement them right 
away, I'm not sure what that interpretation might be. 
 
So these rules were agreed upon twice.  No objection has been 
taken in substance in either time, and it is the view of the 
members of the . . . the government members of the committee 
that the time has now come to make some changes.   We cannot 
postpone this process indefinitely while we attempt to resolve 
every other problem that may exist between government and 
opposition. 
 
The overhaul of the rules is away overdue.  I think most 
members of the public concur in that and the government 
members have come to a reluctant determination that we should 
proceed with these rule changes.  Certainly I think it is 
preferable, wherever possible, the rules changes be made 
unanimously.  This is not a . . . unilateral rule changes are 
something I think that any fair-minded member or person in 
this Assembly would approach with real trepidation. 
 
I say though, with respect to these rules, while there is some 
indication . . . and I hope I'm wrong; I hope the third party is 
able to support these.  And we shall be interested to see what 
the position of the third party is.  And we hope after the debate 
is at a conclusion, the opposition members will also be able to 
support these. 
 
We say with respect to these rule changes, while this vote may 
or may not be unanimous, these rule changes have been agreed 
upon by the official opposition and the government on at least 
two separate occasions, and no objection has been taken in 
substance. 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will point out that these rule changes 
enhance the effectiveness of this Assembly, and they enhance 
the accountability of the members of the Assembly to the 
public.  And I think they enhance the ability of the public to 
participate in this Assembly, to understand what's going on, 
and to benefit from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won't go into the detail, but let me say in 
summary, we are recommending that the motion would change 
the sittings of the Assembly in a way which we think would 
really better accommodate the public and also perhaps better 
accommodate some opposite members. 
 
I want to say that that motion, a number of these changes were 
almost solely emanating from the opposition.  Now we concur 
in them.  I'm not saying that we object to these.  I want to say 
that the origin of this one was the opposition.  We have retained 
it because we're taking these forward as a package, not only 
what we wanted, but what the opposition want as well.  The 
whole package which was agreed upon is going forward. 
 
There are changes, Mr. Speaker, to the public holidays we have 
traditionally observed: holidays like Easter, and on the rare 
occasions when we've been sitting at this time of the year, 
Canada Day, what used to be called Dominion Day.  We wi l 
now place these in legislation. 

l That the third report of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly be concurred in. 

 
We are amending the guidelines for television, Mr. Speaker, so 
that members of the public might better understand how this 
Assembly operates, what the issues in this Assembly are, and 
might better follow our deliberations.  We are reinstituting a 
practice which we think worked well with respect to statements 
by members.  A bit more to and fro between members and we 
think, Mr. Speaker, it enhances the role of the private member, 
something that the public has asked for.  The public I think 
wants an enhancement of the role of the private member and so 
this rule accommodates that. 
 
We are, as part of an ongoing process of democratic reform in 
ensuring accountability, we are providing realistic deadlines for 
written questions and for answering an order for return.  Those, 
Mr. Speaker, are enhancements which we think will be useful 
and which the opposition members wanted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also instituting some changes to the order 
of private members' business.  This again is in keeping with an 
expression of the comment put forward at one point in time by 
opposition members but with which I think the government 
members agree.  And that is the public want the role of the 
private member, the non-cabinet minister, they want the role of 
that person enhanced, and these changes will enhance the role 
of the private member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some rules as well which will clarify 
how we deal with emergency debates -- something that doesn't 
occur a lot, but they're almost 

always on very important issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are other changes as well, of perhaps more 
routine if not less important, that I won't go into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that members of the Assembly will 
be able to now vote and concur in this.  We earnestly seek their 
support in this, as we will be seeking their support in the days 
ahead when we continue the process of reforming the rules.  
This is simply one step in what I think all members of the 
committee see as a fairly long road in bringing this institution 
into the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that this Assembly has 
benefited from less reform in the last 15 years than virtually 
any in Canada.  I think that's an accurate statement.  These 
changes are way overdue.  We would acknowledge, Mr. 
Speaker, that there's a huge job left to be done.  We would also 
ask all members of the Assembly to acknowledge that this is an 
important contribution to completing that job ahead. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 
hesitated in rising because I thought the member from Carlton 
might want to speak as to the reasons why he was supporting a 
motion like this from the hon. member that has just spoken.  
And I'm certainly beginning to wonder if I attended the same 
meetings that that gentleman was at. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to try to summarize my 
fundamental premiss as succinctly as possible here.  And I 
think what we have seen over these last couple of days is the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) Party putting on their railroad 
caps once more, Mr. Speaker.  And the chief engineer tooting 
his horn, as he does from time to time, that the train has left the 
station.  And then, oblivious to any democratic tradition, 
oblivious to any reality that might be existing, simply 
steamrolling ahead and rending asunder whatever opposition to 
their desires that there might happen to be.  Because they are 
fundamentally convinced that might makes right. 
 
And that therein, Mr. Speaker, I believe is one of the 
fundamental problems that we are having in trying to wrestle 
with the complicated issues of changing and adapting, on an 
ongoing basis, the rules and procedures of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this unilateral abridging of the rules and 
procedures of this Assembly is only but the latest in a long 
litany of procedures that this government could be accused of, 
as it runs roughshod over the people of this province. 
 
I could remind members of one of the first acts of this 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

government when they indeed did break contracts with the civil 
servants.  I could remind people of the second basic premiss 
that this government undertook and that was to break contracts 
of 60,000 farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker -- and 
retroactively, I might add.  And I also might add, Mr. Speaker, 
that there was taken away the opportunity of any legal recourse 
that these citizens might want to pursue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, furthermore there is a litany of threats and 
intimidation by which the members opposite are operating and 
governing this province. 
 
We know that one of the biggest threats was on the Federated 
Co-operatives, Mr. Speaker, and the upgrader issue where they 
had to fight for their very existence and for their very life. 
 
On the individual level, we know what the now minister from 
North Battleford said to his chamber of commerce: you guys 
better agree with me because some day I will become a 
minister and you will be sorry.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it is sad to 
say that yes he did become a minister, and yes the people are 
sorry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the general rules within this Assembly have 
changed.  And that's perhaps where my status as House Leader 
I am most concerned. Because on an ongoing basis there have 
been changes made in this House, not necessarily by the parties 
involved in this House, the political parties, but on an ongoing 
basis the ability of the opposition to fulfil its commitments to 
be Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition have been undermined.  
They have been removed almost piece by piece so that quite 
literally now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, the third party and 
the official opposition, are finding it more and more 
increasingly difficult to perform the functions that have been 
bestowed upon us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this stifling of all opposition at all costs by 
members opposite, I think has just been highlighted once more 
by the delivering of this interim report from the Rules and 
Procedures meeting to the Assembly here today. 
 
And no, Mr. Minister, I don't think that there will be unanimous 
support, certainly not from the official opposition.  We do not 
per se oppose any of the rules that are included in this package. 
 
And that's what I'm saying -- that the rules are a package.  And 
what we're seeing here, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon is only part 
of the package that was agreed on.  And every opportunity at 
every meeting that I have attended in the Rules and Procedures 
meeting, I have made it abundantly clear that yes, while we 
may in some cases reluctantly agree with some of these rules 
and some of these changes that have occurred, it is always 
being done under the premiss that we must look at the package 
as a whole.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is not the way that it has 
occurred.  We find now that we have a dictatorial government 
handing down its ultimatum, and it's either our way or 
highway. 

This will not work, Mr. Speaker, because the tradition of this 
House has always been that we are working on a consensus 
basis.  That is the way this House can only function properly, 
Mr. Speaker.  If there is that fundamental agreement to disagree 
on policy issues, that's what we're here for. 
 
But certainly the House must be able to function with some 
degree of comfort, both in terms of the government members 
and the opposition, that the rules are there for all of us and that 
they are going to be adequate. 
 
Now for the life of the members on this side, we cannot 
understand what is so sacrosanct about March 1.  That was 
what the folks opposite said.  March 1, we've got to have it; 
that's the deadline.  Now it's been reluctantly agreed that maybe 
March 7 or whatever is the time when these changes must be 
instituted. 
 
And I'm glad that the minister . . . or the member from Prince 
Albert is getting ready to stand up after I have finished because 
I would like to hear from him about the comment that he made 
in the meeting yesterday when he let the cat out of the bag.  Oh, 
but we have public pressure; we have public pressure; we must 
show the public that we are instituting reform.  And this is a 
rather shallow attempt, in my opinion, of the government 
members opposite to regain the reform agenda.  And so you're 
saying now: we are reformists at heart and, folks, look; here are 
12 rule changes.  The opposition doesn't agree with them and 
that doesn't matter.  We will show you that we are reform 
minded. 
 
And what I'm saying to you and I'm saying to you members 
opposite, it cannot work.  It won't work that way.  And that, in 
our estimation, is the reason why you are pushing this.  You 
want to get the public pressure off your back.  You want to be 
able to say to your back-benchers, boy, look what we did for 
you; we got private members' statements and all the rest of the 
stuff back in again.  And the public will allow the thing to pass 
by, but they are not going to be fooled.  We are certainly not 
fooled on this issue. 
 
So if you want to start taking a look at some of the rules that 
have . . . and we can just quickly go through them, as the hon. 
minister did as well.  The sitting hours -- I didn't think that that 
was a rule that was suggested but it doesn't matter; we're 
changing the rules. 
 
Now there's a fundamental test that I want the people who are 
listening and the general public to apply to the reform package 
of the government.  The reform package of the government, 
Mr. Minister -- ask yourself the question: is this what the public 
wants?  Is this the priority of the public?  Does this pass the test 
of what the public is asking of us, as administrators of this 
province?  Sitting hours -- is that a priority, Mr. Speaker, of the 
public, whether we sit on Tuesday night or whether we sit on 
Thursday night or don't sit on Thursday night? 
 
What about public holidays?  That's the second; that's the 
second initiative of these government members.  It says that 
public holidays . . . well so that we can 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

legitimately have the public holidays like everyone else.  And I 
have a little bit of sympathy with the Government House 
Leader because it makes life easier for him; he doesn't have to 
get up in front of every holiday and say, I move that we accept 
this next Friday as a national holiday and we don't want to 
work either. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is that a priority with the people?  
Do I hear people in Prince Albert right now clapping their 
hands and saying, goody, boy, those guys are right on track, 
right on track. 
 
Statements by members could be, Mr. Speaker, could be, and I 
would suggest to all members that this is probably the highlight 
of the package in a positive sense.  It could be positive if it was 
used for the purpose for which it was intended, which is the 
ability of individual members to have their day here and be able 
to get up and say something positive, I would suggest, about 
their constituency, happenings in their constituency, awards 
being won by constituents.  But I challenge anyone to go back 
in the verbatims and see how this statement by members during 
the trial period was used and abused, and we question the 
objective of the members in including the statement by 
members once more. 
 
We have deadlines for questions from 48 to 5 sitting days.  The 
intent here, Mr. Speaker, was by the government to say well, 
really you know, we don't have enough time to answer those 
questions that you submit in 48 hours; give us five days to 
answer them and then we'll answer them.  Yet if you check the 
records, Mr. Speaker, of the 200-and-some questions that we 
asked last session, I don't know, I would suggest that there 
would be a very small percentage -- I didn't check to see 
exactly how many were answered -- extremely small example. 
 
And we can go on.  A deadline for 180 calendar days for orders 
for returns, I think that's good.  I have basically nothing more to 
say on that.  I think that's good. 
 
Private members' motions: 
 

All notices not taken up on the following Tuesday shall be 
withdrawn from the Order Paper and adjourned items 
(will) remain on the Order Paper . . . 

 
And I can just hear the public saying, right on.  They don't 
know what we're talking about.  Is this the priority of reform in 
this legislature?  I think not.  I think you're missing the mark, 
folks.  That's not what reform is all about. 
 
Private members' motions, no problem.  Priority of debate, 
makes the life of Mr. Speaker easier and so on.  We have no 
problem with that one.  But again it's the smaller things about 
the machinations that go in within the House.  And I ask again, 
is that what the priority of the people of this province are when 
we talk reform?  I think you're off track.  I think you're missing 
the boat. 

Legislative internship programs, basically it's not worth talking 
about. 
 
Smoking in the Chamber, no smoking in the Chamber.  Well I 
would agree with that.  We have no problem with that.  But I 
don't think that's a priority of the people.  I think it's a priority 
of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health under the 
current situations.  And I have commended both of them for the 
stand that they are taking in those issues and I fully support 
them on that. 
 
Use of laptop computers in the Chamber.  Is this what the 
people want?  Do they want us to spend government tax dollars 
buying computers and using them in the Chamber here?  I'm 
computer illiterate, I must confess, so it's not a big deal with 
me.  But I question, Mr. Speaker, is this what the public wants 
us to talk about when we talk about rule changes? 
 
And I say that although that is a package that we could live 
with, as the minister opposite has said and we concur with that, 
I don't think that that is really what the essence of reform is all 
about.  So then what we have done is come up with ideas and 
suggestions on the committee. 
 
Now this is what the committee has decided.  This is what that 
interim report is about, and we feel it's missing the mark; it's 
leaving too many things out. 
 
Our recommendations that we came forward with have been 
rejected, Mr. Speaker.  Our recommendations . . . and we say in 
addition to this package, to make it a complete package, to 
make it a meaningful package, we should have amended the 
rules for private members' Bills and motions to be brought 
forward on a regular basis so that they can be debated but, more 
importantly, resolved.  Bring them to a vote; bring them to a 
head.  Let private members -- government members perhaps as 
well as opposition members -- to come forward with Bills and 
be able to have them brought to some form of resolution.  
Denied, Mr. Speaker.  Meaningful reform denied. 
 
We have asked that the chairman of the Crown Corporations 
for accountability be an opposition member, just as when we 
were in government we allowed that to happen in the Public 
Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker.  Meaningful change, 
dramatic change -- denied. 
 
We're asking, Mr. Speaker, for free votes in the Assembly.  We 
were told simply, there's no chance.  Don't even talk about it; 
we're not going to even look at free votes in the public.  And 
there are two ways of approaching that, Mr. Speaker.  We can 
do that by incorporating it within the rules and procedures or 
through legislation, as we will be doing. 
 
We have other reform initiatives like the legislative utilities 
review commission -- an excellent idea, in my opinion, where 
we can put our members, our back-benchers, to work.  While 
they're already getting 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

paid for sitting here, they could also be expanding their 
horizons and acting as a watchdog in some of our Crown 
corporations and our utilities. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- And the public is interested in that.  The 
public's very interested. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- And as my member says here, the public is 
interested.  We believe that's what the public agenda is all 
about. 
 
We're also going to be advocating a reduction of cabinet 
ministers, reduction of cabinet ministers on a scale, on a scale 
as opposed to the numbers of members that we have.  We are 
saying that there has to be a mechanism to review public 
appointments.  I know that there's no patronage in members 
opposite, but it would be nice if we had an all-party legislative 
committee to review public appointments. 
 
These are the kinds of things that we're looking for, Mr. 
Speaker, these are the kinds of things that we wanted to have 
on the agenda to be incorporated within these rules and then 
become part of the rules of this Assembly. 
 
Now we're not the only ones, Mr. Speaker, that had an added 
list.  The government members have some more.  They have 
their priorities straight.  And these are some of the extra things 
that they want to include in future discussions and change in 
the rules.  And one of them is adjournment motions.  We 
should not allow adjournment motions during debate as a 
mechanism, to again withdraw and restrict the ability of the 
opposition to perform its functions. 
 
What else?  The other issue on their agenda is to limit the 
length of speeches.  They want to limit the length of speeches.  
I'm not quite sure that 30 minutes, is it an hour, or whatever.  
That's on their agenda and I don't think it's on the public 
agenda. 
 
Another one is that the House leaders will be able to use cell 
phones in their desks.  Now that's a top priority as far as reform 
with your public is concerned. 
 
And then also another one of significance here is that 
non-alcoholic beverages be allowed in the Chamber at all 
times.  This is the kind of reform that you folks are talking 
about.  And what I'm trying to tell you is that you are not on the 
people's agenda.  This is not true reform.  In a sense what we're 
looking at is the glitter and the tinsel, to be able to say to the 
public, this is what we have done.  And for you to say 
unilaterally and use the might of your majority to say that this 
is what is going to be good for the Assembly, you are missing 
the mark.  You are missing the mark and we cannot have a 
meaningful dialogue in this Chamber as long as the 
might-makes-right philosophy is going to prevail. 
 
And so, I would seriously . . . in fact I could make an 
amendment to that and I gave that some consideration, but I'm 
going to give you the opportunity, as a couple more of my 
members want to speak, to reconsider what you're doing here, 
have the 

courage to say, well maybe we were a little bit hasty in this and 
withdraw this report, let's go back to the drawing board, let's go 
into that committee meetings again, and have some meaningful 
dialogue where we can come out united. 
 
And if there is that resolve, we can do it.  And we can come up 
with a package here that's going to make this Chamber proud in 
the eyes of the public.  Because we will be on the public's 
agenda, and not just a glitter and tinsel show to show the people 
that yes, we may be doing something that's useful. 
 
So I would encourage you, Mr. Member, to consider my 
suggestion here, withdraw, and we'll get back to the drawing 
board and come back with a unanimous decision on the larger 
package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a member of 
this Committee of Rules and Procedures, I very much would 
like to respond to what has transpired today.  I couldn't agree 
more that reform of rules has been long overdue in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  And what I want to do is just walk through 
my very short history of being on the Rules and Procedures 
Committee since I entered this arena. 
 
When we first met there was considerable goodwill on this 
committee, a committee that you chair, Mr. Speaker.  In fact, 
there was enough goodwill that people made a decision to bring 
forward a range of possibilities for changes in this legislature 
that would be done on a trial basis for 50 days. 
 
That indeed took place and I think that there were some things 
that we considered worked well, other things that we felt were 
perhaps sometimes misused and abused; for example, the 
statements by members.  But overall I think that people were 
very pleased that we seemed to making some progress. 
 
One of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, we felt that we were making 
progress was because what had transpired had been reached by 
consensus.  That all changed, Mr. Speaker, when certain things 
arose in this House, and after a meeting was called of the Rules 
and Procedures Committee that the government members 
decided for the first time to no longer vote as an entire group 
with members of the official opposition and the third party 
through consensus, but rather to use their majority rule.  That 
resulted in a lack of goodwill, Mr. Speaker.  A lack of goodwill 
to the point where in spite of the House Leader yesterday in the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures stating that we had 
agreed to and implied that we had been meeting over all of this 
time since the fall of 1991, that what he neglected to say is that, 
Mr. Speaker, we had not met in over a year. 
 
The rush, the need for a rush was somewhat perplexing.  The 
need to do this by March 1 was very perplexing to both the 
members of the official opposition and myself.  Because one of 
the things we felt needed to be done was to return to a time of 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

goodwill, to be able to look as though the government members 
were willing yet again to work by consensus.  And what we've 
discovered is that that is indeed not the case.   And I find that 
very tragic when we're dealing with something that could be of 
great importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I happen to think that reform is something that has a life of its 
own.  It's dynamic in nature and in fact it is something which 
should be and indeed will be ongoing.  But it has to be done 
with a vision in mind and a real view to where it is we want to 
be going.  It isn't something that we simply tinker with the 
engine.  We should have some idea as to where we want to go 
and why it is we want to be doing this. 
 
The view of the committee members, as I understood them 
some time ago, was that we wanted to do this in the best 
interests of the public.  We wanted to do this to ensure that the 
members of this Assembly would be able to be most responsive 
to the people that they represent.  And I do not believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that the things that are now going to be claimed by 
this government as being reform oriented and substantive as far 
as a reform package is concerned, is really going to be the 
things that the people of Saskatchewan are concerned about at 
all. 
 
If we're truly concerned about the empowerment of 
back-benchers, if we are truly concerned about ensuring that 
the people of Saskatchewan have a sense that this is their place 
where their concerns are raised, where their concerns are 
addressed in full and meaningful ways so that people in this 
Assembly actually have the right to stand up and speak on 
behalf of their constituents on an ongoing basis and vote in a 
manner in which their constituents want, we would be dealing 
with the kinds of reforms that have real meaning to real people.  
Most of the changes that we see here are superficial.  In fact I 
called them window-dressing last night and I quite meant it.  
All the substantive changes are yet to be addressed. 
 
And I find it most interesting that there really was an attempt 
by the official opposition and the third party to address 
everything that was transpiring in the Rules and Procedures 
Committee with goodwill.  And if I may, I'll take the liberty of 
making some comments. 
 
First of all, it has been quite clear from all the deliberations that 
we had had with the Rules and Procedures Committee of the 
past that the official opposition did not want, nor were they 
interested in having, laptops in this particular Assembly.  That 
was more than clear. 
 
But what did the official opposition do?  They stated we would 
be more than willing to concede on this item; since it means so 
much to the member from Churchill Downs that we will in fact 
agree to this particular item.  But what we want in return is to 
have items that we are concerned about. 
 
If I may, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise a concern that I brought 
forward to the committee that I think is very important to the 
people of Saskatchewan, in particular 

important to the members in order to be able to do the best job 
possible on behalf of their constituents.  And that's regarding 
sitting hours. 
 
One of the things that I had suggested is that it would be in the 
best interests of the people of our province and their members 
in representing them to be able to meet with their constituents 
one day a week in their constituencies.  All that would be 
required would be extending the time of the session to ensure 
that we are able to cover all of the dates and spend that one day 
per week. 
 
Now if we look across the country, Mr. Speaker, that is 
happening in other places, where while the session is on MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) are able to be able to go 
to their constituents and be in contact.  And I know that I can 
meet with individual constituents on a weekend, but it is unfair 
and impractical to think that there are groups of people, 
organizations that exist in one's constituency, who are going to 
be able to bring together all of their members and meet on a 
weekend. 
 
That was something that I was able to say well, I'm willing if I 
have your word that we will address this in the future, that we 
can put aside for the moment because I think that this will be 
addressed at another time. 
 
There were many things that were done on the part of the 
official opposition and the part of the third party in order to be 
able to show goodwill.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was not done in 
return by government members. 
 
In fact some of the things that happened were the package that 
we had agreed to previously, the things that were tried out for 
50 days in this particular Assembly were decided by the 
member from Humboldt that we should no longer consider.  
For example, the seconders, that there would be no need for 
seconders.  And I find it most interesting that that would be the 
case because the mother of all parliaments got rid of that 
particular rule in 1957 in Britain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, we had agreed to changes with broadcast services 
in the past and had tried that for 50 days.  Who was it that made 
a decision that no we wouldn't be dealing with that at this 
moment, but the member from Humboldt. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's very surprising to me that we wouldn't 
take the time to do this in a way that is innovative and 
substantive.  If we look to the House of Commons they have 
many things that are worthwhile looking at.  The fact that they 
have many, many private members' Bills, that these things are 
addressed in Alberta.  I passed around all of the changes to 
many of their rules and procedures in the Government of 
Alberta that show that private members' motions and Bills are 
brought to a vote on the floor. 
 
I'm not suggesting that they have all of the answers, but I do 
believe that we should at least explore the 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

things that are going to allow the empowerment of people to do 
their jobs better here on behalf of their constituents. 
 
I think as well that when we look across the country, we don't 
want the kind of chaos that has been implemented by the 
Government of Ontario; so we should indeed be looking at 
things in a thoughtful manner. 
 
Similarly, there's something that I would very much want to see 
and that's better use of all-party standing committees.  Things 
that would result in our being able to meet in the evenings, for 
example, where we really could welcome in the public because 
we are simply temporary tenants in this building and they are 
the landlords.  We should be doing things that absolutely 
promote true access. 
 
I too would like to be introducing legislation in this Assembly 
which would be able to be brought to a vote, whether it be 
anti-corruption legislation or otherwise. 
 
I am very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, in the way that this has 
transpired.  I not only believe in reform, I want to participate 
fully in reform, and I think it unfortunate that the government 
members last evening tried to paint this as something that 
would depict the official opposition and the third party as being 
disinterested in reform. 
 
What concerns me even more is that the government is now 
going to go out and promote this somehow as if this is some 
wondrous reform package when in fact it is not near what the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve nor what they want. 
 
I concur with the hon. member that what we should indeed do 
is to withdraw . . . to offer the government to withdraw this 
report at this time and to offer us an opportunity to work 
toward a consensus once again.  Which is the only way in 
which changes to the rules and procedures are going to prove 
most successful for the people of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
was newly elected on October 21, 1991.  I had never sat is this 
legislature before that point.  And I, like a good number of 
members in this House, were elected on that very same date for 
the first time. 
 
As I toured my constituency seeking to represent 
Souris-Cannington, people there told me they wanted change.  
They wanted real, meaningful change in this legislature that 
would allow their representatives to represent the people that 
had elected them. 
 
They didn't want to elect someone to walk into this Assembly, 
into this Chamber, and simply represent the political party for 
which they ran.  They wanted people to represent them as 
constituents, as the people of Saskatchewan.  They wanted the 
members in this House to be able to do such things as bring 

forward pieces of legislation which benefited them and the 
province as a whole. 
 
We saw the member from Regina Rosemont last session bring 
forward a Bill, a private members' Bill from a government 
back-bencher, Mr. Minister. And what happened?  The 
government members refused to allow that Bill to be debated.  
They refused to allow it.  So, Mr. Speaker, it's not just 
opposition members who wish to have the ability to bring 
forward pieces of legislation, it's government back-benchers 
also. 
 
The people who elected me, and the people who elected all the 
other new people into this Assembly in 1991, wanted us to be 
able to speak out on free votes to best represent our 
constituencies, our individual constituencies.  They wanted us 
to speak on behalf of the whole province, but they also wanted 
us to speak on their behalf. 
 
By forcing members to vote the party line, you are not 
necessarily allowing the members of this Assembly to vote for 
what is best for their particular constituency.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is what real reform is all about, not what the 
government has presented in this report.  That is not reform at 
all, Mr. Speaker, that's just tinkering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to inform this Assembly that I will and am 
representing my constituents and the hundreds of thousands of 
other people across this province who continue to demand real 
change when I vote against the fluff which is this report and the 
sham reforms that the government opposite represents.  Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I had hoped that 
some of the other government members might want to add a 
word or two because the things I have to say won't take very 
long to throw into this debate.  I think the question that my 
colleagues asked gets right to the heart and the core of this 
matter: is this what the public really wants? 
 
That's the question we have to sit and ponder and ask ourselves, 
Mr. Speaker, because every one of the new members who were 
elected in the last election from the other side must search their 
souls at this moment and ask themselves this question.  Is this 
not what the public has asked you to do, to reform the process?  
This is what they sent you here for.  This is what they're calling 
for.  It doesn't matter which party they voted for.  They're 
telling us all the same message: reform the parliamentary 
process in our province so that it is meaningful and so that it 
will accomplish something that the people want to have done. 
 
And so what do we do here today, Mr. Speaker?  We bring in 
the 12 tinsel decorations from the tinman's government, and he 
allows us now to drink Beep in the Assembly, and that is our 
offer of a revolution in reform.  We're going to be able to drink 
Beep, while 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

things like amending the rules to allow the private members' 
Bills and motions to be brought forward in the Assembly on a 
regular basis so they can be given the deserved recognition, 
that's left out. 
 
We have members of the public who sit in this Assembly week 
after week, day after day, lobbying to try to get their messages 
and their issues dealt with.  And even when they make that 
point with the official opposition, that this is a proper and 
intelligent thing that needs to be done, do we listen to them?  
Do we provide an opportunity so that that issue can be brought 
before this House so that people can vote on it?  No.  We throw 
that out.  We throw that out, and we bring in a program so that 
we can play computer games in this House when we get too 
bored with the speeches, instead of listening to the debate that a 
democracy was set up to do in this very House and every 
House like it.  Instead of listening to the debate to find out what 
we've done wrong, we'll sit and we'll play computer games.  
And that we call reform. 
 
I beg your pardon, but it doesn't work for me.  That the 
chairman of the Crown Corporations would actually be a 
member of the opposition so that some real work can be done, 
instead of the political games that we play in that particular 
process, that we reject.  No thank you, we won't have that.  
We'll drink Beep and we'll play computer games. 
 
More free votes in the Assembly . . . and they don't even have 
the courage to allow their members a free vote on this very 
issue itself.  Not one proclamation from anyone that you can 
vote your conscience and do what your people want you to do, 
the people that elected you. 
 
And I point my finger to the back benches again and I 
challenge you to represent the people that elected you and bring 
in some true reform -- the kind of reform that they want to see 
and deserve to have. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 
only going to take a few minutes in reply to the interim report 
brought down by the government members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was at that meeting last night and I can tell you 
that from attending Rules Committee meetings in the past that 
there was no consensus, there was no consensus at all, Mr. 
Speaker, in the development of this interim report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayer and the voter today in this province 
are demanding of the members of this Legislative Assembly, 
and every other one across Canada and the House of Commons, 
that politicians start to develop some type of consensus way of 
governing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say to us as politicians and as political 
parties that you no longer have the 

credibility, no longer have the credibility to speak on our 
behalf.  And, Mr. Speaker, when we have over 50 per cent of 
the voters in a riding not bothering to vote, that reaffirms in my 
mind that the credibility that we all would like to have no 
longer exists for politicians and political parties either in this 
province or across Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the trick in the job is to get it back again.  And 
to do it in a way, as the Leader of the Liberal Party pointed out 
is being done in Alberta, a way that other jurisdictions are 
experimenting with, and that is to take the partisanship out of 
the process and develop, by consensus, rules that are 
meaningful for the 1990s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it rings totally hollow when the member 
from Churchill Downs tries to snow this Assembly and snow 
the people of this province that the process we are going 
through here today has anything to do with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this report today, and I 
challenge the members of the government to give us a taxpayer 
today, give us a taxpayer that would come into this Assembly 
and say that this is what I want; this is good work, ladies and 
gentlemen.  Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? I don't 
believe they could find one.  They might find a hack out there 
somewhere who would agree, but they won't find an 
honest-to-goodness taxpayer that would say, this is good work; 
you've earned your pay today. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, all that this does, quite frankly, is make 
the life of the 66 members of the Assembly -- and particularly 
the government members -- easier to bear.  Mr. Speaker, that's 
not what's on the public's mind today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the year 1994 across this land, this agenda of 
change is on.  And if members of this Assembly did nothing 
else in 1994 but to deliver to the people of this province at least 
a glimmer of hope that that change is taking place, then we 
would have accomplished something, Mr. Speaker, and there 
would have been no deadline of March 1 or March 7 or 
anything else.  If it took this entire session, Mr. Speaker, to 
bring about fundamental change, then there has been good 
work done, and members of this Assembly, I believe, can say 
they have earned their pay. 
 
There is nothing, Mr. Speaker, in this report today, nothing that 
will change public attitude one iota as to how this place works 
and how it functions and how it represents the views of people 
across this province. 
 
I would love, Mr. Speaker, I would love the Premier of this 
province, the member from Riversdale, a man who has taken 
part in fundamental change in our country through the 
constitutional process 10 years ago, to stand in this Assembly 
and tell me how this particular document lines up with some of 
the fundamental changes that he helped institute in this country 
that fundamentally changed the way -- rightly or 
wrongly -- that we govern ourselves. 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

And I would challenge the Premier today to stand up and say 
how this is reform, how this is the leading edge for h s 
government, and to bring me someone from the real world back 
into this Assembly who would put their stamp on this and say, 
well done, good and faithful servant; you've done good work 
today. 

i 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is no consensus.  There is no good work 
today because the job is not finished.  And I see no will from 
this government to finish the job in this session or any other 
because the maintenance of power by members of executive 
government is paramount.  And the maintenance of power of 
individual members of this Assembly should be what is 
paramount, Mr. Speaker.  It is not before us today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 3:05 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Pringle 
Van Mulligen Lautermilch 
Thompson Calvert 
Wiens Renaud 
Tchorzewski Murray 
Lingenfelter Trew 
Shillington Draper 
Koskie Serby 
Teichrob Whitmore 
Johnson Sonntag 
Goulet Roy 
Kowalsky Scott 
Carson Crofford 
Mitchell Kujawa 
MacKinnon Stanger 
Penner Kluz 
Cunningham Knezacek 
Upshall Harper 
Hagel Keeping 
Bradley Jess 
Koenker Carlson 
Lorje Langford 

-- 44 
Nays 

 Swenson 
Britton Muirhead 
D'Autremont Neudorf 
Goohsen Martens 
Haverstock Boyd 
Bergman Toth 

-- 11 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Moving the 
second of these traditional motions, I move, seconded by the 
member from Lloydminster: 
 

That the modifications and amendments to the practices and 
rules of the Assembly, as recommended in the third report of 
the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly, be implemented 

effective March 7, 1994 and; 

 That the said practices and rules be incorporated into the 
Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan as soon as is practicable. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Thursday 
next ask the government the following questions: 
 

 Regarding the Department of Justice: February 15, 1994, 
Garry Moran received salary increase from $4,930 per month 
to $5,585 per month: (a) why was Mr. Moran given the salary 
increase; (b) why was Mr. Moran's salary increase retroactive 
approximately one and . . . one and a half years to July 1, 
1992; (c) what is the total amount of retroactive pay that Mr. 
Moran will receive; (d) where is Mr. Moran located and what 
is the title of the position; (e) what are Mr. Moran's 
qualifications for this position? 

 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 
that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

 Regarding the Justice department: currently the liability 
insurance for hunter safety instructors is paid for by the 
province: (a) will this change after April 1, 1994?  If so, 
please outline details of this adjustment; (b) will instructors 
of newly required FAC (firearms acquisition certificate) 
courses be provided liability insurance by the province? 

 
I so request. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly, a business person from 
Saskatoon, Abe Dyck, with Saskatoon Fresh Pack, who is with 
us here today in the Speaker's gallery.  I'm sure all members 
will want to join with me in welcoming Abe to the Assembly.  
Saskatoon Fresh Pack, as you will know, processes vegetables, 
and in the city of Saskatoon employs about 50 people and do a 
wonderful job of exporting Saskatchewan products into the 
world market. 
 
So I'm sure we all want to join with . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Rural Emergency Health Care 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health.  Madam 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

Minister, on Friday you accused me of misinforming the public 
when I brought forward concerns about emergency services in 
Langenburg.  You said, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

 For the member opposite to suggest that there isn't medical 
services in Langenburg 24 hours a day, and there isn't any 
emergency medical services, is false, it's misinformation, it's 
wrong. 

 
Madam Minister, shortly after question period I was phoned by 
an individual who works at what used to be the Langenburg 
hospital -- an individual who said that he couldn't believe you 
were telling people that they had emergency services in 
Langenburg when they don't. 
 
Madam Minister, I'm not sure where you are getting your 
information from, but it is false, it's misinformation, and it's 
wrong.  I'm wondering where you've been, Madam Minister.  
How many of the 52 rural hospitals have you visited since your 
cut-backs last year?  It's a very simple question.  How many 
have you bothered to visit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister and I and many 
other members of this government have been in those and 
many other communities since that time, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 
proud to say that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of Langenburg, the information that I 
have is that 24-hour emergency service is available in that 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 
individual that I spoke of earlier provided me with a memo 
signed by the director of nursing in Langenburg.  It is an update 
on the emergency services available in Langenburg.  The 
memo states, and I have it here with me: 
 

 . . . there will be NO SCHEDULED position, nurse, lab or 
X-ray person designated On Call. 

 
You people have accused me of spreading misinformation to 
the people . . . for the people are bringing the same information 
forward before you this afternoon in the Assembly.  Do you 
believe that this memo, written by the director of nursing in 
Langenburg, is false, misinformation, and wrong?  Do you 
believe that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if I heard the member 
correctly in the House this afternoon, he's talking about an 
issue of being on call.  Now there is a difference here, Mr. 
Speaker, of having a registered nurse in a facility 24 hours a 
day than someone who is on call. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am told, in Langenburg in the special 

care facility there will be on a 24-hour basis a nurse available 
in the long-term care facility which, Mr. Speaker, I would 
argue, and I'm sure the member would agree, is probably a 
better situation than on call. 
 
(1515) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I don't 
know exactly what you consider emergency medical services.  
Do they include a doctor?  Do they include a nurse or a lab tech 
or an X-ray technician?  Or do you consider it to be an 
answering machine that tells the emergency patients to travel to 
Yorkton, Esterhazy, or Russell, Manitoba?  Is that sufficient, 
Mr. Minister?  What exactly do you consider to be emergency 
medical services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, across the province, in the 
community of Langenburg, in the community of Esterhazy, in 
the communities of Melville, Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, 
to the far north to Uranium City, Saskatchewan people are 
concerned about the provision of emergency services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the emergency services available to the 
people in our province today are, I would argue, Mr. Speaker, 
improving.  We have, Mr. Speaker, in this province existing 
perhaps the best road ambulance system in the country.  To 
that, Mr. Speaker, we want to improve. 
 
We are building across this province a network of first 
responders.  We are strengthening EMTs (emergency medical 
technician).  We are finding in our communities means to 
provide 24-hour emergency response -- very often, nurse 
emergency response.  We're working with doctors to provide 
group practice where teams of doctors can work together and 
link together. 
 
We're building in our base facilities the best possible 
emergency system.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think we've had 
testimony in this province through the healing of the young girl 
from Rouleau, a testimony to the emergency service in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, if you 
won't believe that individual, maybe you'll believe the health 
district president of that district, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister.  He 
said, and I quote, on contacting him this morning: lab services 
in the Langenburg hospital are available from 8 a.m. to 3:30 
p.m. Monday through Friday.  No weekends or evenings.  No 
lab technician on call. 
 
X-ray services 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Monday through Friday.  
No weekends or evenings.  No X-ray technician on call. 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

The Langenburg Health Centre closes at 4 p.m. and phones are 
forwarded to the Langenburg Centennial Special Care Home.  
If you will recall, Mr. Minister, that's where the long-term care 
patient answered the phone the other day.  The Alzheimer's 
patient, Mr. Minister. 
 
An RN (registered nurse) or psych nurse is available to answer 
phone calls from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. on weekdays and 11 a.m. to 
3 p.m. on weekends. 
 
There is no doctor on call at either facility. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan and the 
folks, the good folks of Langenburg, don't feel that they have 
24-hour emergency services in their community.  Would you 
agree with them, Mr. Minister, and will you provide that 
service, that very necessary service, to the people of 
Langenburg? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the member rises in this 
House and says all sorts of things.  A few weeks ago he rose in 
this House and accused both myself and the Minister of Health 
of not responding to a letter.  Mr. Speaker, we explored this 
situation; the letter was never sent to us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today he stands in the House and he tells us that the phone is 
answered by an Alzheimer patient.  He talks about an 
Alzheimer patient.  Well I wonder if that's the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Yesterday in the House he stands up and he says that 
everybody that's appointed to a health board in the province is 
an NDP partisan.  Well now today he wants to quote, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been working with groups like the Rural 
Health Coalition.  We have been working with our district 
boards.  We have been with working communities across the 
province to build emergency services and the best possible 
health care system that we can provide to our people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SGI Monopoly Policy 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), and it deals with a problem that has been 
encountered by a Mr. Vern Klein, who runs an auto body shop 
in Biggar. 
 
Recently Mr. Klein's wife, Merle, began selling Co-op 
insurance two days a week out of the auto body shop.  
Immediately SGI sent an adjuster to tell Mr. Klein that SGI 
would no longer be meeting claimants at his shop, as they had 
been doing for the past 20 years. 
 
Mr. Klein says this change by SGI could well put him out of 
business.  Mr. Minister, is this the policy of SGI, to bully the 
people you do business with like Mr. 

Klein, simply because his wife is trying to work part time to 
earn a second income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you very much for the question.  
I'll check into the case, you know, as soon as question period is 
over. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 
this was in the newspaper, in the Biggar town and the 
constituency.  I'm surprised your member didn't bring this up to 
you. 
 
Mr. Minister, this policy doesn't seem to make a lot of sense.  
There are numerous insurance agents throughout the province 
who sell both SGI and other types of insurance.  Yet Vern 
Klein, who runs a body shop, is being penalized because his 
wife is selling Co-op insurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it the policy of SGI to use its monopoly 
position with vehicle insurance to threaten and coerce the 
people of Saskatchewan for the benefit of SGI CANADA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'll say, for the second time, I'll take notice 
on the question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 
as I mentioned earlier, this is an old problem.  It's been over a 
month in the news, and Vern Klein has yet to receive a straight 
answer.  SGI refuses to give Mr. Klein its policy in writing, and 
head office officials refuse to meet with him.  Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Klein has had a 20-year relationship with SGI.  During that 
time, he has provided SGI adjusters with a desk, a separate 
phone line, and a fax machine in his body shop at his own 
expense -- not SGI's -- Mr. Klein's own expense. 
 
Mr. Minister, why won't SGI provide Mr. Klein with an answer 
in writing?  Is this any way to treat a businessman who SGI has 
been dealing with for the past 20 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- To the member, I think I will be getting a 
letter in writing in regards to the response, and I'll be taking 
notice as well, in regards to the question. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Minister, your government's heavy-handed way of dealing 
with Saskatchewan business people raises some much bigger 
questions.  A couple of these questions appeared in an editorial 
in the Biggar Independent.  The editorial writer asks:  by 
agreeing to provide a service of the government, does that 
mean the government agency has the sole claim on what can 
and cannot operate out of that very same building?  And does 
that government have a right to dictate to a private individual? 
 
Those are two very good questions, Mr. Minister, and I wonder 
if you would care to answer them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The policy has not changed over 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

the years, to the member.  We've had an outstanding 
relationship with the brokers and agents of this province.  And I 
may say that in regards to that question of dictating, we've been 
operating with brokers throughout this province.  In this 
specific instance I'll be looking into the case, as I said in the 
previous other three questions. 
 

Health Care Equipment Purchases 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, the new frontier of health 
care depends upon new technology and state-of-the-art 
equipment, not bricks and mortar.  And yesterday's 
Star-Phoenix article on laparoscopic surgery is just one 
example of the aggressive approach Saskatchewan health care 
specialists have taken as a means of minimizing expensive 
patient recovery time. 
 
Madam Minister, can you explain what portion of capital 
budgets are dedicated to guarantee state-of-the-art equipment to 
our health care professionals, and what is your department's 
commitment to new equipment purchases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to address the topic 
generally and I certainly invite the member to discuss that in 
full with the minister and I during the process of estimates, 
which I think is the appropriate point to discuss that kind of 
detailed question. 
 
But let me say, Mr. Speaker, that with all health spending we 
are now attempting through needs assessment process to relate 
our spending very closely to need.  And the member makes a 
good point, there are technologies that can improve the quality 
of health care and add to the total package.  But again it needs 
to be shown that it's based on need, and again within the 
available resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Associate Minister, 
hundreds of volunteer non-profit organizations raise money 
through bingos, through raffles, through lotteries, and Nevada 
ticket sales.  The Lions, Kinsmen Telemiracle, Children's 
Miracle, Shriners, and countless others work very hard to raise 
money for local hospital funds.  Mr. Minister, does your 
department have an inventory? In other words, do you know of 
the value of the equipment that has been donated through the 
generosity of Saskatchewan charitable organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't have that 
specific information here today.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 
recognize that across this province volunteer groups and 
community associations have gone to great lengths and have 
contributed a great deal to the provision of health care and 
health care facilities in the province.  Again, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest to the member that this kind of questioning, I believe, 
is more appropriately dealt with in estimates when all of the 
more detailed information can be here before us. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Associate 
Minister, as you know, Saskatchewan people have a very long 
history of generosity.  For years hospital foundations have 
donated life-saving equipment to the hospital systems in 
Regina and Saskatoon.  Every year these foundations budget 
for funds raised through the sale of Nevada tickets in hotels and 
licensed lounges across the province. 
 
In 1992-93, two Saskatoon hospitals shared $85,000 per 
month -- that's per month, Mr. Minister -- from Nevada sales 
alone.  Eighty per cent of that money was dedicated to 
equipping St. Paul's Hospital.  In 1993-94, it is going to the 
City Hospital Foundation, and they were counting on a similar 
amount per month. 
 
Now as the direct result of competition with VLTs (video 
lottery terminal), City Hospital's share is now just $48,000 per 
month from Nevada sales profits.  That's a loss of almost a half 
a million dollars a year, Mr. Minister.  Can you detail the 
arrangements that you've made with your minister of Gaming 
to compensate these foundations directly for the loss of Nevada 
ticket income? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 
response to the member's question, I'd I guess like to speak to 
the fluctuation in terms of different forms of gaming.  And the 
member may be aware, and if she's not she should be aware, 
that the figures are not consistent every year. 
 
With respect to break-opens, she indicates that there is a 
decrease because of shifts and other forms, and I agree with 
her.  But it's not inconsistent with what's happened in the past.  
The year '78 to '79, as an example, the decrease in break-opens 
was 29 per cent. 
 
So I would suggest that the member should totally research 
before she comes into the House making charges with respect 
to competition on other forms of gaming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  You know, we're talking about 
charitable foundations here and that your government happens 
to be competing with them and hurting people in the province 
of Saskatchewan as a result. 
 
Mr. Minister, hospital foundations in Saskatoon alone now 
have a shortfall of $40,000 a month -- $40,000 a month as a 
result of the gaming strategy of your government.  Now what 
assurances can you give this Assembly that funds will be 
specifically earmarked from gaming revenues to cover this 
loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me answer 
the question of the member.  Again, we see inconsistency.  Last 
week she tells us that we shouldn't be doing gaming.  The year 
before she's telling us 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

hurry up, hurry up, generate this revenue.  And I want to say, 
Mr. Speaker, that I am wondering if she's maybe more 
concerned with her friends who own commercial bingo halls 
and benefit from wide-open expansion under the Tories at the 
expense of charities.  And I'd like to know, Mr. Speaker, if 
that's the Liberal direction for gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 1982 to 1991 hall owners in this province in 
bingos raked in 106.4 million.  Charities raked in about 85.2.  
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we're turning that around 
because we're going to increase the amount of dollars that go 
from bingos to charities as opposed to the hall owners.  So I ask 
the member, state your position:  on which side of the issue are 
you? 
 
(1530) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I'd 
love to tell you my position on gaming.  Before you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I guess perhaps they're not wanting 
to listen, which it does not surprise me. 
 
Before you ever expand gaming there has to be a strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, that addresses all of the implications and not just a 
bigger bottom line for your provincial budget.  And you don't 
have that strategy and I would suggest that you start getting to 
it immediately.  That's my position. 
 
Your government departments, your government departments, 
Mr. Premier, are working at cross purposes here.  On the one 
hand, you're giving community responsibility for health care.  
On the other hand, your minister of Gaming is promoting 
policies that hurt local charities, Mr. Premier, unless you take 
over the fine work -- and if you want to take over the fine work 
of all the local charities, fine -- to pay for hospital equipment, 
but you're going to have to make a commitment.  Will you 
make the commitment to protect their fund-raising capacity 
from government gaming competition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me be very clear 
with the minister.  Our commitment is to the Saskatchewan . . . 
Or to the member.  Our commitment is to the Saskatchewan 
business community, to the aboriginal people who we'll be 
partnering with in the charities. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if the member has another 
direction that she'd like to see gaming, I'd like to know if 
perhaps it may be, if it just may be because her constituency 
assistant and her campaign manager were long-time involved in 
the bingo industry at a time when, in fact, the owners of the 
bingo halls generated more in revenue than in fact the charities 
do. 
 
Madam, I ask you if that's your position, and if that's the 
Liberal direction, I say to you that members of this House will 
have none of it.  We are involved in 

generating and in assisting generating money for charities and 
for the small-business community and for the aboriginal 
people.  Mr. Speaker, we're concerned about jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Welfare Numbers 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a series of 
questions I'd like to ask the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, today we have seen another indication of your 
government's failed economic policies and the devastating 
effect it is having on Saskatchewan families.  The new social 
services figures which we have just received, Mr. Premier, 
show that the number of people on welfare has reached a new 
and record high, 78,406 people.  Mr. Premier, that's 21,000 
more people on welfare than the day that you took office, and 
it's a jump Mr. Premier, of 1,600 in the last month.  This in 
light of your solemn pledge to eliminate poverty in your first 
term. That's what you said. 
 
Mr. Premier, with these kinds of numbers, how can you say 
that your economic and job creation policies have been a 
success?  Mr. Premier, when are these numbers going to turn 
around and go the other way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member has forgotten that were it not for 
the federal PC (Progressive Conservative) UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission) changes in April of 
'93 which put 5,000 new clients onto social services, and the 
treaty offloading of families in July of 1993 which put another 
5,000 onto our case-loads, the case-load has been stabilized; it 
would have been stabilized.  In fact in January of 1994 there 
was the lowest increase in five years in social assistance cases, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a number of initiatives in the budget, 
the 700 million capital projects, the Opportunities Corporation, 
the northern economic development plan, the business tax 
decreases.  There's the additions to the economic plan that is 
working very well, Mr. Speaker.  The chambers of commerce 
are optimistic. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would just say that the retail sales in 
Saskatchewan for December, at an increase of 6.7 over last 
year compared to a decrease in Newfoundland, the Liberal 
province, of minus 1.1, and the New Brunswick Liberal 
province of only 1.1.  So we're well on the track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would ask that member to remember that his federal 
counterparts put 10,000 new clients onto assistance.  The 
federal budget with . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 
we drag out the blame thrower.  Mr. Speaker, the minister in 
his own words says that the only addition was 8,000.  Now 
we're talking about 21,000 people.  We heard the government 
blame this on the federal government and the province for 
looking after off-reserve Indians, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well we've checked that claim. We checked that claim, Mr. 
Speaker, and they tell us that only 8,000 of the 21,000 people 
have joined the welfare rolls since your government took 
office -- 21,000 -- as a result of the change in the federal policy.  
The other 13,000 are a direct result of your failed economic 
policies. 
 
Mr. Premier, the biggest issue of these people is they don't 
want a cheque from the federal government.  They don't want a 
cheque from the provincial government.  They want a cheque 
from an employer.  That's what they want.  That's what they 
want.  Mr. Speaker, they can't get one because there's no jobs 
available. 
 
Mr. Premier, or Mr. Minister, when are you going to start to see 
that some jobs are created in this province to offset the 
thousands of jobs that you have chased out of this province?  
When will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, it's good rhetoric but it 
doesn't deal with the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increase in social assistance case-loads in 
Saskatchewan which have gone up 33 per cent in the last two 
years, related to their federal PC counterparts, have gone up 50 
per cent in the rest of Canada, on average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal budget, the cuts to UIC 
changes are going to dump another, probably several hundred 
people onto our case-loads because they've restricted the 
eligibility and the benefits and the number of weeks you can 
receive assistance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have no job creation plan in their 
federal budget.  They didn't deal with agriculture.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, we can't go it alone.  We need some federal support in 
some of our initiatives.  But we're doing the best we can and we 
would encourage the member and seat mates to the left there to 
be optimistic like the rest of Saskatchewan people are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 
Saskatchewan Universities 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I move that a Bill to establish Crown Foundations for 
Saskatchewan Universities be now introduced and read a first 
time. 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Interim Table Officer 
 
The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to 
introduce to the hon. members of the Assembly, Mr. Charles 
Robert, a committee Clerk who is on secondment from the 
Senate of Canada.  Charles will be assisting the Clerks at the 
Table for the remainder of the session. 
 
Charles is no stranger to the people here.  This is his third tour 
of duty in our Assembly.  And I would want to ask all members 
to welcome Charles to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Priority of Legislative Reform Mechanisms 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to deal 
with a motion before the Assembly that says, and I will move it 
at the conclusion of my remarks: 
 

 That this Assembly urges the government to heed the wishes 
of the people of Saskatchewan and proceed, develop and 
adopt reform mechanisms within the Saskatchewan 
legislature rather than address items low on the public's 
agenda such as labour legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to point out today that we have witnessed 
some interesting debate earlier on, on changes to rules within 
this Assembly.  And I'm going to ask some questions, Mr. 
Speaker, that relate to this discussion because it identifies what 
I believe are some very significant problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were in this package really very few reforms 
that dealt with anything that could assist or implement a 
positive impact within the framework of this Assembly for the 
private members of this Assembly.  The majority of the time 
that it was taken in the discussion to emphasize that was 
sufficient.  However, I want to point out that the people of this 
Assembly do not have any more rights, exclusive of the 
government and the cabinet, than they had yesterday. 
 
There is no reform in that package for the public of 
Saskatchewan.  There is no reform in this package for the 
public of Saskatchewan.  What do they have better today than 
they had yesterday?  Answer that question.  That's the 
fundamental question about what reform is all about.  That's the 
question.  There's no reform for the voters of this province, Mr. 
Speaker.  There's no reform for the voters. 
 
And the member for Churchill Downs chirps from his 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

seat and wants to get in the debate.  And I will ask him to 
deprogram his computer, his laptop computer, of all of the 
games that he's going to play on them.  And I will ask him to 
deprogram all of the items in his law practice that he has on his 
computer as he sits in this Assembly and details those kinds of 
actions. 
 
That's the kind of program reform that the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are financing.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
disgusting.  And if he wants to get into this Assembly and 
debate it on the basis that he is going to exclude that laptop 
from his desk because he is going to be doing that, then I would 
say he is an hon. member.  Until then, Mr. Speaker, I'm going 
to question that. 
 
The reform is only for the government and the cabinet 
ministers of this Assembly, and that is a fact, Mr. Speaker.  The 
list of House reforms in this Assembly that we have today 
versus yesterday are so insignificant it doesn't even matter that 
they exist.  As a matter of fact, the majority of the people in 
this Assembly didn't smoke in this Assembly from respect of it 
even though the rule was there that they could during 
Committee of the Whole.  And that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so today we want to say that we have massively changed 
the rules of this Assembly.  We've massively changed the rules 
of this Assembly, and we're going to go on from here and have 
a continued debate about this.  I challenge the members 
opposite to get some sand in their back and tell their cabinet 
that they have a right to speak in this Assembly just like I have 
a right to speak in this Assembly, and not to be curtailed by the 
executive branch of this government. 
 
They're hungry for power.  They're hungry for control.  And 
what do the taxpayers of this province want?  They want 
representation in this Assembly that clearly deals with some 
package of reform.  We have provided some very fine options 
on that, I believe, Mr. Speaker.  We have presented some 
options that I believe are fundamental to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan and should be identified here. 
 
We have asked this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to provide an 
opportunity for the public to hear what back-benchers and 
opposition members would like to have put before this 
Assembly so that they can discuss them, debate them, vote for 
them, or vote against them.  That's what we have suggested  
Mr. Speaker.  One of those things would be to present Bills in 
this Assembly for discussion. 

, Underlying Lorje's argument is a belief that "traditional" 
solutions -- whether espoused by the right or left -- no longer 
work. 

 
What we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is a government hesitant to 
give anybody else control of the agenda and in that way forcing 
everybody, everybody in this Assembly to bow down to the 
House Leader of this Assembly in the government side and say 
yes, sir; yes, sir.  We want to have an opportunity to debate the 
Bills that are brought forward by the people from my 
constituency -- Bills that impact in the constituency of Thunder 
Creek or from Indian Head-Wolseley, or wherever in this 
province.  That's the kind of impact we need to have in this 
debate and this Assembly. 

We have identified three, we have identified three issues 
already, Mr. Speaker, that deal with reform -- an opportunity to 
set the record straight in this Assembly so that individuals 
could have the freedom of conscience to vote the way they 
want to, freedom to vote on behalf of their constituents, 
freedom to do that. 
 
(1545) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
House Leader has asked me when he has allowed his members 
to do that and not to do that.  Well I want to bring up a Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, where he did not allow the member from Nipawin to 
vote his conscience.  Mr. Speaker, that member had to leave 
this Assembly because he couldn't vote his conscience.  And 
that is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's what we have to have, is the freedom of individuals to 
vote for their conscience sake and to represent their 
constituency in this Assembly.  That is freedom.  That is 
reform.  And it's time the people in this Assembly identified 
with that. 
 
And that is important for the people here and for the people out 
in the country.  That's important for the taxpayers.  Why are 
they cynical, Mr. Speaker?  Why are they cynical?  It's because 
we in this Assembly for years and years had to vote along party 
lines. And that government is no different than anybody else 
has been in the past history. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it's time to change.  It's time to change.  And 
I had an example of that pointed out to me.  People will say to 
me, well you had the freedom to do some of those changes.  
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we did.  And we did make some changes.  
We opened up the Public Accounts Committee, which was 
traditionally closed, to anybody being able to report what was 
going on.  We made changes. 
 
But this is a time, Mr. Speaker, for people to reform their 
attitude.  And I want to point out some statements that were 
reported in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, a column written by 
Paul Martin, and identifying one of the members from the NDP 
who would like to speak out, speak out on behalf of her 
constituents: 
 

 
It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, and so today what did we do?  We 
identified tinsel, we identified tinsel that changes things in this 
Assembly.  But what does it do to fundamentally change the 
rules and regulations of how we do things in this Assembly?  
How does the taxpayer get involved, and how does the voter 
get involved? 
 
We've identified one of those things in our question period, Mr. 
Speaker, where we ask a question on behalf of our constituents 
so that they can have a voice in what's being said.  And as a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, those constituents are getting the 
replies 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

back in Hansard that these ministers are providing, and some 
of them are not very happy about it.  I cannot even use some of 
the words that were said outside of this Assembly about what 
some of the ministers said and the conduct they had. 
 
And that is what the voter says:  I want to have that change; I 
want to have a fundamental change in how those things are 
done.  And I believe that it is our responsibility to present to 
this Assembly alternatives to that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here's one.  We need to have free votes in 
this Assembly.  And when there is a confidence vote in this 
Assembly that is considered by the government to be 
important, they can state it. 
 
But what do we have now?  We have everything so locked up 
that if you don't mark time exactly as your House leader says or 
the whip tells you to be, that's going to be out of order.  And we 
have had examples of that in the last session, and I pointed 
them out already. 
 
We need to have, Mr. Speaker, a voice by the members of this 
Assembly who have been elected to this Assembly to represent 
the taxpayers in one of the most awesome positions that could 
be provided, Mr. Speaker.  And that is 40 per cent of this 
Assembly's spending, the executive branch of government, 40 
per cent of that spending, Mr. Speaker, is spent outside of the 
functions of this Assembly.  We cannot debate.  We cannot 
argue.  We cannot check to see whether 40 per cent of the 
spending of this executive government is done legitimately and 
for the purposes that it was set out to do. 
 
We can't do that, Mr. Speaker, and that would allow members 
of this Assembly, on a proportional basis to the representation 
by party, an opportunity to review the utilities in the province 
of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, that would enhance the role of 
members in this Assembly.  It would make this Assembly for 
the first time have a reason to believe that they could impact on 
the Crown corporations in this province.  For the first time, 
individuals in this Assembly could deal with that. 
 
I challenge members on the government back bench to tell me 
what the budget looks like for SaskPower Corporation and I 
will bet you, Mr. Speaker, that there isn't a single one will be 
able to tell me what the dollar value of the budget for 
SaskPower is, nor for SaskTel, nor for SGI, nor for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Why?  Because, Mr. Speaker, the front benches, the ministers 
responsible have absolute authority and control and dictate the 
control over those various agencies.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
not right.  The members of this Assembly have the 
responsibility to do that for their taxpayers and their voters. 
 
Another item that we had brought forward, Mr. Speaker, is 
setting election days.  Fix a day, and make it a day that is 
legitimate.  We have suggested the second Monday of June, 
every four years.  And, Mr. Speaker, the voters asked for that.  
They have been asking for 

that for a couple of elections already, Mr. Speaker.  And does 
anybody listen?  Has anybody been hearing what they've been 
saying, or have been hearing and not doing anything about it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we had an example of the fourth item that I 
believe is an example of how we need to handle the discussion 
in relation to reform in this Assembly.  Legislate a reduction in 
the number of cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker.  Legislate it. 
 
We had a minister responsible for SGI taking notice of 
questions today on issues.  That is his only responsibility, Mr. 
Speaker.  That is his only responsibility, and he couldn't even 
answer the questions, and they have been in the papers in the 
town of Biggar for months.  Mr. Speaker, we need to have a 
legislated number of ministers in this Assembly as a proportion 
of the total representation.  Give members of this Assembly 
some option on controlling the utility rates.  Give the members 
of this Assembly some control in the budget valuations and the 
monies being brought in in the budgets of the Crown 
corporations.  Give these people some access to that. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the fifth thing that we're suggesting is a 
committee to review government appointments.  Mr. Speaker, 
political parties through their history have traditionally placed 
people who they know and who have worked for them in 
positions of responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today, today the public doesn't want that any 
more.  They don't want that any more.  They don't want that, 
and they have said that over and over and over again.  In the 
minister's office it's fine to have these people come in and be 
political appointments because those people . . . the minister 
has to have absolute total confidence in.  But when it comes to 
dealing with an overall strategy for a Crown corporation, for a 
board or agency, a commission, it's time to change.  The voter 
is saying, the taxpayer is saying, it's time for change. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I brought forward this 
motion here today.  That's why I am presenting this motion, 
seconded by the member from Moosomin: 
 

 That this Assembly urges the government to heed the wishes 
of the people of Saskatchewan and proceed, develop and 
adopt reform mechanisms within the Saskatchewan 
legislature rather than address items low on the public's 
agenda such as labour legislation. 

 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I believe is what the public agenda is all 
about.  Thank you for your time. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure for me to join in the debate and to second the motion 
brought forward by my colleague, the member from Morse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past few years, many members from all 
sides of this Assembly and all parties have 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

actually spoken up on different issues and concerns regarding 
the rules and how this Legislative Assembly should operate, 
and certainly members of the official opposition didn't come 
into this Assembly with any grandiose ideas of making major 
changes overnight. 
 
But we certainly came in with some positive ideas of what we 
saw as -- for those of us who may have been here for a term or 
two terms, those who were elected for the first time -- came 
with some positive ideas of how we should look at seriously 
changing the way this House operates so that we indeed have 
the ability to represent our constituents in a format and in a 
manner that we would feel would be more appropriate and 
more becoming of us as members of the Assembly and 
representatives of the voting public across Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were prepared to work for the people of 
Saskatchewan in a cooperative manner, and I believe, as my 
colleague has indicated . . . and as I speak, Mr. Speaker, I'll 
bring out some of the areas that we've thrown out for 
consultation.  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I could go over some of 
the arguments that were presented when I was a member of the 
government for the term from '86 to '91.  And unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, at that time, there were some members who had 
been around a lot longer than I have been around who were still 
looking at this Assembly in the format of how it used to operate 
and suggesting that we must continue on that road versus 
looking at new methods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we devised a package of reforms and we've taken 
the time to even have legislation drafted on these matters so 
that we can present them to the Assembly and allow all 
members the opportunity to look at the legislation.  And 
hopefully at the end of the day before the sun sets on this 
specific legislative session, we will indeed have that privilege 
of seeing those pieces of legislation come forward for debate, 
for real debate, to address some of the real ongoing concerns 
that the people of Saskatchewan have.  We look forward to 
bringing our reforms, reforms supported by the Saskatchewan 
public, forward in this Assembly. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there is a growing feeling that our 
legislation will not be debated in this Assembly.  And some of 
the debate that's already taken place in the House regarding the 
change to the rules and procedures of this Assembly would lead 
us to believe that the format really isn't going to change that 
much.  We've done some window-dressing but we may not be 
addressing the real issues. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I trust that even though there has been a 
change or suggestions on new rule changes that the Rules 
Committee will indeed, and the government members 
themselves, will take the time and that, as Speaker of the 
Assembly, the chairman of the committee would take the time 
to even call the committee to order and go on . . . address some 
of the other ongoing issues and suggestions that have been 
brought forward. 

We feel that our legislation will not be debated because rules 
which would allow private members' Bills to come forward 
from under all other private members' business were rejected 
by the Rules Committee and brought into this Assembly 
basically because of the majority that the government has on 
the committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with an open mind that opposition members 
attended the meetings of the Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures and I think, as we've heard today, we didn't go with 
a lot of grandiose demands.  We had a few demands and 
suggestions that we were ready to put forward. 
 
We also indicated that we were willing to look at and consider 
all the suggestions that had been presented to us by the 
government members.  And all we asked of the government 
was that they take the time to look at the change in rules in the 
overall picture rather than just changing immediately and 
demanding that certain rule changes come in but we'll maybe, 
maybe, down the road look at some of the other changes. 
 
As it turns out, our caucus, it appears, had no opportunity to 
work cooperatively with government members.  Instead the 
government reverted back to its heavy-handed tactics and 
rammed through changes to the rules of this Assembly without 
any regard for the suggestions put forward by the opposition.  
But as I indicated earlier, and I will say it again, I trust that 
government members will indeed sit back and even though 
there have been rule changes implemented, will sit back and 
take a serious look at some of the other suggestions that have 
been put forward by my colleagues on the Rules Committee 
and as well by the member of the Liberal Party or the members 
of the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard over time and time again this 
government has continually talked about being open and 
having an honest government and an accountable government.  
And yet within the framework of these walls and of this 
building, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions we really haven't 
seen that openness and honesty and accountability that the 
government has talked about. 
 
(1600) 
 
They talk about being close to the people and brag about 
reforms they have brought to the legislature and the province.  
It would seem, Mr. Speaker, if this government were indeed 
close to the people it serves, if this government would listen to 
the people it serves, the reform packages and ideas brought 
forward by the members of the opposition, official and the third 
party, would indeed be debated in the legislature and would be 
enforced by law. 
 
You may ask why, Mr. Speaker.  Because our caucus has 
introduced a package of reforms into this Assembly that has 
found favour with the public of Saskatchewan.  In fact many of 
the reforms have been brought forward by people in the public 
and in fact by even members on the government side of the 
House 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

and from members of all parties.  The public do want a 
committee established to review utility rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past few years when we look at the 
number of increases that we've seen in utility rates, one has to 
hardly wonder why the public are asking for a review 
mechanism.  And the government and the Premier said 
yesterday, well we can't have a review mechanism because 
when you were in government you did have a review 
committee in place but you found out it became too costly and 
ineffective and therefore you disbanded it; so why would we 
appoint another costly committee to deal with utility rate 
increases? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I have indicated, we are 
suggesting a committee made up of MLAs already elected
already being paid to represent their constituents and to speak 
out on their behalf.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if this committee 
were to operate in the normal process, the government would 
continue to have the majority of members on the committee, so 
the government would have their say. 

,  . . . all party select committees of the Assembly should be 
used frequently to inquire into . . . 

 
One of the . . . another reason I would argue we need this 
process, we need this utility review process, Mr. Speaker, is 
because of the fact that by the time the Crown corporations file 
their annual reports and come before the committee, and the 
committee meets, no matter how hard the government would 
work to get their reports in or the Crowns would work to put 
forward their reports, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that in most cases 
a year and a half to two years have elapsed since changes have 
taken place, since we were debating the issues. 
 
And when rate increases have been taking place, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe people want to ask questions and they want to ask the 
questions now.  And I would certainly welcome the comments 
made by the Premier yesterday about being able to debate the 
questions right now.  And it seems to me the appropriate place, 
if we don't have a utilities review committee in place, would be 
to bring those debates right before the Legislative Assembly of 
the province of Saskatchewan, just as we debate departmental 
spending, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at the spending of government and the fact that 
40 per cent of government spending takes place in the Crowns 
outside the walls of this Legislative Assembly, it would seem 
to me that would be most appropriate in the whole scheme of 
government spending and financing in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that the people of Saskatchewan, that we as 
MLAs, have that opportunity to address those issues, not 
tomorrow or not next year, but today when the issues are 
relevant and real and mean a lot to people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe as well the public want their MLA to 
stand up for their constituencies.  They want their MLA to vote 
on behalf of their constituents and not just follow the 
government lines.  And, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that 
I have heard that from my constituents. 

In fact I had the fortune of . . . the opportunity of having some 
coffee with business people in the Moosomin constituency 
recently and one person said to me: it's too bad members of the 
government at the time you were in government didn't listen to 
some of the suggestions that you had been making.  And I had 
been making a number of these suggestions over the past few 
years, of how we should reform this Assembly so that, indeed, 
it meets the real needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I believe the NDP have heard the same rhetoric; the NDP 
have heard the same concerns.  In fact I look at a reform 
platform brought forward by the New Democratic Party prior to 
the election of October 1991, and from their democratic reform 
package they have a paragraph that says: 
 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed 
according to the rules. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 
very pleased to enter this debate with respect to urging 
government to proceed with democratic reforms and I want to 
compliment the members opposite for putting such a motion in 
on private members' day because this gives us an opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker, to go back just a bit and to identify all of those 
changes that this government has already brought in since 
we've been elected. 
 
We identified way back in March 1990 and published at that 
time, a summary of reforms that we thought ought to be 
addressed by government.  These were reforms that were very 
evident to the public.  And it was because the government of 
the time was unable to see and deal with the reality, with the 
political aspirations of the people of Saskatchewan, that they 
turfed them out of office and as a result of that, we have now 
been able to implement some of these reforms. 
 
And I'm very, very proud, Mr.Speaker, to be a member of a 
government which has instituted some 20 to 30 reforms to 
date -- to date.  And there will be more to come, Mr. Speaker, 
as we continue to consult with the public; as we continue to be 
sensitive to the needs of society in the 90s; and as we just try to 
make this Assembly and this government more and more 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will be dealing with these in just a moment, but I want to refer 
back to one of the things that was mentioned by the member 
from Morse in his comments -- which I've heard quite often 
from members and which I think bears a little listening 
to -- and that is his call for the concept of the free vote.  And 
when the member from Morse makes his call or when I hear 
other people making this call for the free vote, it seems to be 
under an assumption that there is no such thing as a free vote. 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth.  From the 
very beginning of the British parliamentary system the concept 
of a free vote has been enshrined into the traditions of the 
British parliamentary system and they so remain.  And there is 
no place in any rule book that anybody can show me that there 
is no such thing as a free vote. 
 
That is the bottom line in every legislature.  And every once in 
a while it pops out.  And a member uses his right, and his 
privilege, and he must not be denied that privilege or that right, 
the right of a free vote.  There are times when that is done and 
there are times when that has brought down governments.  
When there are two or three or a handful or a dozen or more 
members decide to exercise their right with a free vote, they 
then can bring down the government.  And that is the purpose 
of it. 
 
Or alternatively, if a member feels that he is dealing on a matter 
. . . he or she is dealing with a matter of conscience, a matter 
which he is even not in tune with with his own colleagues and 
his own party, that member then also may exercise that free 
vote.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the member can at any time 
exercise that free vote.  Because that is the purpose of the 
parliament.  And to say and to impugn that there is no such 
thing as a free vote is wrong, patently wrong, because there is 
such a thing as a free vote and it should remain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to relate back, before I get into the main 
comments of my 10 minutes that I have here, I want to think 
back of the time . . . just relate back to the time when I was still 
a youngster and in school and when I was thinking about who 
the heroes of society were.  And in those days I don't know 
what it was that was different particularly, but there was a 
difference in the way most of the people talked about their 
leaders, their elected leaders and their politicians. 
 
You know, I got so that I held people like the prime minister of 
the day, Louis St. Laurent, or Tommy Douglas, the premier o  
Saskatchewan, or Mr. Lloyd, premier Woodrow Lloyd, the 
premier of Saskatchewan, and even John Diefenbaker, the 
aspirant at the time for prime minister, I held them in respect.  
And the community held them in respect.  Because politicians 
at that time were held in a great public respect. The teachers o  
the day tended to propagate that and so did the community. 

f Affirms the progress made over the last two years by the 
legislature in implementing significant democratic reforms 
which have contributed to the accountability and accessibility 
of government, including the following: 

f (1) The appointment of the Saskatchewan Financial Review 
Commission to open the books and provide an independent 
audit of the province's financial affairs;  

And it wasn't till the 1980s when we had Tories in office i  
Saskatchewan, Tories in office in Ottawa, that somehow things 
began to change.  And at the same time there were Tories or 
Conservatives or Republicans in office in the the U.S.A. 
(United States of America), and likewise in Great Britain. 

n 

 
Now I don't think those things are just coincidental.  But what 
happened, there was a certain ruthlessness brought into the 
parliament at that time during those years, and there was a 
complete loss of respect for politicians.  So now we're seeing a 
slow change and I'm very proud to be a part of that change 
when we're doing things to reform the way governments work 

here.  Reform the way the governments work so that once again 
we can restore public confidence in our institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just go through a brief listing of some of 
the things that this government -- the government that I am 
proud to be a part of -- have done with respect to reform.  
When we got into government everybody knew that the Tories 
had gone amok in their spending.  That's one of the reasons 
they lost respect.  There was no accountability.  Our Premier 
promised to, and did, appoint a Saskatchewan Financial 
Review Commission known as the Gass Commission, did that 
for the purpose of having an independent body identify some of 
the difficulties and some of the reasons that we were in 
financial difficulty and also to propose some solutions. 
 
The Gass Commission did exactly that.  They suggested that 
we apply different guidelines.  They suggested that we use the 
Public Sector Accounting and Auditing Committee guidelines, 
the same ones the chartered accountants, the Canadian Institute 
of Chartered Accountants, use.  And they restated, using that 
technique, that the debt of the province at that time was 7.53 
billion rather than 3.6 billion which was recorded in the Public 
Accounts up to that date. 
 
We at that time also, Mr. Speaker, following that, we put in 
legislation that ensured by-elections were to be held within six 
months of a vacancy.  We've had by-elections since then.  
We've proclaimed the freedom of information Act.  We 
introduced an MLA conflict of interests Act.  There were many 
other such things, Mr. Speaker, that I have that my colleagues 
will mention.  But before I sit down I want to move an 
amendment to the original motion and I hereby move the 
amendment, seconded by the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd: 
 

 That all of the words after the word Assembly be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 

 

 

 (2) The implementation of the recommendations of the Gass 
Commission, including the adoption of the accrual method of 
accounting, the tabling of financial statements in the 
legislature for the Crown Investments Corporation and its 
subsidiaries, and the release of the mid-year report on the 
province's financial situation; 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

 (3) Legislation to ensure that both the legislature and the 
public is fully informed when Crown corporations are 
established; 

 
 (4) Amendments to The Financial Administration Act which 

require the release of the Public Accounts within seven 
months of the fiscal year end; 

 
 (5) Legislation to reduce the number of MLAs from 66 to 58, 

and to ensure that Saskatchewan residents are treated fairly 
by the electoral system; and . . . 

 
(1615) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member's 
time has expired.  I will allow him to complete his amendment, 
however, but I do ask the Clerks to stop the clock so that he 
does not take the time of other members.  The member may 
continue with his amendment. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I thank you very kindly, Mr. Speaker. 
 

 (6) A new MLA conflict of interest Act and code of ethical 
conduct to ensure that elected representatives carry out their 
public responsibilities openly and fairly; 

 
 (7) The adoption of strict new rules ensuring greater 

accountability of elected representatives with respect to their 
constituency offices; 

 
 (8) Changes to the operation of the Board of Internal 

Economy, ensuring public access to its meetings; and 
 
 (9) Amendments to legislation ensuring that by-elections are 

held within six months of a vacancy; 
 
 And further that this Assembly urges the legislature to 

continue to move forward with reforms which will enhance 
the openness and accountability of the institutions of 
parliamentary democracy, including the implementation of 
measures which enhance the role of private members and 
make the legislative process more relevant to the 
Saskatchewan people. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The amendment has been moved by the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton, seconded by the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster.  Will the members take the 
amendment as read? 
 
Order.  Traditionally, we do recognize the seconder to an 
amendment or motion, so I'll recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I'm happy to stand up 
and second this motion.  I have a few comments to make in 
regard to democratic reform.  Let me be clear about my support 
for the parliamentary system.  The system that we have to 
follow is among the most democratic in the world.  That does 
not mean that reform is not needed from time to time.  Societies 
do not remain stationary.  Changes occur, and a democratic 
government must respond. 
 
In the past we have had representation democracy.  People 
elected a member, and that member represented his or her 
constituency to the best of their ability.  If the voting public 
was dissatisfied, they voted against the member in the next 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the people are asking for more participatory 
democracy.  This means changes must be made on all sides.  
The public must be better informed on issues, and the 
politicians must provide more information, be more 
accountable, and take a more active part in the political 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by participatory democracy I do not mean direct 
democracy which has caused many problems in many 
American states, for instance initiatives on ballots which are 
often the result of well-heeled, well-organized lobby groups 
and little facts on complex problems, or frequent referenda 
which are expensive and often cannot be worded in a black and 
white fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our voters want to be consulted.  They want input 
into legislation.  We have embarked on extensive consultation 
in many areas, for example the current rounds of discussions 
with business groups, chambers, labour groups, and labour 
legislation.  Another one of the areas where we believe the 
public has concern is the role of the private member in this 
Legislative Assembly.  Through changes in the rules of this 
Assembly, we are trying to enhance the role of private 
members. 
 
One rule change is private members' statements.  This is very 
important to me as a private member.  Private members' 
statements enable a member to bring to the legislature 
concerns, interests, developments, initiatives in the member's 
constituency.  Changes to rule 16, timed debate, allows private 
members to question members which have spoken in debate in 
the legislature.  This makes private members more accountable 
in the comments they make in debate. 
 
Speeches should be more thoughtful and better researched 
because of this rule change.  There is no reason why more rule 
changes cannot take place and won't take place over the next 
two years. 
 
Members opposite may think these rule changes are 
inconsequential.  But I can tell you, after two and a half years 
in this legislature, these rule changes are something that I am 
happy about. 
 
Another area where voters demanded reform was in the way 
MLAs ran their offices 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

and the way the offices and expenses were financed.  A great 
deal of concern.  I received many, many petitions when I was 
first elected.  We have moved quickly in this area.  Here are the 
initiatives that we have undertaken. 
 
We have eliminated the right of the MLA to keep office 
equipment and furniture if he or she is defeated in an election.  
Now all furniture and fixtures go to the next MLA.  Wouldn't I 
have loved to have received that consideration when I was 
elected.  MLAs are required to file an inventory of office 
equipment and furnishings that will be updated regularly.  In 
this way an incoming MLA will know what is in the office. 
 
All claims from the allowances must be supported by original 
invoices, with the exception of travel.  Printing and advertising 
expenses must be documented with original invoices that 
describe the product received and the services rendered.  And 
this was definitely a needed change. 
 
Radio and broadcasting expenses must be documented with 
original invoices that indicate when the broadcast occurred. 
 
MLAs must operate a constituency office to use their office and 
secretarial allowances.  This may seem odd, but in the past 
there were MLAs that did not have an office but operated from 
their own homes.  The public and constituents are entitled to 
accessibility and a decent office to their elected representatives. 
 
Fee-for-service invoices for communication work must 
document the work performed.  It is not sufficient to indicate 
only research or consulting. 
 
Purchasing or renting of office space or staffing by family 
members or companies owned or operated by family is 
prohibited.  And this is a very good change.  We shouldn't have 
a conflict of interest like this.  Hiring or contracting with MLA 
family members is prohibited. 
 
If you call these kind of changes inconsequential in two years, I 
don't know what consequential would be.  What is clear to me 
is the proof is always in the pudding.  The Saskatchewan 
people will judge us not on what we say but on what we do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made many steps towards democratic 
reform.  My colleagues and I will and have covered some of 
those reforms and there is more to be done.  Reform is never 
complete; it is just an ongoing process that must continue.  
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is a 
pleasure for me to be speaking to the amendment to this motion 
on government reform.  The people of Saskatchewan will only 
be satisfied with reform that has a significant impact on the 
productivity and accountability of government.  In order for 
that to be accomplished, there must be a commitment on the 
part of members of this Assembly to want that to happen.  And 
at this time I truly do not 

believe that commitment fully exists. 
 
What we have is a commitment to make it appear that 
government reform is taking place without really attaching any 
meaningful results to the process.  A perfect example of this is 
what transpired since this sitting began.  If we were an 
Assembly committed to focusing on the problems we are paid 
to solve, there would not be hundreds of hours spent by elected 
members from all parties taking partisan shots at one another. 
 
If we were an Assembly intent on developing a vision for 
tomorrow, we would not be subjected to hours of rhetoric about 
Tommy Douglas and the good old days by people who had 
nothing to do with Tommy Douglas or the era in which he 
governed.  That is what makes the public believe that the 
activities of this Assembly are a colossal waste of time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and in many cases that belief is reinforced by 
the actions of the very members in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am a proponent of tradition and protocol 
but only when it advances the cause of good governing.  And 
let us examine today what it is that has caused people to lose 
respect for their own government.  People feel shut out of the 
process.  The solution?  Open the process. 
 
With 66 members paid to sit in this Assembly there should be 
all-party committees with whom people can meet to explain 
issues from various perspectives, rather than having people 
present their case three different times to three different parties 
or 66 times to 66 members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
What would be so wrong with having all-party committees 
receive presentations in this very Chamber from the public and 
the many organizations it comprises?  This opening of the 
process should apply to the Board of Internal Economy, and it 
should extend to meetings of the Treasury Board for pre-budget 
consultations to ensure that budget decisions are made with the 
best interests of the people in mind, rather than re-election 
constituency pay-offs, or simply gutless avoidance. 
 
When government spends public money, the public has a right 
to be informed about not just how it was spent, but why, and 
what is intended to be accomplished.  Grants to caucus, which 
amounts to hundreds of thousands of dollars per year, must be 
reformed to build in accountability for that money.  It is 
completely inexcusable that thousands of dollars can end up 
anywhere from where they're supposed to be and no 
explanation is demanded on the floor of this Assembly. 
 
Why is the public appalled by this situation, yet there has been 
no action taken by this Assembly to ensure that it never 
happens again?  Well in answer to that question lies the 
obstacle preventing government reform.  Political parties really 
do not want to be accountable to the public.  They simply want 
to appear to be accountable while retaining their ability to 
control, to manipulate, and to play politics with the 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

taxpayers' money.  And if political parties are so appalled by 
deficits and debt, where is the beef? 
 
How can a government claim to be disgusted by the fiscal 
actions of its predecessors while it makes no move whatsoever 
to protect the taxpayers from future atrocities?  If there were 
true commitment to reform, Mr. Speaker, that would be the first 
legislation presented, the first. A deficit reduction Act, a 
taxpayers' protection Act, and a form of balanced budget 
legislation or a new expenditures control Act.  The fact that this 
government has not introduced it speaks to their unwillingness 
to be constricted by rules and regulations. 
 
What else makes people cynical and distrustful?  Well, broken 
promises, corrupt behaviour, patronage.  The government is 
aware of this.  The opposition knew it when they were in 
government and now spend time talking about the very things 
that they did when they had control.  But why are there no 
changes? 
 
What is the value of a code of ethical conduct which proposes 
no penalties for its breach?  How can we restore public trust 
when the ministry of Justice allows investigations into 
allegations of corrupt behaviour to drag on for months and 
perhaps even years without resolve? 
 
And what will be done with guilty parties?  If politicians truly 
wanted to improve the system, there would be deterrents in 
place to discourage inappropriate behaviour and punishments 
legislated to deal with those guilty of abusing our very system.  
But that has not happened because the will is not there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A government with a majority so powerful that it can 
retroactively legislate changes to legal contracts is a 
government with enough power to change its own modus 
operandi.  A majority government could implement set 
election dates and set budget dates just to bring stability to the 
lives of people, if it were truly committed to reform. 
 
And one has to ask why this has not happened.  It has not 
happened because control over election dates and budget dates 
and session dates and sitting hours is control -- control over the 
people, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition and the political 
organizations who might threaten the power and control of the 
government. 
 
(1630) 
 
And, fellow members, this is what government has come to 
mean in Saskatchewan, has come to mean to the real people.  
Those involved in politics are seen as those interested in power 
and control. 
 
The true objective of government reform must be to share the 
power of the majority with the rest of the Assembly, to ensure 
that all elected representatives have equal value in this system, 
because this more accurately reflects the equal value of all 
electors to our democracy.  And why should a constituent 

represented by an opposition member have less credence paid 
to his ideas, her concerns or objectives than a constituent 
represented by a government member?  But this is what 
happens, and the window-dressing reforms being addressed 
will not change that. 
 
What is the point of investing valuable time and expensive 
resources to draft Bills from opposition members if they will 
not come to a vote?  Should it not be incumbent upon members 
of the government side to not just indicate what ideas they 
support, but what ideas they reject, by forcing votes on all 
opposition Bills and motions?  That, Mr. Speaker, is 
meaningful reform. 
 
And we will be presenting a Bill to force votes on opposition 
Bills and motions in this Assembly, asking members to go on 
the record to give credit for good ideas and to make their stand 
known on opposition initiatives. 
 
And there are other things that need to be addressed as part of 
government reform as well.  We must take a serious look at the 
activities of government and the bureaucracy, be truly willing 
to examine every program and every department to ensure that 
mandates are still relevant, that activities are productive and 
cost-efficient.  And this will require a new approach, a new 
way of thinking about government. 
 
But this is what reform means, Mr. Speaker -- reforming, 
reforming our ideas and our approaches.  And let us stop being 
afraid of what we might find if we examine government and its 
functions for efficiency and productivity by productivity 
efficiency audits.  Governments must stop being driven by fear 
of the electorate, fear of the unknown.  And when we begin to 
focus on why change must take place on the means as well as 
the end, then we can begin to lead the evolution of our system. 
 
Presently the public is leading the politicians by demanding 
reforms that politicians are afraid to deliver for fear of losing 
control and losing power.  And that must change, Mr. Speaker.  
It must change through reforms which politician-proof the 
system by taking some of the control out of the hands of the 
government. 
 
Now the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan is not the only party to 
embrace the concept of reform, but we did put forward a 
reform platform in our 1991 election document.  And what is 
important now that other parties have seen the public 
acceptance for and desire to have reform is that this Assembly 
develop a true commitment to incorporate meaningful reform 
into the way that government operates on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I believe that we must begin by restoring trust to move quickly 
to strengthen the code of ethics, to institute anticorruption 
legislation, to open the process of setting salaries and benefits 
for elected members of this Assembly. 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to 
enter the debate at this point.  I would like to, in my remarks, 
address both the amendment and the original motion that has 
sparked the amendment.  And I would also like to refer to some 
of the comments that members who've spoken before me have 
made. 
 
I want to start out by quoting what I believe the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone said when she said, the people of 
Saskatchewan will only be satisfied with reform that has a 
significant impact.  I agree with her about that, and quite 
frankly I have to question whether or not the proceedings in 
this Assembly over the last couple of hours really do have a 
significant impact on the daily lives and concerns of the people 
of Saskatchewan -- the people that all of us were elected to 
represent. 
 
I've listened to members opposite having what can only be 
charitably described as childish temper tantrums about the fact 
that some few rule changes are being implemented in this 
Assembly to give a more meaningful opportunity for all 
members to be able to do their work that they were elected for. 
 
And I listened to people standing up and talking all sorts of 
wonderful high-blown phrases about the need for reform and 
how this party or that party would do it better if only they were 
in government.  Well quite frankly, they're not in government 
right now and there's a good reason why they're not in 
government. 
 
One party did all it could to destroy the financial integrity and 
credibility of this province.  The other party has been 
discredited for scores of years and continues to run around this 
province talking process and saying, I was first with the bright 
ideas; but when actually asked to give us good ideas, doesn't 
have any. 
 
I would remind members of this Assembly that it was the 
Leader of the Third Party who challenged our Minister of 
Economic Development last year and said that she would bring 
in an economic development idea a week.  One a week, she 
said.  I will bring in ideas that will be real and meaningful for 
job creation. 
 
And yet what have we seen?  Not only does she not bring in 
any real and meaningful job creation ideas, she now has two 
other members in her caucus and they do the similar sort of 
silent nonsense of having no ideas. 
 
Reform is taking place in this House, Mr. Speaker, and it will 
be real and meaningful reform.  Because it won't only be 
reform dealing with the sterility of this place, it will be reform 
that deals with the needs and concerns of the people of 
Saskatchewan.  Things that I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, are 
high on the public's agenda, not low on the public's agenda. 
 
This legislature is not, such as the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone said, a colossal waste of time.  Her kinds of 
statements -- calling this legislature a 

colossal waste of time, insinuating to the people of 
Saskatchewan that there have been no democratic reform 
changes -- those kinds of statements simply fuel the cynicism 
that people have about governments right now. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we're at a crossroads in this 
country.  We know that unless we can get our act together, 
unless we can figure out real and modern responses to the 
threats of globalization and continentalism, we won't have 
much of a province left.  We'll become like the hole in a 
doughnut, Mr. Speaker, unless we can figure out ways to make 
the people of Saskatchewan able to enter the 21st century in a 
strong and productive capacity. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, we believe as a government that 
the best reforms happen at the level where real people live.  Not 
simply meaningless reforms in the legislature where a few 
privileged people have been elected to come and debate out 
their particular topics.  We believe that real reform means 
making the Saskatchewan labour force able to enter the 21st 
century in a proud and productive capacity. 
 
We want to introduce a total reform package of labour law 
which is fair and balanced and up to date.  That reform package 
will be the result of extensive consultation and it will be 
consistent with our province's economic development strategy.  
That, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, is high on the public's 
agenda, not low on the public's agenda. 
 
We want to protect and enrich the skilled and productive 
working people in this province because it is only if we have a 
highly trained, flexible workforce that is able to use skills and 
training and technology consistent with the needs of the coming 
century, the needs of the forces of globalization, that we will 
actually be able to compete in the global market.  I believe that 
those kinds of reforms are the kinds of reforms that many, 
many people across this province want. 
 
We know that we have scores of people affected by The Labour 
Standards Act.  Indeed all working people in this province are 
affected, but in particular the 71,000 people who work in lower 
paid or minimum wage jobs are affected.  We know that 32 per 
cent of the paid non-agricultural workforce in Saskatchewan is 
unionized.  That means 91,000 people are looking to our 
reforms in The Trade Union Act.  Those are real and 
meaningful reforms that real, meaningful people of 
Saskatchewan want to see. 
 
It's not surprising that the Tories would dismiss as low on the 
public agenda things like labour legislation.  It's not surprising 
that they don't have much use for things like occupational 
health changes, workers' compensation, or changes to The 
Labour Standards Act that will affect part-time workers.  The 
Tories know, or they did know before the last federal election, 
who their friends are or were. 
 
But you know it seems to me that it is somewhat 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

surprising that we would have a Leader of the Third Party who 
goes around espousing the kinds of things that she thinks 
people want to hear, saying that real reform doesn't include 
things like labour legislation.  I am surprised that she stands up 
in this House and calls the kinds of reforms that we are 
introducing a colossal waste of time. 
 
Probably it's because she has simply taken over with friends 
that the Tories used to have.  Probably it's because there isn't 
too much difference between her and her approach to the real 
working people of Saskatchewan and the approach that the 
Conservatives had. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Black cats, white cats. 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- A member opposite hollers out, black cats and 
white cats.  He understands that very clearly.  He's got his 
claws out. 
 
I've been reviewing some of the speeches that some of the 
members have made in this House.  And I want to right now 
comment on the speech that the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone made dealing with the throne speech debate, because 
I was quite surprised in that. 
 
Early on in her speech, she attacked labour legislation, just like 
the member from Morse in his rule 16 motion seems to be 
attacking labour legislation.  She attacks legislation that she 
hasn't even seen yet, and at the same time would have us 
believe that she wants reform, when she won't even wait to see 
legislation. 
 
She talks about empowerment of the individual, and yet she 
doesn't want to see labour standards amendments.  She talks 
about empowerment of the individual, and yet she seems to 
think that union membership is something that isn't voluntary 
and isn't something that many . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure this afternoon to talk about government reform and the 
kinds of reform initiatives that the opposition has put forward.  
And unfortunately, following on the member from Saskatoon 
Wildwood's comments, who has missed the mark totally as she 
normally does, Mr. Speaker, we'll try and confine our remarks 
to reform of government which is what we're talking about this 
afternoon. 
 
We have introduced, Mr. Speaker, a number of reform 
initiatives into this legislature during this session that we think 
are extremely important: fixed election dates; the public utility 
rate increases, control over them through a legislative utility 
review commission; and free votes.  And the government is 
opposed to those initiatives, Mr. Speaker, because I think it 
goes to the very heart of the concern that they have about 
control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1645) 

This is a government that would do well, I think, to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan and ask the people of Saskatchewan 
about the kinds of reforms that they would like.  And I don't 
think the kinds of reform that we saw being introduced in the 
House earlier today are the kinds of things that people want.  
The initiatives that the government puts forward as sweeping 
reforms, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of things like asking people if 
they want . . . the Saskatchewan people, the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer, whether the people in the legislature should be 
allowed to use laptop computers and what kind of beverage 
we're going to be able to drink when we're sitting in the 
building here, sitting in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's a really big reform package that I'm sure the people of 
Saskatchewan will be most interested in knowing that we've 
been discussing this afternoon on the government's agenda.  
What does the member from Saskatoon Wildwood like for a 
beverage this afternoon? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it almost will get to the point it will be so 
ludicrous we'll be asking the pages: would you mind bringing 
me in a drink of Beep this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, or a 
lemonade or something of that nature?  That's the kind of 
government reform initiative that they have put forward this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker.  And it's so ridiculous that I'm 
surprised that they'd even want to bring it forward. 
 
The taxpayers of Saskatchewan, they find out about this sort of 
stuff -- as I'm sure they will before very long -- will be most 
interested in knowing about the kinds of initiatives the 
government is putting forward and the strong legislation that 
they're backing up all of their promises with.  Bringing in 
laptop computers so the member from Churchill Downs can do 
case-loads and the member from Saskatoon Wildwood can do 
that sort of work and play games and computer games and all 
of that kind of stuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we couldn't believe, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, we 
were talking about it in the lounge behind us a few moments 
ago.  We couldn't believe our good fortune today when we had 
this motion come forward and be able to discuss it on the very 
heels of the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's not good fortune; that's planning. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- The member says it's good planning.  I'm not 
quite sure that many people would believe that.  But anyway, 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn't believe our good fortune in noting 
that this motion came forward after the committee's meeting of 
last night. 
 
And what kind of disgraceful sham they tried to put forward on 
the people of Saskatchewan last night, Mr. Speaker.  
Absolutely disgraceful, the kinds of action that this government 
brings forward and tries to disguise it under some sort of 
reform initiative, Mr. Speaker, saying that they are going to be 
the ones that bring forward the real and important changes that 
the people of Saskatchewan are looking for, Mr. Speaker. 



March 1, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

And I think that's exactly what the problem is.  The heat's on, 
Mr. Speaker.  They realize that the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
The reform-type initiatives that are being put forward by the 
official opposition are the kinds of things that people want, Mr. 
Speaker.  We should be discussing, I say to the member from 
Churchill Downs, things like fixed election dates.  That's the 
kind of reform initiatives that the people of Saskatchewan want 
to talk about.  We should be discussing a public utility review 
commission that has strength to curtail this government from 
slapping on utility rate increases at every opportunity. 
 
We should be discussing free votes.  And the member from 
Prince Albert Carlton stood in his place and said he's had a free 
vote the whole time he's been here.  It would be interesting, Mr. 
Speaker, to go back and check the record of his voting record 
and see whether he has on one occasion in his entire political 
career voted against the party that he represents.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would bet, I would bet that he has never, never voted 
against the will of his party and his leader after he's been 
directed how to vote, Mr. Speaker.  But he's . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . absolutely. 
 
But he's willing to stand in his place, stand in his place and 
today vote against the people of Saskatchewan in bringing 
forward the kinds of initiatives that he's talking about bringing 
forward, Mr. Speaker.  All of these weighty issues that the 
government puts forward and says they're reform 
initiatives -- changing the hours, so we come to work a half 
hour earlier now on Mondays and Tuesdays, work a half an 
hour later, and cut back on the Thursday evening sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely there's better things to be talking about in 
this legislature.  Surely the taxpayers of Saskatchewan want us 
to discuss more important issues than those kinds of things . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and the member from Biggar chirps 
from his seat about these kinds of initiatives, Mr. Speaker.  He 
would do well to pay a heck of a lot more attention to his 
constituents than worry about the hours of the legislature, Mr. 
Speaker, he would do well.  In question period today we 
discussed one of his constituents and how they aren't being 
represented by that member, Mr. Speaker.  And he knows 
exactly what I speak of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was, I think, a sorry day that we witnessed in 
the legislature today when we saw the kinds of things that this 
government is trying to suggest to the public of Saskatchewan 
that are real reform initiatives.  We're disappointed in that kind 
of initiatives, Mr. Speaker.  Things like -- as we discussed 
earlier -- election dates, free votes, are far more important, Mr. 
Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that those are the issues that 
the public of Saskatchewan would be more interested in 
hearing about today than some frivolous ideas that the 
government has put forward.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley: -- I am pleased to stand up in favour of 

this amendment.  Reform is taking place, and it is significant in 
spite of the opposition's ranting.  I'm a member of the Rules 
Committee, and I take exception to the members opposite 
saying our reforms are insignificant. 
 
After 10 years of patronage, lack of accountability to the people 
of this province, the people of this province voted for change 
and wanted accessible and accountable government, and that's 
what we're delivering.  Our reform package could not be called 
window-dressing. 
 
I suggest that the members opposite when they voted for 
change two years ago and now three weeks ago they voted for 
change in our Rules Committee, but yesterday all of a sudden 
they changed their minds, they didn't want change.  They didn't 
want reform.  Even some of their own proposals now have 
become insignificant to them.  I guess that maybe to them they 
feel it hasn't gone far enough.  Reform hasn't done enough, so 
they don't want to do anything.  Sit back and leave everything 
as it was. 
 
I acknowledge reform is an ongoing process, and we will 
continue with it, and there will be a never-ending process that 
we will continue to reform.  But let's review just some of the 
things that they feel are insignificant and the things that are 
window-dressing. 
 
First of all, the appointment of the Saskatchewan financial 
review commission to open the books and provide an 
independent audit of the province's financial affairs, I don't 
think the public thought that was insignificant.  The 
implementation of the recommendations of the Gass 
Commission including the adoption of the accrual method of 
accounting, the tabling of financial statements in the legislature 
for the Crown Investments Corporation and its subsidiaries, 
and the release of a mid-year report on the province's financial 
situation -- I don't think that that's insignificant.  Legislation to 
ensure that both the legislature and the public is fully informed 
when Crown corporations are established -- the public won't 
find that insignificant. 
 
Amendments to The Financial Administration Act which 
require the release of the Public Accounts within seven months 
of the fiscal year end.  A new MLA Conflict of Interests Act 
and code of ethical conduct to ensure that elected 
representatives carry out their public responsibilities openly 
and fairly -- not what I would call insignificant.  The adoption 
of strict rules ensuring greater accountability of elected 
representatives with respect to their constituency offices -- the 
public asked us for that kind of change.  Changes to the 
operation of the Board of Internal Economy ensuring public 
access to meetings.  Amendments to legislation ensuring that 
by-elections are held within six months of a vacancy. 
 
Now these are just some of the changes that have already been 
implemented.  With some of the new rules that we're putting in, 
gives a greater role for MLAs in private members' statements, 
in debate.  I don't think that the public thinks that these are 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1994 

insignificant changes. 
 
The other statement that I want to make about democratic 
reform is that it's a process of governing.  It's a process in 
which we have taken on to involve people more and more in 
decision making, more consultation, more consensus building.  
It's hardly insignificant to the public.  We've been around this 
province and we've been thanked by people all over this 
province that we are listening, that we are evolving a more 
open process to government. 
 
I ask the members opposite to be part of reform, to not be 
afraid of change and that we will continue to meet, and it will 
be an ongoing process and not to be so cynical.  I support the 
proposed amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- I too want to speak to the reform issue that's 
being addressed here this afternoon and comment very 
particularly, if only for a few, brief moments, on the words of 
the Leader of the Third Party, the member from Greystone.  In 
an article in the Yorkton This Week and Enterprise from 
December 22 of last year, staff writer to the Yorkton 
Enterprise, Calvin Daniels, talks about the Leader of the 
Liberal Party commenting on the legislative process in this 
Chamber.  And she said: What are these yahoos doing dealing 
with legislation that is completely irrelevant?  End quote. 
 
Yahoos -- she refers to her colleagues in the legislature as 
yahoos.  Hon. yahoos, perhaps.  But she calls them yahoos.  
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that bespeaks her disdain not only for 
this Assembly but for many of the procedures that go on in this 
Assembly.  And so when it comes to her charges about 
democratic reform . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The 75 minutes allowed for this 
debate has elapsed. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 


