






















































Hansard: February 11, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 113 
 February 11, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 
that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to urge a decision 
regarding the decertification of the Moose Jaw Woolco store. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday 
next ask the government the following question: 
 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Power Corporation's request to 
communities, agencies and other organizations to submit 
proposals for co-generation projects: has a decision been 
reached on any projects, and if not, what is the reason for the 
delay and when will the decision be reached? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Carlson: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 
to the rest of the members of the Assembly through you, a 
constituent of mine, Cecile Halyk, who is watching the 
proceedings here today, and her uncle, Lloyd Halyk, who is 
visiting the province of Saskatchewan from Toronto. Lloyd 
works for CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television 
in Toronto. He is back in the province, albeit not for a great 
occasion — it was a funeral that he was back for of a brother of 
his, and he's just commuting back to Toronto today. So I'd like 
the rest of the members of the Assembly to welcome Cecile and 
Lloyd here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too want to introduce a guest, and to you and through you to all 
members of the legislature. In the Speaker's gallery is Brian 
Hartsook, the executive assistant to the director of education, 
Saskatoon Public School Board. I want to welcome Dr. 
Hartsook to the legislature this morning. We'll see whether or 
not there are any questions on education, but I'm sure that he 
will find the proceedings most enjoyable. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce through you to the legislature a group of grade 7 
students just entering the Speaker's gallery. They're from St. 
Gerard School in my riding, and they're accompanied by their 
teachers, Ms. Aline Korol, Roseanne Carter, and also their 
chaperons, Ms. Mantyka, Ms. Gamdzalles, Mr. Ross, Mr. 
Lanman, Mr. Gusikowski. So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Availability of Taxol 

 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Gloria 
Hartsook was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1981. Following 
a mastectomy and follow-up chemotherapy, Gloria was 
fortunate to enjoy eight years of remission. However, in January 
of this year Gloria was informed that she had cancer of the 
liver. Gloria's doctor informed the Hartsooks that the one drug 
that they could use with a great deal of confidence was Taxol. 
The problem, Madam Minister, is that Taxol has been approved 
for breast cancer patients but there is no fee schedule as of yet 
through the drug plan. 
 
Madam Minister, can you explain to me why Taxol does not 
have a fee schedule? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you to the member 
for the question and for raising this issue. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
understanding that there is a committee in existence which 
reviews the various pharmaceutical and drug products. That 
committee, if my understanding is correct, has not made a 
ruling on Taxol. 
 
I appreciate the spirit in which the member is bringing the 
questions on this issue on behalf of this individual this morning, 
Mr. Speaker. As we proceed through the questions, I sense that 
there will be a need for me to discover more of the detail and 
perhaps respond in detail at some further time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, our office 
was informed by the Health department that the executive 
director of the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation could approve 
Taxol immediately, that exceptions could be made. When Mr. 
Hartsook contacted the executive director to request such an 
exemption, the director said that he would check with the 
cancer clinics in Regina and Saskatoon and if there were 50 
cancer patients that needed Taxol, it would probably be 
covered, but if there were 150, they could not be covered 
because of the cost. 
 
Mr. Minister, why would 50 people be covered for such an 
important drug and not 150 people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the way 
in which the member is raising this issue in 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

the House today. On this and I think some other questions I will 
simply have to take notice. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, as a result 
of no fee schedule for Taxol, the Hartsooks will have to pay 
$2,000 every three weeks for the next six to eight months if 
they hope to get Gloria's cancer back into remission, or about 
24 to $36,000. 
 
Mr. Hartsook said he isn't worried about his family because 
they are prepared to delete their savings and cash in their 
RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan) to cover the costs, 
but he is concerned about the many other cancer patients they 
know that are faced with these costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am posing a question then directly from Brian 
Hartsook's letter to the government almost a month ago, which 
he received no response: I respectfully request that you 
intervene with the staff of the department to have the fee 
schedule established for Taxol immediately. Cancer patients 
across this province are relying on your help. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you grant this request? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, what I will guarantee to the 
member and to our guests is that immediately following 
question period I will be in contact with officials from the 
Department of Health and we will pursue this immediately and 
get what information that I lack here. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Brian 
Hartsook was also told by the executive director of the cancer 
foundation that he would have to wait until the pharmacy and 
therapeutic committee meets to discuss Taxol. The problem, 
Mr. Minister, is that the committee only meets a couple of times 
a year and the Hartsooks don't have that sort of time. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please agree today to meet with the 
Hartsooks who are here today, since they have come all this 
way from Saskatoon, and listen to their concerns and act as 
quickly as possible to help this family — as quickly as possible 
— and the other families in the province that are affected by 
this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again I commit to the 
member and to members of the House and to our guests that 
immediately after question period I will be in touch with 
officials in the department and I would be more than pleased to 
meet with our guests. 
 

Studies of Casino Gambling 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for the Gaming Commission. Mr. 
Minister, how many studies in total have been commissioned by 
your government to study casino gaming and will you name and 
table all of those studies in this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, I would want to say that over the months 
that I have been the minister responsible for the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority, we have done a number of studies. We have 
studied information from other jurisdictions, from Manitoba, 
Ontario, from Quebec, from the Maritimes. We have looked at 
information that has come to us from some of the American 
states in areas where in fact they have been involved in gaming. 
 
We have had consultants' reports done on a number of locations 
dealing with the expansion of casinos, dealing with video 
lottery terminals. We have done internal studies in terms of the 
impact on bingos as we've introduced the video lottery terminal 
program. We've been consulting with law enforcement agencies 
throughout North America and throughout Europe. 
 
I want to say to the member that the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority has spent an enormous amount of time studying this 
issue. As you and I both know, it is a very delicate issue, the 
expansion of gaming. We have people who support the 
expansion of casinos, who support the video lottery terminal 
program, and we have people who are opposed. 
 
We have spent endless meetings with first nations people, with 
Metis groups, with exhibition associations, with chambers of 
commerce, with church groups, with community groups, with 
individuals as well. It's a process that has been ongoing, not 
only since I've been the minister, but previous ministers before 
me. And it is a process that we plan to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Speaker, my question was, how many 
studies in total has your government commissioned, in other 
words, have they paid for, to study casino gaming, and will you 
name and table all of those studies in this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in order to answer to 
the member's question, I guess I must revert to some of the 
inquiries that were made by the opposition with respect to who 
has done studies, when the studies have been done, how much 
the cost of these studies have been. 
 
I would want to say that we think that we have been very 
diligent in terms of the information gathering and learning what 
we can about this industry, not only the effects on our province, 
but the effects that have happened in other provinces. And it is 
an area that we have been prudent with respect to the amount of 
money we've been spending. Quite clearly, we would want to 
ensure that money we spent would return to us the appropriate 
and proper information. So quite clearly we have been careful 
in terms of the amount of 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

dollars. 
 
I would like to say to the member opposite that I don't have 
with me the details in every instance in terms of where we've 
been spending these monies. I would want to say to the member 
from Greystone that she's been part of this Legislative 
Assembly for quite some time now and I'm sure understands the 
process and detailed questions are more appropriately asked in 
estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Mr. Minister, I still am most interested in 
knowing the numbers of the studies and the specific studies that 
have been paid for by the people of Saskatchewan regarding 
gaming in this province. And we would very much appreciate 
you tabling that information. 
 
On Wednesday last, you indicated that the amount of money 
spent on bingos went from $4 million to more than $100 million 
a year. That's over a $100 per year for every man, every 
woman, and every child in the province of Saskatchewan. 
You're now proposing two large casinos, complete with 
hundreds of slot machines, for Regina and Saskatoon. What 
studies have been done to assess how much new money will 
have to be bet in these casinos in order for all the partners 
involved to get the profits they expect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, in order to answer the 
member's questions I would have to respond that yes, in fact we 
have done a number of studies and we think it's a prudent 
approach to the expansion of gaming. We know that this hasn't 
been the case in the past. 
 
As the member from Greystone has indicated, the number of 
dollars that people are spending on bingos in Saskatchewan has 
increased dramatically in the last 10, 11, 12 years and I would 
want to say that it's my belief that there wasn't enough 
information gathered and that there wasn't enough time spent 
putting together information with respect to the impact on 
charities and how they function with respect to the families that 
spend their money and the people who spend their money on 
bingos. 
 
And I want to say that I commit to her that we will continue the 
process that we've been involved in, that of consultation and 
information gathering. I would want to say to her that we have 
gathered together the best information we can with respect to 
how many dollars we might expect to come through an 
expanded casino operation. 
 
I think she will understand that we can only do an educated 
guess because there's nothing in black and white. It's a new 
industry; it's not been done before. In terms of the expansion, 
we know how much is spent on table games, but how much 
may be spent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Next question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
partnership of exhibition boards, FSIN (Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations), and government treasury have 
already discussed how much will be left after proposed 
American investors get their share. 
 
Our investigators indicate that the casino partnership expects to 
share in close to $50 million in profits. That will likely mean 
$40 million to promise for a similar investor, $12 million to 
FSIN, and the remaining monies split between exhibition 
boards and the Metis association. 
 
That would mean betting increases up to $350 million per year 
or, Mr. Minister, an additional $350 per man, per woman, and 
per child in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you table the anticipated revenue 
projections for the proposed casino operations, so that local 
groups, local people, can get a better picture of how many 
gambling dollars these casinos are going to take out of revenue 
they count on to run their community activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting, 
the number that the member from Greystone puts forth. Quite 
clearly she must have spent some time and some money to put 
forth the numbers that she raises, unless she pulled them out of 
a hat. And I'm just not sure where they may have come from. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker. We have embarked upon a 
process whereby we intend to involve exhibition associations 
and first nations and the Metis groups in this province in terms 
of revenue sharing. We intend to, with the dollars in profits that 
come from these, create some jobs for some people who haven't 
had employment opportunities in the past and who we hope to 
employ in this expanded form of gaming that quite clearly, by 
the number of dollars that are spent on gaming, the people of 
Saskatchewan demand. 
 
We know that there are thousands of dollars leaving this 
province every week and they're being spent in other 
jurisdictions. We want to stem that flow. We want 
Saskatchewan dollars to remain in Saskatchewan. We know that 
there are employment opportunities for aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan and we intend to pursue those opportunities, 
working with the aboriginal community in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the number of dollars that are 
going to be spent in casinos, we can only speculate at this time 
and based . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Next question. 
 

Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
series of questions is to the Health minister. 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

Madam Minister, cases brought forward in the past few days 
have proven that your health care reforms are placing a lot of 
stress on rural families, which indicates, Madam Minister, that 
maybe a warning to you was that you were starting at the wrong 
end. 
 
Not only are families dealing with the concern of travelling 
great distances to receive emergency medical care. They're also 
having to deal with sick family members being relocated all 
over rural Saskatchewan. As you are aware, Madam Minister, 
that because of your cut-backs to rural health care facilities, 
respite patients — mostly seniors — now have a six-week limit 
that they can spend in a facility. Madam Minister, are you 
aware of this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
With respect to emergency service the member opposite knows 
full well that the facilities that were converted continue to 
provide emergency services, and so for him to suggest that 
people are travelling much further because of the conversions is 
inaccurate, because it isn't necessary. The emergency services 
are still available in those communities and he full well knows 
that. 
 
With respect to patients being moved, there have been a number 
of long-term care patients being moved and we have known 
about that; it was necessary in order for us to achieve the 
conversions. And in places where there was not an opportunity 
to relocate an in-patient, long-term care patient, the facility is 
continuing to be funded to accommodate that. 
 
With respect to respite patients, the district boards are doing 
needs assessment to determine what the needs are in districts. 
That information will be in very shortly. And if they have 
determined that respite care should be six weeks, or respite care 
should be two months or whatever, that is the kind of service 
that will be provided by the district boards. That type of 
analysis is taking place right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well, Madam Minister, I would like to give 
you an example of what's happened. One respite patient at 
Davidson Union Hospital, Kay Schultz, was moved after six 
weeks from Davidson Union to Kyle for six weeks and is now 
in Outlook. Nine patients have been relocated from Davidson 
hospital in the last month and one-half. And, Madam Minister, 
this is not exclusive to the Davidson hospital. Respite patients 
are being swapped from facility to facility all over rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, what sense does it make to uproot respite 
patients from their families and their communities just to satisfy 
a six-week respite care limit that you have placed on all rural 
health facilities? Madam Minister, what sense does that make? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — As I indicated in my earlier response, 
that if there is a need for longer respite care in a district, this 
should be brought to the attention of the district board. There is 

flexibility based around what the needs are, what the real needs 
are with respect to what is being done in districts. 
 
Now there is some misunderstanding out there as to what for 
example can be done and what can't be done. And in a situation 
like that, where the member opposite thinks that the rules that 
are being applied by the facility are not appropriate, I would 
suggest that he contacts the district board and inquires as to 
whether or not they can engender some flexibility into their 
rules or what they are doing with respect to needs assessment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Well, Madam Minister, we all know that 
there's a great cost involved in transporting patients from one 
health facility to another. How much money is being saved 
when these patients are being transported all over rural 
Saskatchewan? Would you tell us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, what the members opposite 
are failing to recognize is the fact that the district boards have 
been up and running since the end of August, but have not in 
effect really taken over until their amalgamation agreements 
were all concluded. They are in a transition phase, and they are 
doing needs assessment, and they are looking at all of these 
particular issues right now. And this will all be sorted out over 
the next few months, as I indicated in my earlier answer. 
 
If you have concerns, bring it to the attention of the people in 
your district who are doing these needs assessment and looking 
to these issues at this point, so that we . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, it's 
strange that you wouldn't understand what we're trying to tell 
you. We're trying to tell you that you are placing a hardship, not 
only on the seniors — and in most cases this is seniors — but 
on their families. Your associate deputy ministers say you're 
going to make further cuts to acute care and long-term beds in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Madam Minister, how can you justify even considering this, 
being that the patients are already being moved all over rural 
Saskatchewan? Where is your compassion? Where's your 
understanding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — And, Mr. Speaker, with respect to further 
reductions, the members opposite know full well that there are 
further reductions in acute care 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

coming in this budget. They were announced in the last budget. 
And they will be forthcoming and they'll affect Saskatchewan 
people across the province. This is old news; they know that. 
 
I want to say something about what our government has done. 
From the very first month that it took power, it started to put 
together a plan with respect to health reform. When we formed 
government, we started immediately putting together a plan to 
deal with health reform, anticipating the need for . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I don't think the minister's 
answer has anything to do with the question that was asked. 
 

Faulty Furnaces 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I took notice 
of a question yesterday from the hon. member from Regina 
North West regarding Flame-Master furnaces, and I want to 
report to the House today that the Canadian Gas Association 
has in fact issued a notice of concern about Flame-Master 
furnaces. And there are some units that were installed over the 
past 10 years, more specifically 1986 and '87, which are prone 
to premature heat exchanger failure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the gas inspection division performs 
approximately 70,000 gas inspections per year, and the number 
of defective heat exchangers found of various brands of 
furnaces is fairly consistent between some 14 and 1,800 per 
year. Also in connection with the question, I'd want to say that 
only one death has occurred from a heat exchanger on record 
and that was in 1984 — a very unfortunate incident — so it is a 
dangerous situation. 
 
I would also caution people to have their class A-type chimneys 
inspected, because there have been deaths because of carbon 
monoxide poisoning as well. SaskPower gas inspection division 
makes inspections and issues warnings on a regular basis, and 
I'd suggest anyone who does have a older furnace, a 
Flame-Master furnace or a class A chimney, in fact have them 
inspected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. Britton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 
maybe you did start at the wrong end of your wellness program. 
You didn't look to see what you were going to do to these 
seniors. Madam Minister, this is very hard on seniors. This 
six-week rule in rural health facilities, Madam Speaker, is hard 
on seniors. And you give them no choice. You give the facilities 
no choice. It's getting so hard to keep track of respite patients, 
Madam Speaker, that seniors are starting to put information into 
the paper, to inform their friends and family where they are 
probably going to be. 
 
And I have an example of that right here, Madam Speaker. A 
senior from Davidson, Rudy Schmiedge, was moved from the 
Davidson Union Hospital after his six weeks was up. He went 
to Lucky Lake, Madam Minister, and is presently in Kyle. 
 
The January 10 issue of the Davidson Leader reads, and I 
quote: Rudy Schmiedge is presently living in Lucky Lake 

Health Care Centre. Rudy sends his greetings, and if you have a 
spare day, he would enjoy a visit from you and his relatives. 
 
Madam Minister, would you like to do this to your mom or your 
dad? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
member's concerns, I want to once again reiterate that respite 
care is not intended to be long-term care; it's only intended to be 
temporary care to give family care-givers a break. That's what 
respite care is for. It's not intended to be long-term care. 
 
Now if there are some problems in the system with respect to 
people being moved, I suggest you bring this to the attention of 
your district board, because as they go through this transitional 
period, these kind of problems are being sorted out. 
 
And I'm proud to say that this government has a plan in place to 
do needs assessment and to minimize the impact of acute care 
reductions that you have heretofore referred to, unlike some 
other jurisdictions such as our neighbouring province, Alberta, 
that is cutting their health care budget by huge amounts without 
a plan in place to deal with these reductions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Curtailment of Throne Speech Debate 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is directed to the Government House Leader. And I say 
to Mr. Minister that the current throne speech that we are 
engaged in is no longer serving a useful purpose, because this 
throne speech is so lacking in substance, so vague by all 
accounts that we hear from everyone, that it has degenerated to 
nothing more than an opportunity for MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) to score political points, while the real 
issues, Mr. Minister, of the province are being neglected — the 
issues of jobs, the issue of government reform, the issues of 
taxation. 
 
Mr. Minister, every party has had an opportunity to express 
itself. The official opposition leader has spoken, the third party 
leader has spoken, the Premier has spoken through the form of 
the throne speech itself. So last night, Mr. Minister, the official 
opposition moved to move directly to the throne speech itself. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are asking you now to use the majority that 
you folks have in power to move directly to the business at 
hand that is so dire in need of discussion. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you do that? 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that the idea of using closure on the throne speech is a new idea, 
one that the members of the opposition may want to bring to the 
Rules Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that there will be a Rules Committee sometime in 
the near future. And if the member opposite wants the 
government to have more power to use closure to end debates, 
that's an interesting proposal, but it's one that we haven't 
considered before. 
 
The idea that as soon as the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Leader of the Third Party give their speeches, you then end a 
debate, is an interesting proposal. None of your other members 
have spoken yet. I understand the House Leader has spoken and 
the Leader of the Official Opposition and no one else — 
nothing to say. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Question period has officially 
ended. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to Create, Encourage and Facilitate 
Business Opportunities in Saskatchewan through the 

Establishment of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — It's with pleasure that I move first 
reading of a Bill to create and encourage the facility of business 
opportunities in Saskatchewan through the establishment of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
questions 19 to 21, I request that they be converted to motions 
for returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — Motions for return debate. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to concur 

with our House Leader that I'm delighted that we didn't move to 
closure and that I indeed have an opportunity to continue my 
speech as it relates to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last evening I was reviewing an issue of some 
importance that has received a great deal of attention and, in 
fact, a great deal of misinformation in recent weeks. Of course, 
I'm talking about ministerial assistants' pay and just to 
summarize what I was saying last night, I stated the pay 
schedule and the regulations that were available to this 
government on election in October 1991 were a shambles — 
chaos — much like government accounts and virtually 
everything else that we inherited, and that was simply the hand 
we were dealt with and what we had to deal with. 
 
I pointed out that the Premier, upon being sworn in and taking 
office named, appointed his cabinet. His cabinet was sworn in 
and they were expected to get their offices up and running very, 
very quickly. We demanded that. 
 
I pointed out that there was no shortage of crises to be dealt 
with by the Premier and by the ministers, and I know that the 
Premier and the ministers and indeed the entire government 
caucus have done their very best to deal with those crises in 
priority from what seems to be the most urgent and important 
on down. Somewhere in the mix classifications and pay rates, 
regulations for ministerial assistants, was addressed, but I'm 
sure that you and the good people of Saskatchewan would 
appreciate that was not the number one priority to a 
government; that indeed there was some question that we could 
meet payroll when we took office — and I'm not talking just 
payroll for cabinet or ministerial assistants or back-benchers, 
I'm talking about the total government payroll. There were 
some priorities that we dealt with. 
 
I pointed out last evening that reclassifications of pay are done 
throughout not only government — certainly the Public Service 
Commission deals with many hundreds of reclassification 
requests on an annual basis — but also in the eight years I was 
in the human resources division as a safety officer with 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool there was a constant flow of requests 
for reclassifications. 
 
Reclassifications happen for any number of reasons, not the 
least of which is the person is hired, does the job to the best of 
their ability, and in fact sometimes become very, very good at 
the job and can clearly handle additional duties. And of course, 
they take on the additional responsibilities and additional duties 
and from time to time you would reclassify to acknowledge that 
extra work and the additional duties that those people are doing 
rather than posting a job and having them bid for, in effect, the 
job that they're already doing. 
 
I pointed out that all MLAs are classified according to a pay 
scale, and according to our regulations and the 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

agreements with all parties, reclassification happens when extra 
duties are performed. Certainly as I pointed out — and I hope 
the Premier is listening very carefully to this — if I were 
appointed to cabinet, I would receive a pay raise. I say this very 
much tongue in cheek. But I'm serious about the pay raise. 
There's extra duties for cabinet ministers and cabinet ministers 
receive extra pay. Leaders of all parties receive extra pay for the 
extra duties that they do according to the classification system 
that has been long-standing. 
 
I find it somewhat interesting, and I pointed out last night that 
the Leader of the Third Party, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 
when she received one additional member making it two 
Liberal MLAs, that the Leader of the Liberal Party received in 
fact a pay reclassification. That reclassification resulted in 
additional $17,389 raise for the leader, a 37 per cent increase in 
her pay, $17,389 increase in pay. 
 
It also resulted interestingly in an additional, for the Liberal 
Party, $42,312 for sessional staff, an additional $70,262 for 
research, and an additional $59,902 for office expenses 
according to the classification system. 
 
And this, it's interesting, this classification system seems 
perfectly okay at this opportune moment for the Leader of the 
Third Party. It's just fine. Oh, I can receive a 37 per cent 
increase. I can receive an additional $17,000-and-change, and 
the extra money for office and research and staff. This is fine 
because it affects me, says the Leader of the Third Party. 
 
But I had to question and I have to question the double standard 
that this poses with working people. It seems to me the new 
politics should not be about double standards, Mr. Speaker. It 
seems to me the new politics should be about discussing with 
honesty and integrity — straight up — the facts, the way things 
are. Not just, oh, it's convenient or it's not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — And I find it somewhat distressing, Mr. Speaker, 
that the new politics is so hypocritical. It is a shame that people 
working in ministers' offices and in the Premier's office, as they 
take on additional duties, as we bring a standardized pay scale 
in, that somehow this is no good. We're better to keep and 
maintain the chaos that there was when we formed government. 
That's somehow not okay with the Leader of the Liberal Party 
but her own reclassification is bang on because, after all, it's 
17,000-and-change pay raise into her purse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I've observed the news in recent months, I 
noticed a news report on the Liberal nominating convention in 
Regina North West. As you know, we had a by-election well 
within the six months of the vacancy being created — that 
because of the democratic reforms that we have implemented. 
But as I was watching this newscast I was somewhat surprised 
to see a former senior adviser to the former Progressive 
Conservative government, big as life there, amongst the 70 or 
so Liberals gathered. Former senior adviser and Regina bagman 
for the Conservative Party, now a born-again Liberal. I'm 
talking, of course, about Ted Yarnton. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was equally amazed when yesterday we 
introduced guests in the legislature — and that's a very fine 

tradition and it's nice to acknowledge people who care to come 
and share their time and observe the goings on in our 
legislature. I think it's important for the democratic process — 
yesterday, to my amazement, the Liberal leader introduced 
some group of people in the gallery and introduced them as part 
of the Liberal family. 
 
(1045) 
 
And to my utter amazement, I was astounded to see that in that 
cluster of Liberal insiders, the Liberal family, the cluster of 
Liberal advisers, shakers and movers of the new politics, in that, 
lo and behold, Ted Yarnton, the born-again Liberal, former 
senior adviser and Regina area bagman for the Progressive 
Conservative government, now senior adviser for the Liberals. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that many people will not have had 
the opportunity to find out a little bit or know a little bit more 
about why I'm singling out the former bagman. I want to refer 
from the Special Report by the Provincial Auditor 
Saskatchewan dated April 21, 1992 to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts, of which, I point out, the Liberal leader has 
always been a member since she was elected to this legislature. 
But on page 20, part of the review says: 
 

The Saskatchewan Liquor Board reported that it paid 
expenses totalling $16,162 for ministers to attend Big Valley 
Jamborees. 

 
It goes on: 
 

The Liquor Board did not have adequate systems and 
procedures to safeguard its assets. The Liquor Board reported 
approximately $19,285 of liquor was supplied to ministers' 
offices. 

 
And get this, Mr. Speaker. It goes on: 
 

A Liquor Board official (a Liquor Board official, not Liquor 
Board officials) signed memos or store transfers to have the 
liquor either sent to ministers' offices or released into his 
custody . . . Accordingly, there was a loss to the Crown in the 
amount of $19,285. 

 
The conclusions drawn in this report to the Committee on 
Public Accounts — the Special Report By The Provincial 
Auditor of Saskatchewan — the conclusions: 
 

We are concerned when goods and services are provided 
without charge to ministers. 
 
The integrity of ministers may be questioned (it says). It 
leads to an increased level of cynicism 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

about government and a loss of confidence in government 
and public institutions. 

 
And I couldn't agree more. Of course it does and well it should. 
That's why we have moved there is no liquor in the cabinet 
ministers' offices. 
 
But I want to come back to where I read from the report: "A 
Liquor Board official signed memos . . . " 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the Public Accounts Committee these 
documents are tabled. They should come as no surprise to 
anyone; it's available to the public. We have a memo here dated 
December 18, 1990, from E.A. "Ted" Yarnton. And it says: 
 

Please arrange to have delivered by 1:30 p.m. tomorrow 
(underlined) the following to our minister, Hon. John Gerich, 
Room 348, Legislative Building . . . 

 
And it calls for in the list: one beer tub, 150 beer cups, 100 wine 
cups, 200 spirit cups. Let's see, December 18. I suspect it wasn't 
a Hallowe'en party. Probably not a birthday party. Two 
22-pound bags of ice and three 5-pound bags of ice. 
 
Now let's see here, there's one bottle of Jim Beam, four bottles 
of rye, three bottles of white rum, three bottles of vodka, two 
bottles of Lemon Hart dark, a bottle of scotch, a bottle of gin, 
six bottles of white wine, six bottles of red wine. 
 

Also please have delivered one case of elevators for the 
minister's personal use and one case of Roughrider decanters 
for the minister to give as a gift to Coach Gregory. Thank 
you for your attention to this matter. 

 
And the signature is none other than the former senior adviser 
to the Conservative government of the day and the now senior 
adviser to the Liberal Party, the born-again Liberal, Ted 
Yarnton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, included in this there's another memo outlining the 
summary of Mr. Ted Yarnton's expenses. And I see that there 
was of course trips to Edmonton and Saskatoon and Toronto 
and Quebec and Montreal. But there's also two trips to San 
Francisco and a trip to San Juan, Puerto Rico. Quite an 
astounding array, Mr. Speaker, from this born-again Liberal. 
And I just wonder how this squares with the new politics. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party knew this about Ted Yarnton. 
The Leader of the Liberal Party cannot deny that she knew. She 
is a member of the Public Accounts Committee. She received 
this documentation long ago, long ago. But when it's 
convenient, one must look the other way. When one might 
inherit a bagman, money to the Liberal Party coffers, one 
maybe has to look the other way. 
 
It's real interesting, this new politics, Mr. Speaker. I wonder 
when I see . . . I hear the words of the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, and frankly, they're nice-sounding words. And it reminds 
me of something that my minister was telling the congregation 
in church about a traveller who had been robbed and beaten and 
was laying by the side of the road. The first person by was a 
priest; the priest walked on the other side of the road, past the 
beaten traveller. The next person came along the traveller, and 

walked around. But a Samaritan came by, stopped, bandaged 
the wounded, injured person, fed that person, took the injured 
person to the next inn, stayed with that injured person for two 
days, helping nurse them back, seeing they're okay. That 
Samaritan gave the innkeeper two denarii and said, I have 
business to attend to; I will go attend to that business and when 
I come back I will gladly pay you whatever you spend looking 
after this man. The good Samaritan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new politics doesn't seem to me — according 
to the Liberal leader — doesn't seem to match. The words are 
good, but the actions are different. The words are wonderful, 
and we can all mouth them. Every individual in the world 
knows how to mouth the right words. But the actions are what 
counts. The actions speak louder than words. 
 
I'm reminded of Confucius, who has a saying that I like to live 
by. And Confucius said: fool me once, shame on you; fool me 
twice, shame on me. And I think we've been fooled once, I 
think twice, maybe thrice; the shame is now falling on us for 
being fooled. 
 
And the Leader of the Third Party I think owes the public, owes 
us, an explanation. When did the conversion take place? Did 
Ted Yarnton, the former Conservative bagman, the former 
senior adviser, did he experience a conversion on the road to 
Liberalism? And when did that happen? Or did the Leader of 
the Liberal Party experience a conversion? Did Ted Yarnton 
convert the Leader of the Liberal Party? Did that happen? How 
can this be explained? How can this circle be squared? 
 
Now is this the new politics, Mr. Speaker? I think not. How can 
this possibly take place? How can the Liberal Party run a 
by-election on one issue, that of MA (ministerial assistant) 
increases, ministerial increases, spreading lies, and yet it's 
perfectly all right for the Leader of the Liberal Party to accept a 
$17,300-and-some personal reclassification — $17,000 into her 
personal pocket and that's fine. It's wonderful. This is good 
because it affects the Leader of the Third Party personally. This 
is somehow justified. 
 
But working secretaries, working people, working people who 
can take on additional duties, working people tagged with the 
responsibility of keeping our ministers fully advised and 
dealing with the public on a regular basis, somehow it's not all 
right for them to be brought into a standardized pay scale. 
 
The real explanation that we really need, that the public really 
needs, is that of the former Conservative adviser, former 
Conservative bagman, Ted Yarnton. How was it? Who was it 
that was converted? Was it Ted Yarnton or was it the Leader of 
the Liberal Party? 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

Who received the conversion? Why is it what Mr. Yarnton did 
when he was with the Liquor Board was not acceptable, and 
clearly not, according to the Provincial Auditor, according to 
the public accounts documents, why was that not acceptable 
then, but now it's perfectly acceptable in the new politics from 
the Leader of the Liberal Party? 
 
Mr. Speaker, integrity seems to me to be a key part of the new 
politics. The new politics to me, Mr. Speaker, is about honesty, 
being honest with the public. 
 
And it's not so much about conveniently looking the other way 
when there might be a shekel or a penny or a dollar or $17,300 
for your own pocket. The new politics is about meeting 
challenges head on. The new politics is about dealing in an 
upfront manner with the hand that you're dealt with. Mr. 
Speaker, the new politics is about doing in a frontal manner the 
proper things for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder how it is that the proponent of the new politics, the 
Leader of the Liberal Party, could have possibly known about 
Ted Yarnton and could have welcomed him, not simply into the 
Liberal Party, but as a senior adviser in the Liberal Party. A 
senior adviser for the new politics. She knew about him. Why? 
Why? Why? There's some real questions that the Leader of the 
Liberal Party must deal with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, others of course will be judging us on how well 
we're doing with the new politics, and how well we are 
addressing the issues that profoundly affect our province. Our 
government is dealing with the hand we were dealt with, not 
with some airy-fairy wish list, but with the reality that we were 
dealt with. We're firmly rooted in establishing that firm, solid, 
solid foundation that is described so eloquently in the Bible. 
 
But you need a solid foundation from which to build. That's 
what to me the new politics is about. It's about being 
straightforward, upfront with everyone, with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it's about telling the whole story, not simply 
what's convenient at any given issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of this government that I am a 
part of. I'm proud of the straight-ahead reality that we're dealing 
with even when that straight-ahead reality isn't always the 
pretty, straight-ahead reality that we would want. Clearly there 
are individual things that we're forced to do or that become, in 
some instances, the only alternative; in other instances the least 
bad of some not-pleasant alternatives. We're forced to deal with 
that. I'd be less than truthful if I said that I am delighted with 
every single decision that we take, but I'm very, very proud of 
every one of my colleagues. I'm very proud of the openness 
with which we can discuss reality, the openness with which we 
can debate the reality, the openness with which we can share 
that reality and come to the best possible decisions. 
 
To me, Mr. Speaker, that's the straight-ahead, new politics. That 
is what is so much an integral part of this Speech from the 
Throne and that, Mr. Speaker, is why I am so proud to be a part 
of this government, to be a New Democrat, and to stand in 
support of our Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(1100) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I count it 
an honour to indeed be able to stand in my place today and 
make a few comments regarding the Speech from the Throne. 
As I was sitting here listening I think a case in point of why we 
should at least heed some of the direction that my colleague, the 
member from Rosthern, made this morning or during question 
period about reviewing the process of debate on the Speech 
from the Throne, I think was further reiterated in the speech we 
just heard from one of the Regina members — a speech that 
basically was totally enveloped around defending the increase 
in rates and salaries to MAs (ministerial assistant) of 43 per cent 
and more that this government has already implemented. And 
whereas many people across the province of Saskatchewan are 
struggling with less because of a number of the policies of the 
government. 
 
And I found the speech very interesting in the fact that it had 
nothing to do really with the throne speech debate, which kind 
of suggests to me that the throne speech was very vague and 
had nothing really to offer, and so it's difficult for members on 
the government side of the House to stand there and try and 
defend the throne speech when it has nothing really in it. 
 
That's why as an opposition we're suggesting as we found when 
we were knocking on doors — and many of us took the time in 
the 30-below weather to contact residents on behalf of our 
candidate in Regina North West — and we found that the major 
concern even in Regina North West was increases to MAs 
salaries, and jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that's why . . . And another area of concern that people 
were raising was how the House operates, how politics works in 
this province, and the fact that it's time we took a serious look at 
the way the Legislative Assembly operates and got down to the 
serious business of trying to deal with the many problems that 
we as Saskatchewan residents face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss in not extending my 
congratulations to the new member from Regina North West 
and inviting her to this . . . joining my colleagues in extending a 
welcome to her as she takes her place in this Assembly and I'm 
sure will be involved in much of the debate over the next few 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at this throne speech, one of 
the areas that really concerns me is the government again talked 
about job creation or the need for jobs, very vaguely referred to 
job creation, and yet when we look at the statistics we see that 
the statistics are telling us the government's own records 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

and statistics are indicating that there are 12,000 fewer people 
working in the province of Saskatchewan than there were in 
October of 1991 — 12,000 fewer people. 
 
The government also indicated that by the end of the decade, 
they hope to have 30,000 more people working in 
Saskatchewan. My simple mathematics indicates that if they 
were going to put 30,000 people back to work, they've already 
eliminated . . . or there's 12,000 fewer people working, then 
they're not just reaching for 30,000 — 42,000 people actually 
are going to be looking for jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Which again brings us to that major concern out 
there: where are the jobs going to come from? 
 
And I think one of the areas that we must look at, and as I've 
had the opportunity of talking to constituents, certainly 
knocking on doors in Regina North West, talking to people 
throughout the province, many people are indicating that the 
small-business sector is one area where jobs have the potential 
of being created. But with the regressive nature of this 
government's taxation, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's 
becoming more and more difficult for small businesses to even 
operate in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I talk about the form of taxation the government has 
adopted. The government continually tells the people of 
Saskatchewan that there haven't been any tax increases; there 
will be no tax increases in this budget. 
 
And I guess that's all fine and that's all fair for the government 
to say that there won't be any tax increases, but what do you call 
utility rate increases? When people across Saskatchewan have 
seen three and four and nine and a half per cent increases in 
their utility rates continually over the last three years, I'm 
wondering exactly what you call that, if indeed it isn't an 
indirect form of taxation. 
 
So I think the government isn't being totally honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan by indicating they haven't increased 
taxes when every time people have turned around, they have 
found an increase in the very necessities of life — the power 
supply, their heat supply, Mr. Speaker, their telephone bills, and 
the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we feel it is important that we get on 
with the business of this Assembly. And as we have looked at 
this and as I've reviewed the Speech from the Throne, I don't 
believe there is enough substantive nature to that speech for us 
to justify this Assembly taking the seven or so days to sit here 
and spend $35,000 a day debating a non-issue when there are 
greater issues and in fact there are Bills before us today that we 
could get on debating, such as the Bill that we've introduced 
calling for a utilities review committee. 
 
A committee made up of sitting MLAs from all parties, an 
all-party committee, so that indeed, Mr. Speaker, we give 
credence to the committee. We allow the committee to sit down 
and review the increases that have been brought forward or that 
would be suggested by any utility committee. That is a 
committee that is fair and a committee that doesn't cost the 
taxpayers . . . that isn't an increased cost to the taxpayers simply 
because MLAs are already being paid to be here and to 
represent their constituents. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to be asking the Government 
House Leader — I'm not asking him to close the debate — I'm 
asking him to allow this House to move on to the real issues and 
the real debate that is taking place. 
 
And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the issues that 
came up and was raised again in question period is health care. 
The government talks about job creation, and yet you take a 
look through rural Saskatchewan, an area that I represent, and 
there are numerous jobs that have been cut out of rural 
Saskatchewan in health care alone. 
 
Just the other day Mr. McMillan gave his report. He's again 
suggesting that there be jobs cut in rural Saskatchewan, when 
he suggests that acute care beds be cut from just over 3.3, I 
believe, per a thousand, to 2.7 beds per a thousand individuals. 
When you apply that across the board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what it means is that there is a further reduction of jobs, because 
as you cut the funding for beds, hospitals and regional hospital 
boards are going to have to then reduce the number of staff 
persons. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. McMillan also I believe called for 
heavier care facilities, or care homes, to take in people with 
heavier care, heavier needs. And that's all fine and dandy. But 
what I find in my constituency is that the government has not 
allowed the appropriate funding so that care homes can indeed 
hire the personnel they would need to work with the heavier 
care load patient. 
 
And so it's fine to ask and suggest we shouldn't take on lighter 
care patients in care homes, we'd better put the funding in place 
to allow these care homes to work with the individuals they 
already have there. 
 
I commend Mr. McMillan and his suggestion that there be an 
increase in funding for home care because of the heavier 
workload that has been placed on the home care program and 
that will be placed on the home care program by these 
suggestions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one other area of concern, and certainly it 
came from the community of Moosomin, is the community is 
wondering where their proposal for a new hospital facility sits. 
And of course, I'm sure the Minister of Health would argue, 
well because of the terrible debt load that they inherited, that 
they won't be able to give Moosomin a new hospital. And yet if 
I'm not mistaken, the government has already committed itself 
to a new hospital in Gravelbourg, a hospital which one has to 
question when there were five excellent facilities in the 
surrounding area. I guess maybe it's appropriate that the 
hospital go into 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg because the seat happens to be 
represented by an NDP (New Democratic Party) member. 
 
But if, Mr. Speaker, if there's such a tremendous deficit and if 
funding is needed elsewhere and if other communities have 
been told that no, your hospital doesn't go ahead, but this one 
does, it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, there shouldn't be any 
hospitals or any capital projects funded anywhere. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated earlier, it's not my 
intention just to stand in this Assembly and just to tie up a lot of 
time addressing the debate and the Speech from the Throne. 
Because I feel, Mr. Speaker, that my colleague and the Leader 
of the Opposition, my colleague from Rosthern, have brought 
out some very significant points. The Leader of the Third Party 
has also indicated over time that this House should take a 
serious look at how it operates and I think it is time for us to get 
on with life, to get on with the real business, the real issues that 
are affecting people out there, to address the job creation or how 
we create jobs. 
 
And my colleagues and I will be presenting some proposals to 
this Assembly to allow this Assembly to . . . And we trust that 
the Government House Leader will allow these proposals to 
come forward so they can be debated and we can show the 
people of Saskatchewan that we have some solid and sound 
ideas that would, if the government wants to implement them 
. . . they would have that opportunity. And they would have the 
ability, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they can take the credit if 
they want. But the main focus is to make sure that we create an 
opportunity for young people to look at continuing to live in 
Saskatchewan rather than moving out. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the House do now proceed to Bill No. 1, a Bill to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
(Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 

 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
very much a pleasure for me to be able to rise in this Assembly 
and to participate in the throne speech debate and, in the 
time-honoured tradition of the British parliamentary system, to 
use this as an occasion to express some of my thoughts, some of 
the thoughts from the people in my constituency, and to be able 
to reflect upon the direction which our province is going and 
which this government is going. 
 
Before I do utter these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to be 
able to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your continued efforts 
to keep peace and order in this Assembly. I know that at times 
things get a little difficult. However, I do want to mention that 
through your continued efforts and consistency I have noticed 
over the last two years that the tenor of the House has changed, 
has improved, and I think a lot of the credit, Mr. Speaker, goes 
to you. 
 
I'd like to be able to congratulate the member . . . the new 
member in the Assembly, the member from Regina North West, 
who has taken her place this week. I was very pleased with the 

cooperation extended from the opposition that allowed us to 
make adjustments necessary, legal adjustments, so that the 
member could take her place here in the House immediately. 
 
(1115) 
 
I was very pleased as well that the member . . . that the election 
was held early, Mr. Speaker. According to the new rules for 
elections, that election had to be held within six months, and the 
good people of Regina North West will be represented 
throughout the course of this session. I wish the member from 
Regina North West the best as she takes her place here in the 
legislature and I hope that she finds her career in politics to be 
rewarding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the throne speech and the 
comments in the throne speech, I was trying to assess it and to 
establish a mood of the throne speech. And I was helped by a 
friend from Prince Albert who told me he thought there was an 
air of tranquility about the throne speech and that it instilled 
confidence in the direction that the government was taking the 
people of Saskatchewan, or perhaps maybe following the 
people of Saskatchewan. The throne speech committed us to 
action in the areas of social justice, and the throne speech 
endeavours to call on the power of the community to cooperate 
to achieve these objectives. 
 
I want to congratulate both the mover of the Speech from the 
Throne, the member from Regina Lake Centre, and the 
seconder, the member from Biggar, who together I thought set a 
good tone for us, Mr. Speaker. The member from Regina Lake 
Centre has always contributed and continues to contribute to the 
government caucus with her expertise on interrelationships of 
parts of government, interrelationships of people working in 
one part of the country with another. And I did appreciate her 
comments about the role and the nature of government in 
today's society. 
 
The member from Biggar mentioned that compassion was a 
constant theme that runs through our financial and program 
decisions. He says, but compassion alone is not enough. And he 
mentioned the need to bring people back from the sidelines — 
those people who are unemployed and those people who are on 
welfare — and welcome them back as participating, productive 
members in our community and he indicated that that was our 
task as a government partially, partially the community's task, 
and partially of course the individual's task. I thought those 
remarks from both of the members were very, very appropriate. 
 
And over the last two or three days, Mr. Speaker, 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

throughout the week, listening to the members speak in the 
House, I just want to say that it makes me feel proud to have 
colleagues who are as thoughtful, as intelligent, and as willing 
to go to work as I do have, the colleagues that I do have in the 
legislature. And it's an inspiration, I think, I know it's an 
inspiration to me, to be able to work and to say that I work 
alongside people of this calibre. 
 
And I want to give you a couple of examples of what the 
members are faced with and what they're dealing with, to back 
up what I say. I guess everybody who comes into this place 
questions himself or herself about motives. What are my 
motives when I come into this place? And are my motives 
always honourable and how can I keep them honourable? I 
suppose one of the most honourable things we can do is keep in 
mind that whatever we do is to always remember that our 
objectives should be to the making and improving and adjusting 
of good laws and to the implementation of good laws. It's very 
simple. The statement is very simple but the implementation 
and the effecting that is quite difficult. 
 
Consider, Mr. Minister, the difficultly of the situation faced by 
the Minister of Justice as he had to steer, alongside with the 
Minister of Social Services, as he has to steer a government 
position through the very, very difficult period of the 
Martensville trials. The Martensville tragedy affected all of us 
in Saskatchewan in a way which we can't really describe very 
well because it's something that we feel but we don't really have 
that good a handle on it. It's something new to us. 
 
And it was important that as we went through all of the motions 
of that and we're still going through it, that the integrity of the 
justice system and the social service system in Saskatchewan 
remained intact. And I have to congratulate both ministers in 
the way that they were able to and that they are steering us 
through this. 
 
The people and the parents, the victims that are involved here 
— and I suppose we're all victims to some extent — have had 
access to the best of professional help, and both ministers have 
acknowledged and are making adjustments from those things 
that we are learning as a result of this tragedy. I congratulate 
them for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I was very 
pleased with the leadership provided to us by our Minister of 
Finance in response to the smuggling tax or the cigarette tax or 
the smugglers' caper in eastern Canada. Here we have a 
situation where people started taking the law into their own 
hands for the sake of greed. Now most people I've talked to 
about this tobacco tax revolt have suggested to me that the best 
solution to reduce that smuggling was, first of all, to put a 
substantial export tax on the cigarettes; and secondly, to enforce 
the law. When I considered the other options, I thought that that 
made a lot of sense. 
 
Unfortunately that's not what the federal Liberal government 
did. Instead they have reduced some of the tax and asked us to 
match as well at $5 dollars a carton. Mr. Minister, just from a 
strict dollars-and-cents point of view, that would have cost the 
treasury of Saskatchewan $35 million. Or another comparison 

would be, it would take a tax increase of 3 cents a litre for every 
litre of gas that you and I burn — 3 cents-a-litre increase. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased that both opposition parties 
endorsed the position taken by our Minister of Finance on this. 
And I'm still kind of surprised why it was that the Liberal Prime 
Minister didn't use the export tax solution. I can think it was 
only done for political reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you consider that a large portion of the tobacco industry 
is based in Quebec and that the Liberal Premier Johnson's 
re-election is threatened right now by the separatists, I come to 
the conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that at this time what is good for 
all of Canada is not necessarily good for Quebec, or good for 
the Liberal Party in Quebec. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that new politics does not impress me, but I am 
hoping that perhaps after that election we can get an all-Canada 
policy to deal with matters such as the tobacco smuggling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to single out one other minister as an 
example of a government that is thoughtful, that is careful in 
implementing policies. And I want to make special mention of 
my colleague, the member from Prince Albert Northcote, who 
has the job at this time of steering through new gaming policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you consider the different pushes and pulls 
dealing with gaming and the competing interests and the very 
sincere ideas that are put forth about whether we should be 
going into gaming at all or not, because on both sides of the 
House there are people and proponents who have very strong 
ideas on both sides of the issue, I think the political 
management of this kind of an issue is very, very difficult. And 
I want to be able to commend the minister who is responsible 
for this, the minister of gaming, my colleague from Prince 
Albert Northcote, who has taken it in stride and is carefully and 
slowly working our way through this, and continues to be open 
to suggestions and consideration and consultation for anything 
that may be of assistance. And I can assure the members and 
anybody that's listening here today that my colleague will listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, as I was going through the 
throne speech and listening to it and seeing what we were faced 
with, I recognized that one of the repeated themes was that we 
are on a journey of renewal. And we need to go on a journey of 
renewal because in four areas we find that we need some 
changes. 
 
People in agriculture have found themselves in a situation 
where they were being crippled by debt, a lot 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

of grain they were able to produce but there were no markets — 
clearly some changes were needed. 
 
One of the most pressing problems in Saskatchewan right now, 
and throughout our nation, is the need for jobs for the 
unemployed and for our youth. There was a tremendous number 
of bankruptcies that we have gone through in the last few years. 
We'd found that some of the megaprojects that were supposed 
to make us all rich ended up putting us in difficulty, ended up 
making us poor. So what we needed there was a change. 
 
We found that in the region of health there was again a need for 
change. We had an excess of delivery rooms and operating 
rooms around the province that were being bypassed — they 
were being funded, but they were being bypassed by the people 
of Saskatchewan because they were looking for better 
technology and they were going to where the doctors and the 
technology is. We needed more of a shift from a curative, 
illness approach to a preventive, wellness approach. 
 
Clearly, again there was a need for change in health. 
Agriculture, economic development and health — a need for 
change. 
 
And when you looked at the fiscal position of the province, we 
found that there also was a need for a change. And we were 
being reminded daily, almost hourly, by the bond-rating 
agencies, through the media, that Saskatchewan was on the 
verge of bankruptcy — crippled by debt, paying $800 million in 
interest payments. Clearly there was a need for a change. 
 
The difficulty was, how was it that we were going to go through 
this transition? Not only did we need a change in methodology, 
but we needed a change in our spirit; a change in the way we 
think in order to be able to properly and effectively manage 
these changes. 
 
(1130) 
 
I want to refer to two lines written by a British essayist from the 
Victorian era. His name is John Ruskin. Lived from the years 
1819 to 1900. He came up with a statement, even at that time, 
that reads as follows. John Ruskin said: 
 

Government and cooperation are in all things the laws of life. 
Anarchy and competition are in all things the laws of death. 

 
I've thought about that statement and how it might apply to us 
today. What he does is he contrasts cooperation and life with 
competition and death. He uses the word, government, to talk in 
contrast with anarchy — government being the way we 
organize ourselves. 
 

Government and cooperation are in all things the laws of life. 
Anarchy and competition are in all things the laws of death. 

 
I thought that that quotation was representative of the kind of 
transition that we have to take place in Saskatchewan. To go 
from a concept of competition to cooperation, to go from the 
concept of anarchy and everyone doing something for himself 
to a concept of government as being good, to go from the 
concept of something that leads to death to something that leads 
to life and openness. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how did we end up there where we had ended up 
after the '80s, when anarchy and competition were all of the 
things that we were concentrating on? We have gone through a 
time when the theory of greed is good, was emphasized. 
Probably started on Wall Street but it penetrated right across the 
free world and around the globe. It was the theory that was 
propagated by Thatcher, Reagan, Bush, Mulroney. 
 
It's what I call the rise of the hard side of politics, the hard side 
of living. It was the law of the corporate jungle — corporate 
mergers where the winner takes all and losers are at fault. It was 
the law of unbridled competition, the law at the time when we 
had leveraged take-overs exemplified by disasters like Canary 
Wharf in Great Britain, and the U.S. (United States) savings and 
loan fiasco, and junk bonds in the United States. It was the law 
of deregulation and of free trade and of privatization. It was a 
portion of a theory derived by . . . what's described by Marx, the 
portion which emphasizes the competition of people in the 
workplace. And as a result of that we had a loss of ethics, which 
you have to have overriding and placed upon in the free world, 
in the free enterprise system. 
 
My colleague from Regina, the Minister of Labour, Regina 
Churchill Downs, has described what happened to us in the 
workplace as a result of following this old theory of 
competition. And he mentioned in a discussion that what he saw 
was a sort of a new kind of ruthlessness in the '80s that was 
brought out. And it's now being characterized and we see it in 
the workplace. A ruthlessness on the part of some employers 
and a ruthlessness which was embraced by governments, and 
which is leading us and which has led us to a situation where 
we feel that people who are working are not nearly as well 
looked after in a comparison fashion as they should be. 
 
And I think of specifically part-time workers. Mr. Speaker, one 
of our daughters has a degree in interior design. She has 
worked, I believe, for three or four different employers part 
time over the last two or three years, fully qualified. She finds 
herself in very much a situation of many other people who are 
in a part-time position — capable, educated, competent, eager 
to go to work, but not much work there. 
 
And I think of her and how she has at times sat beside the 
telephone, waiting for the phone call to be able to go to work. 
And there are many more people like her who have found 
themselves in a situation where they are dependent on that 
phone call, tied to the phone. And if they're not there when the 
phone rings, then 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

they might have to lose their job. Clearly I feel that this is 
something that we have to address in this throne speech, that is, 
the plight of part-time workers who, along with other workers, 
have suffered from the ruthlessness of this unbridled 
competition that we have gone through. 
 
And yesterday in this House there were a group of perhaps 50 
or 100 people, employees of Woolco from Moose Jaw, who 
came here because they were frightened of what could happen 
to them because Wal-Mart has refused to buy the Woolco store 
because they are unionized in Moose Jaw. 
 
Now think of this, Mr. Speaker. What has happened is the 
people are afraid of losing their jobs. They are afraid of losing 
. . . and they are almost pleading at this stage to be able to work 
for less. That's rather . . . that's hard to fathom, Mr. Speaker. 
You can understand . . . I mean I can understand their definite 
need and their desire to want to maintain their jobs. But the fact 
that a company who's been given free reign because of the 
ethics of competition is in such a position to threaten them that 
their jobs will be lost by not buying their company . . . And 
Woolco was doing well. Woolco in Moose Jaw is perhaps in the 
top three of sales in Woolcos in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a new breed of entrepreneurship and a breed of 
corporations who continue on this concept of taking over, 
managing directly from outside, forcing people to take less, 
lower their wages, and they do it by luring us all with the 
concept of cheap prices. 
 
Well we have to re-examine this. We have to re-examine the 
workplace so that things like this just don't happen. Because if it 
does, it leads everything to the lowest, lowest common 
denominator; puts us into a situation that I just don't want. 
Because in the end, the ethics of competition, Mr. Speaker, is 
such that to the victor — maybe the Wal-Mart in this case — go 
the spoils, but to the conquered, the toil. 
 
And we end up in a situation, as we see in Mexico, we see in 
different places in the world that have not developed rules and 
regulations by which employers and employees can work 
together to solve a common problem — a cooperative approach. 
I believe that, Mr. Speaker, is the challenge of this government, 
to put that type of an ethic into place. 
 
And we are guided, Mr. Speaker, by words of Tommy Douglas 
which were so well paraphrased or so well phrased by the 
member from Biggar that I would like to repeat them for the 
record again. Tommy Douglas did make these remarks: The 
measure of a nation's greatness does not lie in its conquests or 
in its gross national product or in the size of its gold reserve or 
the height of its skyscrapers. The real measure of a nation is the 
quality of its natural life. What does it do for its less fortunate 
citizens, the opportunity it provides for its youth to live useful 
and meaningful lives. Equally important, what does it do to 
share its affluence with those people around the world who 
suffer from poverty and disease. Those are the guiding 
principles, Mr. Speaker, that I want to see this government 
embrace. Those are the principles, Mr. Speaker, that I will 
strive to work for in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a philosophy; we know what the 
difficulties are from where we go. The problem is, how do we 

create a climate for jobs, how do we create a climate for the 
survival of farms, how do we create a climate for the provision 
of health care that's affordable, how do we create a climate to 
continue education? 
 
We can look quickly by studying some of the methods of the 
governments past, the governments of Woolco, the 
governments of . . . excuse me, that was a very bad slip, Mr. 
Speaker. I was going to say Woody, the governments of 
Woodrow Lloyd and Tommy Douglas who talked about co-ops, 
producers, and retailers. They got people together, used the 
common approach of one vote for one person, not one vote for 
one share. We could use the example of Blakeney who 
developed utility corporations like SaskTel, SaskPower, and 
added to that Potash Corporation, using Saskatchewan's 
resource revenue for Saskatchewan people. Again using the 
partnership approach, we were able to distribute services and 
income to people in Saskatchewan. But that was before free 
trade and the global village deregulation, and Thatcher, Reagan 
and Bush, Mulroney. 
 
So how do we proceed? Well I say, Mr. Speaker, that we once 
again rely on partnerships, once again. And that's what this 
throne speech speaks to — partnerships at a local level. This 
government is devolving . . . in some areas we are attempting to 
devolve a lot in the areas of economic development and in the 
areas of health. And we're using the guidelines, the words, 
cooperation, community, and compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other members who have 
things that they want to say. I have a few examples I want to 
mention from Prince Albert. I am going to save some of those 
words for remarks that I will make instead in the budget speech. 
 
I want to close my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by . . . I want to close, 
Mr. Speaker, by saying that the methods that we use are . . . and 
that we will be using and we will use as a guideline are the 
methods which are exemplified by John Ruskin, the statement 
that I used earlier, and that is that this government will work so 
that "government and cooperation are in all things the laws of 
life." And we will not work in a manner where "anarchy and 
competition" are our guidelines because they "are in all things 
the law of death". 
 
And the last thing I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we can do 
these things only properly if we have confidence and continue 
to have confidence in ourselves, in our colleagues and if we 
have confidence in our leader, the Premier. 
 
And I want to say without equivocation, Mr. Speaker, that I 
continue to be impressed with the tireless, openness and 
committed work that our Premier has exemplified and continues 
to show and the leadership 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

he provides to caucus and to cabinet. And I know that as we go 
through the tough times, as we keep on turning the corner, as 
we continue on this journey of renewal, I am confident I can 
depend on his leadership and on the cooperation of my 
colleagues to really continue to make Saskatchewan a place 
where we can bring our children back home to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into 
the debate on the Speech from the Throne on the occasion of 
the fourth session of the twenty-second legislature. 
 
First of all, I would like to extend my best wishes to you, Mr. 
Speaker, during this session knowing that you shall perform 
your duties with dignity and equity in light of the arduous task 
of keeping order in this venerable Assembly. I personally shall 
pledge my commitment to you to do my utmost to maintain a 
decorum of respectability during this session. I encourage my 
colleagues to do likewise. 
 
Secondly, I wish to extend a cordial welcome to all of my 
colleagues who have returned on this, the fourth session, and a 
special welcome to the member from Regina North West on her 
election. 
 
Finally, I'd also like to welcome the pages to this session and I 
look forward to having a pleasant session with them. 
 
Time waits for no one, Mr. Speaker. It seems like yesterday that 
we commenced the first session of the twenty-second 
legislature. But here we are today, the fourth session. 
 
We've all journeyed a long way together from the day of the 
election of this government, on October 19, '91. This has been 
indeed a journey of renewal, a journey of restoration, a journey 
fraught with its difficulties, but most significantly, a journey of 
hope with its accomplishments along the way. 
 
I think it is only fitting that I should pause for a moment and 
acknowledge with gratitude the trust that my constituents have 
reposed in me as their elected representative. It is an honour and 
a privilege to represent the constituency of Weyburn. My 
constituents, and indeed all the people of Saskatchewan, 
deserve the credit for the difficulties each have endured — and I 
acknowledge some have endured more than others — each have 
endured over the past two years in the course of putting the 
province's financial house in order after years of deficit 
financing and $15 billion of debt accumulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shall review briefly the financial condition of the 
province at the time that we took office; and in particular, I'll 
restrict my comments to the operating budget. 
 
If you'll recall, Mr. Speaker, the Tories did not pass a budget in 
the dying days of their administration, electing to pay the daily 
government operating expenses by special warrants. When the 
newly elected government of the day assumed office, the 
projected deficit was $1.3 billion. However, this $1.3 billion 
was shaved to $842 million by March 1992. 
 

Over the next year, that is '92-93, the deficit was further shaved 
to 592 million. And for this present fiscal year, '93-94, the 
deficit is on target as projected 12 months ago at $295 million. 
This is indeed a good record for the present government in 
reducing the operating deficit. Our government is on top of its 
budget plan for this year even though an extra 31 million was 
spent on Social Services, an extra 4 million on Agriculture, and 
an extra l5 million on Environment and an extra 2 million on 
Education. 
 
Our government does have a plan, a well-thought-out plan I 
may add, to balance the budget in 1996-97. As I stated before, 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve the credit for having to 
endure the sacrifices required to tidy up the financial mess they 
inherited. 
 
Now that the sacrifices have been made, there are positive 
economic indicators which point to a more favourable 
economic climate for the benefit of our children and our 
grandchildren. One of the bright lights in my constituency has 
been the oil patch. From January 1993 to October 1993, 1,740 
oil and gas wells were drilled. 
 
This represents an increase of 225 per cent over the same period 
last year. With the increased activity in the oil patch, royalties 
also increased by an additional $61 million, allowing the 
government to remain on target with its four 
_year deficit elimination plan. With sound fiscal management 
and a little good luck, I may add, Saskatchewan may very well 
be the first province to receive a credit rating upgrade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wormsbecker: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a 
few minutes discussing health care reform which is by far the 
biggest undertaking of this government. Saskatchewan 
pioneered hospitalization and medicare. Saskatchewan is now 
pioneering the integrated delivery of all health care services at 
the community level through health districts with emphasis on 
promoting wellness in conjunction with treating illness. 
 
I attended a legislative conference in Alberta last month with 
representatives from Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, Quebec, 
and eight American states. Health care was an agenda item. It 
was the general consensus of the American legislators in 
attendance that the Canadian health care system is an enviable 
model but unfortunately it's too costly for the Americans, so 
they state. 
 
One of the state senators acknowledged that the Canadian 
model of health care was pioneered out of a sense that it was the 
moral thing to do, it was the right 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

thing to do, while the Americans implemented a patchwork of 
public health care delivery but not universally accessible in 
response to public pressure. Consequently, our American 
neighbours have been more conscious of the public cost. 
 
President Clinton has defined the principles of health care for a 
national health care policy. The individual states are concerned 
that they may be legislated to provide the service without 
receiving adequate federal funding. Federal funding is a big 
issue across the 49th parallel as it remains here in Canada. 
Without adequate federal funding, health care will be 
jeopardized in Canada. 
 
Returning to health care reform as it applies to my constituency, 
it is fair to state that there are some sceptics. The vast majority 
of people realize that health care designed for the '40s and the 
'60s does not meet the needs of the '90s and the next century. 
The difficulty with any reform is the transitional period. There 
are the visionaries who can picture in their mind's eye the new 
health delivery system. And on the other hand, there are the 
pragmatists who wish to see the finished product prior to 
embarking on changing the present system. 
 
One of the most important factors in health care reform is 
communication. The South Central District Health Board, 
which is located in my constituency, is taking the time to meet 
with health care workers and community groups to establish a 
communication rapport with groups and communities within the 
district. 
 
A good example of board communication is its willingness to 
dialogue with the Souris Valley task force. Souris Valley is a 
regional fourth level care facility located in Weyburn and 
provided care to all of south-east Saskatchewan. 
 
The geographical catchment area was equivalent to five health 
care districts. With the reduction of beds to meet certain target 
levels established by the Department of Health, the Weyburn 
community quickly formed a task force to look into integrated 
delivery of health care services, including the feasibility of such 
services being provided from the Souris Valley physical plant, 
or alternately, promoting Souris Valley to neighbouring health 
districts as a centre specializing in management of level 4 
patients with multiple care needs. A process is in place for a 
dialogue, and many options are being discussed. 
 
These issues must be resolved at the community level. This 
government chose, and I must state, to its credit, to reform 
health care with community input rather than dictating health 
care boundaries. This consultation process has worked, is 
continuing to work, and shall work well into the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session will see the introduction of 
approximately 60 to 75 Bills for debate and passage. These 
Bills will be supportive of our government's long-range plans to 
maintain sound financial management, to promote jobs and 
economic development, to encourage value added agricultural 
businesses, to support children through the children's advocate, 
and to support working people and families through 
amendments to The Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment briefly on agriculture and 

The Labour Standards Act. The farm industry has undergone 
significant economic changes over the past several years. The 
Saskatchewan farmers have responded to adverse market and 
commodity prices by shifting some of their production to 
non-traditional cash crops. With the federal government shifting 
the cost of agricultural support programs to the provinces, 
Saskatchewan has been dealt a burdensome financial blow. 
Costs which it didn't have prior to 1988 are now being asked to 
be paid by them, and the federal government had paid these 
costs previously. Saskatchewan has 40 per cent of the cultivated 
land in Canada and 60,000 farmers. Per capita the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer has unfairly paid more towards safety 
nets than taxpayers in other provinces. 
 
The Saskatchewan Farm Support Review Committee has 
recommended three optional safety net programs as alternatives 
to the present GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and 
NISA (net income stabilization account) programs. It is 
important that the federal government acknowledge and accept 
its responsibility to provide adequate funding, because it is 
unrealistic to expect a province like Saskatchewan to shoulder 
significant safety net costs for premiums when the treasury is 
dependent on a vibrant agricultural economy. If the agriculture 
sector is faltering, the tax revenue isn't there to cost-share safety 
net programs. 
 
All farmers would like to receive their income at the farm gate. 
With the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
agreement there shall be some reduction in subsidies, but is not 
expected to have any immediate impact upon the upward 
movement of commodity prices. Therefore an adequate safety 
net program is essential. 
 
As farmers would like a fair return for their produce, farm 
workers also would like a fair return for their labour. Farm 
workers are presently excluded under The Labour Standards 
Act and some other workers have partial protection only. I'm of 
the opinion that the day is long gone when any workers should 
be excluded from The Labour Standards Act. 
 
What is debatable is the extent to which each class of worker is 
afforded protection under the Act. However, exclusion should 
not be permitted. 
 
Farms are very mechanized and require skilled machinery 
operators. Any skilled worker is worth the minimum wage. All 
employers should be required to pay their employees in a timely 
fashion. Shouldn't farm workers have the benefit to wage 
recovery similar to other workers? These are a few issues some 
constituents have raised with me, as representing minimum 
labour standards for farm workers. 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

(1200) 
 
Addressing the workplace generally, Mr. Speaker, the 
workplace has changed dramatically. There are more 
temporary, casual, and part-time employees in the workplace. It 
is not uncommon for an employee to have three part-time jobs 
today, scurrying about to three different places of employment. 
Couple this difficult task with raising a family and it is no small 
wonder that there is tremendous stress on a working family. 
 
A part-time worker can be imprisoned in their own home, being 
tied to the telephone waiting for an employer to call. It is only 
fair that part-time employees should receive a minimum of 
several days advance scheduling notice as well as prorated 
full-time employment benefits. Legislative amendments 
implementing the foregoing shall assist in restoring some equity 
to employees in the workplace. 
 
Equity, balance and fairness are concepts everyone subscribes 
to; however, there is divergence of opinion when it comes to the 
application of these principles. I am proud to be part of a 
government which is restoring financial stability in this 
province and monitoring with sensitivity the social programs 
and services like health care and education within a framework 
of equity, balance and fairness. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the journey of renewal and 
restoration of this province is continuing and one day, not too 
distant in the future, our children and grandchildren will reap 
the benefits of the difficult decisions having to be made today 
for tomorrow. 
 
I join my caucus colleagues who have spoken before me in 
support of the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure and an honour for me to enter into this debate in 
response to the Speech from the Throne for 1994, not only on 
my own behalf, Mr. Speaker, but on behalf of the people from 
the Nipawin constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must say I feel somewhat under-prepared today 
as I attempt to reply to the Speech from the Throne. I haven't 
given as much time to this preparation as I would have 
preferred. My office has been moving in this building. It has 
moved from the first floor up to the third floor, so on the more 
positive side you could say I'm on the way up. Or if we were 
looking for a headline you could say: Keeping on the move. 
 
But to begin with, Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer my 
congratulations to the mover of the Speech from the Throne, the 
member from Regina Lake Centre, and the seconder, the 
member from Biggar. Mr. Speaker, I listened to their addresses 
the other day and I was very impressed with both of their 
speeches, both in the moving and the seconding of the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
As others have already done, too, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate the newest member of the legislature, the member 
from Regina North West. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I thought today I would open my speech with a 
funny story so I brought the best story I knew. It's the kind of a 
story that just knocks the hair right off the top of your head, but 
I see, seeing as you've already heard it, Mr. Speaker, I will just 
omit and proceed on without it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now for a few minutes and tell you 
about my Nipawin constituency. It's a beautiful part of the 
province, and I recognize the responsibility that the people from 
that constituency have placed in me. I have tried to represent 
them to the best of my ability and I will continue to do so. 
 
The constituency of Nipawin, as we all know, lies in the 
north-east part of the province, the north most and the eastern 
most part of the agricultural lands. It also includes the southern 
edge of the forest boundary. 
 
As is in the case in much of the province, most of the province, 
agriculture is the most significant industry or occupation of that 
area. But in the Nipawin area our agriculture is very, very 
diverse. Besides the regular crops that are grown all over the 
province, farmers in our area have grown for many years now, 
many, many specialty crops. And we have in that area of the 
province a large number of pedigreed seed growers and 
companies. We also have in that area of the province, a lot of 
alfalfa — both for dehydrated alfalfa for export and for seed 
production. 
 
Along with the alfalfa industry goes the leaf-cutter bee industry. 
Also, as most of us know, canola is — and has been for a long 
time now — a big market, a big part of our seeding plans in that 
area. And we have at Nipawin, the CanAmera canola seed 
crushing plant. 
 
Another significant influence in that area, in the economy of 
that area, is the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker — one that I've 
worked in all of my life. And we have at Carrot River the 
government-owned saw mill and planer mill at Carrot River, 
but also in the area we have many, many small farmer-owned or 
privately owned saw mills that create much-needed 
employment in that area of the province. And as well we have 
livestock on most of the farms, or a lot of the farms have 
livestock either as the sole industry or as part of their industry. 
We have also, Mr. Speaker, three provincial government 
pastures in the Nipawin constituency. 
 
I think the thing that's the most unique about the Nipawin 
constituency is the flourishing tourism industry. Year-round 
tourism is flourishing. It's based mainly on snowmobile, 
golfing, hunting and especially fishing. I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have in that area of the province the best fishing in the 
province. And fishermen and fisherwomen from all 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

over the province and all over Canada, and in fact countries far 
away in other parts of the world, are coming there to Nipawin to 
fish for record-size wall-eye and northern pike that are caught 
relatively easy — at least I've been able to catch them and I am 
sure not an expert fisherman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Nipawin constituency have done 
an excellent job in promoting and marketing this natural 
resource. And over the years this industry has grown and grown 
and expanded, year after year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I've probably taken enough time talking 
about or bragging about the Nipawin constituency, but I really 
do believe that the people in my area of the province are the 
biggest asset that area has. They are innovative, ambitious, 
friendly, and they plan for the future. And each generation has 
left the environment and the opportunities better for the next 
generation than they received it. 
 
Another important event probably that I should mention, Mr. 
Speaker, before I leave talking about my constituency 
altogether, is the fact that Garry and Bonnie Meier from the 
Nipawin constituency were selected last year as the most 
outstanding young farmer in Saskatchewan. We are very proud 
of them. And last fall at Agribition, when they came to Regina 
here and met in competition with farmers from all over the 
Dominion of Canada, they were selected as one of the top three 
most outstanding young farmers in Canada. 
 
We are very, very proud of them in our constituency. They are 
an example of the hard work and the innovation and the forward 
planning of the people in that area. We're proud of the award 
they've received; we think they're worthy of the award, and they 
are to be very much congratulated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just over three years ago when I decided . . . when 
I made the decision to try to win the opportunity to represent 
the Nipawin constituency, many people asked me at that time, 
why would you even want to take on such a task? They were 
probably referring to the debt of the province and the measures 
that they realized even at that time that would have to be taken 
as the government got its spending under control. I believed at 
that time, Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic Party was the best 
able and the most likely to succeed, to succeed in renewing our 
province and rebuilding our province — which at the time, Mr. 
Speaker, by the former government's own admission, was at 
that time teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe our government was the best choice. 
That is what I believed at that time and I believe it even more 
strongly today. 
 
The reasons that I believe that the New Democratic Party and 
the New Democratic government is the best choice for 
Saskatchewan are many. These reasons involve not only what is 
promised by various political parties during an election 
campaign, but more importantly, what is the track record of the 
available choices? What was the record of the two right-wing 
parties? What was the record of the Tory Party? What was the 
record of the Liberal Party? What was the record of former New 
Democratic parties? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has already been mentioned today, but actions 

do speak louder than words, or as my mother used to say, the 
proof is in the pudding, or as Randy Travis used to sing in the 
song, don't call him a cowboy until you've seen him ride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of being a community pasture 
manager for eight years and I worked in one for another five 
years. It was one of the most enjoyable times of my life. I was 
very young at the time, in my early 20's, and I met and got to 
know many, many cowboys, and many, many would-be 
cowboys. And I can say with Randy Travis — a certain amount 
of wisdom in his song — don't call him a cowboy until until 
you've seen him ride. 
 
As I've already mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I was in my early 20's. 
I think I was 20 when I got the job as community pasture 
manager, and I shortly turned 21. And when the weather was 
nice and the job was enjoyable and the weather was warm, it 
was easy to find lots of cowboys and cowgirls to help — very 
enjoyable. But, Mr. Speaker, when the days were long and the 
work was hard and the weather was bad with snow and rain, 
freezing rain and snow, those are the days when we found out 
who was a cowboy and who wasn't a cowboy. And I can say 
with Mr. Travis, don't call him a cowboy until you've seen him 
ride. 
 
It's much the same with government. It's much easy to govern in 
easy times when things are going good, economies are booming 
and growing and you are trying to figure out ways to spend the 
money, ways you could be a better government and spend 
more. Some even figure out ways to spend money they haven't 
got yet. We've experienced that in the province. 
 
I remember the former premier, the member from Estevan 
saying: Saskatchewan had so much going for it — when he was 
looking to govern — Saskatchewan has so much going for it 
you can even mismanage it and still break even. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, he certainly proved to be half right. He certainly 
proved he could mismanage the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, actions do speak louder than words, and the 
former right-wing governments have said all the right things. 
And that right-wing talk sounds great, it sounds good, but look 
what it does, look what it brings. We've got many examples, not 
only in Saskatchewan, but in other places in Canada and other 
places in the world. People in Saskatchewan have seen the 
right-wing ride. They've seen the right-wing ride. People in 
Canada have seen the right-wing ride. 
 
(1215) 
 
I am pleased with the progress that our government 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

has made to date on our journey of renewal. I am more 
optimistic now than ever in our term of office. The hard 
choices, the sacrifices that were necessary to be made have been 
made and optimism is starting to grow. People of the province 
are to be congratulated and thanked for their part and their 
cooperation in turning this province around. 
 
Last March, as everyone knows, we introduced a detailed 
balanced budget plan that would balance the budget in four 
years. It included all the major decisions, both on the taxing 
side and the expenditures, to reach the required goal. Three 
months ago we released a mid-term financial report that shows 
we're right on track. I'm encouraged. 
 
That's amazing when you stop and think it's a billion dollar 
turnaround in just two years. It wasn't easy. And again the 
people of the province are to be thanked and congratulated for 
their part. 
 
While our economic renewal cannot be described as a boom, 
nevertheless the economy is recovering. Retail trade, an 
important indicator, was up by over 5 per cent in 1993 
compared to '92 — 5.3 per cent. That is the highest increase in 
retail trade on the Prairies — higher than Alberta which was 
only 3.8, and higher than the national average which was 4.4. 
 
Wholesale trade was also up in Saskatchewan. Urban housing 
starts were down by 8 per cent in Canada, but here in 
Saskatchewan housing starts were up. 
 
Oil and gas drilling were up by 174 per cent over the previous 
year. That's good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe the expansion of uranium mining, stronger prospects 
for potash, the fourth largest harvest in the history of our 
province, are all reasons for optimism in this upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1994 marks the 50th anniversary of the election of 
the Tommy Douglas government in Saskatchewan. This historic 
election changed not only this province, but had a very positive 
influence all across Canada. This was the first experience 
people in Canada had at watching a social democratic 
government rise. 
 
The policies and ideas that were introduced by that government 
have been much copied and admired all around the world. 
Tommy's government had a deep commitment to economic and 
social justice and an unyielding faith in the power of 
community and cooperation. 
 
I believe this Speech from the Throne that we heard the other 
day has those same kinds of plans and ideas that will outlast any 
of us that are here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: — And I think that those kind of plans and ideas 
will restore confidence in governments in general and will 
restore the idea that government is to be the servant of the 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I came into this building a few days ago I 
did so with optimism and pride of being part of a government 

with a plan that is working and having the courage to stick to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've often asked myself, why do I believe in the 
New Democratic Party? Why am I a New Democrat? Mr. 
Speaker, I believe it is because I believe in the community; I 
believe in sharing; I believe in compassion; I believe in 
fairness; I believe in using the resources of this province for all 
the people in the province. Why do the New Democrats believe 
in that? Why do people in Saskatchewan, the majority of people 
in Saskatchewan, think that way as well? I don't know. Perhaps 
it's because of the experience in the Depression. Perhaps it's 
because of our sparse population. Perhaps it's because of our 
climate, the cold weather, etc. Maybe it's a combination of 
those. 
 
But whatever it is, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
have learned to cooperate. The people of Saskatchewan have 
learned to share. The people of Saskatchewan have learned to 
help one another and learned to care for and care about one 
another. More recently, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have learned 
to not elect governments that will spend more money than they 
take in — will spend money they haven't got. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we balance this budget, and we will, no one 
can ever say we did it because times were easy. We have been 
riding in some of the hardest weather and the toughest times to 
ride, but we've been riding straight and true into the storm, and 
we will win. 
 
Not only are we on the road to recovery, but we're doing it the 
Saskatchewan way. We're doing it the slow, steady, sure, and 
careful way. This, I believe, is the Saskatchewan way and I 
believe it is the right way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I walked into this floor of this legislature the 
other day, I was somewhat excited and happy to be back. And I 
found myself as I was walking across to take my place here, 
humming an old cowboy tune that I remember singing quite 
often as I rode out across the pasture for the first time. And I'm 
sure that perhaps there's a member or two, even in the 
opposition side of the House, that would recognize that old 
tune. The old tune of, "Back in the saddle again, back where a 
friend is a friend." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be part of this government, I'm 
pleased at the progress we have made so far, and I am pleased 
to support the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
great pleasure that I rise in my place today and take part in this 
throne speech debate. I want to join with other members in 
congratulating my colleague from Regina Lake Centre on the 
great job she did in moving the Speech from the Throne; also 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

congratulating the member from Biggar on the good job he did 
on seconding the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also gives me great pleasure that our House 
Leader has refused the call by the Opposition House Leader to 
implement closure on this debate. Because he has done that, I 
still get the opportunity to speak on the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to join with my 
colleagues in welcoming the new member from Regina North 
West to these chambers. I am sure that she will find some of the 
proceedings that go on in these chambers very frustrating, but 
I'm also sure that she will find much of her job as an MLA very 
rewarding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everyone has took their place and told you 
what a wonderful job you do up there, so I don't think I have to 
say it again. You know you have done a good job and we all do, 
and we thank you for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — I also want to take this opportunity to once 
again thank the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood for giving 
me the opportunity to represent them in these chambers — also 
allowing me to be part of the government that has taken the 
province of Saskatchewan from the road of destruction that we 
were under under the previous Tory administration and now put 
us on the road to renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on December 3, 1991, I had the pleasure of 
seconding the first throne speech delivered by this government. 
Mr. Speaker, at that time I stated that the first throne speech 
removed the climate of fear, frustration, and failure that the 
former administration had impelled on the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it replaced that climate with a new hope for 
the future — a new hope of no more deficit budgeting, no more 
unnecessary deficit budgeting, and the hope that they had 
elected a government that could make the difficult decisions to 
bring financial stability to the province. 
 
In order to regain control of our finances, we have to make 
those tough decisions, not just for ourselves but for the future 
generations of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, I said at that 
time we had to establish new goals that stress equity, fairness, 
and sharing. Our objective must be wealth creation that is as 
widely distributed as possible, and reverse the obvious 
mismanagement of government, government departments, and 
Crown corporations and return efficient, effective public 
administration. 
 
We said at that time that we were not going to rely on Bay 
Street to create jobs, but rather rely on Main Street 
Saskatchewan to create those jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — And, Mr. Speaker, we have come good on all of 
these statements. And our job creation is working and the 
province of Saskatchewan is on the road to renewal as we 
promised back in 1991. 

 
I also stated at that time that we stood ready and willing to go to 
work with the people of Saskatchewan to build a better, more 
decent society for all the people of this great province. And I 
believe as this throne speech states, Mr. Speaker, we have done 
that. 
 
We are in fact building a better, more decent society in 
cooperation with the people of Saskatchewan. The faith that the 
people of Saskatchewan put in us in 1991 has been tested and 
sustained over the last two years as the people of Saskatchewan 
have joined this government on that journey of renewal — 
renewal of our economy, renewal of the Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, as the speech states, the journey 
has often been difficult, with unprecedented challenges along 
the way. But Saskatchewan people have undertaken the journey 
together, and together we have made great progress. The 
greatest problem that we faced in the renewal was the legacy of 
a decade of deficit spending by the past Tory administration. 
 
One of the first priorities was to restore confidence in this 
province's ability to manage its financial affairs. We are well on 
the road to achieving that priority. Next week we will table a 
budget in this House that will confirm the deficit for this year at 
$294 million. That means that this government, along with the 
input from the people of Saskatchewan, has reduced the annual 
projected deficit by $1 billion from the time we took office. 
 
We still believe that we must balance the annual operating 
budget. That's important — not as an end in itself but as only 
the means to moving forward to restoring confidence, thus 
allowing us to create jobs and enrich the growth of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech dwells on six main topics. I 
want to speak on but a couple of those today. 
 
Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, under the former administration, 
farmers were led to believe that all they had to do was to plant 
wheat, insure it for $127 an acre, and the government would 
keep them. 
 
Well to me that was silly to have people rewarded for not 
growing a crop or not growing what was needed by the 
government or not needed by the market-place or what the 
market-place demanded, and to do all of that at the expense of 
the taxpayer. 
 
The program that allowed this to happen was a program that 
was brought in by the previous administration in a hurry — 
after eight years in government, a plan they knew they could 
not afford, a plan that was used to bribe the farmers, because 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

farmers were told that in order to qualify for third line of 
defence payments they would have to enrol in the GRIP 
program. So they brought in a program, not to develop the 
industry, not to get farmers the greatest return from the 
market-place, but a program that was developed as an election 
ploy — an election ploy that did not work. 
 
(1230) 
 
The Minister of Agriculture, along with consultation with the 
industry, has put together a direction paper called Agriculture 
2000 — A Strategic Direction for the Future of Saskatchewan's 
Agriculture and Food Industry. This paper was designed to plan 
a strategy for the future of agriculture in Saskatchewan. It was 
put together by people who were concerned about how 
agriculture is going to evolve and develop into the future, 
people who have a stake in the future of agriculture. 
 
Over the last decades farm families have adapted to change. But 
most of the time that adaption has been in conflict with 
government programs — programs that were developed with 
politics in mind, not the agribusiness. Our government is 
committed, Mr. Speaker, to working with the stakeholders in 
the agribusiness to develop programs that will not work against 
the development of new products and crops, but will in fact 
encourage the producing of new crops, pulse crops and other 
speciality crops. 
 
The acres committed to speciality crops have increased 
sevenfold in the last 12 years. The production of cattle and hogs 
has increased to a point where livestock-related farm income in 
our province exceeds $1 billion per year. 
 
We as a government will adapt these programs and services to 
support more diversity in Saskatchewan's agricultural 
production. An agri-food equity fund will be established to 
encourage new value added agricultural businesses in 
Saskatchewan because, Mr. Speaker, we realize that we have to 
change from a province that exports the raw materials for 
someone else to process and to make the value added dollars. 
We have to change to a province that processes more of its 
produce at home, and if not processing it fully, at least adding 
some value to it by partial processing before it leaves our 
province. 
 
The example used in the throne speech is a Saskatoon-based 
biotechnology company who plans to build an $8 million 
manufacturing plant in Saskatoon. That plant will employ some 
40 people and will manufacture livestock vaccines for the 
livestock industry and export them worldwide. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to note the words: export them worldwide. 
 
A beef industry development fund will be established to 
improve products and enhance markets for the beef industry. 
Mr. Speaker, the beef industry requested that this fund be set up 
and established with cooperation of the federal government. 
This shows how our government is working in cooperation with 
the stakeholders to enhance the industry so it can develop and 
strengthen it for the future. 
 
The Saskatchewan Farm Support Review Committee was set up 
by our government to bring forth a report and recommendations 
on safety net options. This review committee consists of 12 

representatives of farm organizations, stakeholders in the 
industry, along with 19 farm members at large, again 
stakeholders in the industry. This again shows how our 
government is working in cooperation with the people of 
Saskatchewan to develop a safety net program that better 
reflects the needs of the family farm. 
 
As my colleague from Biggar has stated in his address, we now 
see the fields in rural Saskatchewan dotted with many different 
crops that would not have been grown years ago, because 
farmers know that if they are to make a profit in farming, that 
profit can't come from government programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farmers do know that the profit, if they are going 
to make it, must come from the market-place. I believe that a 
government should be there to help people help themselves. Mr. 
Speaker, a government should not be there to drag people 
along, but instead work with them to find the best road for a 
better life. Our policies in agriculture have been and will be 
developed to do simply that. 
 
The second topic I want to talk today is the reform of the health 
care system. I think everyone knows that the health system 
needed to be reformed and streamlined, but the previous 
administration either never had the courage to do it or never had 
the knowledge of how to do it. Even after the conversion of 
some 52 hospitals and the closing down of a great deal of 
acute-care beds in our province, we still have just about three 
times the average of hospitals per 100,000, as was pointed out 
by my colleague from Saskatoon Idylwyld. The national 
average is 3 per 100,000, and we still have 8 per 100,000 in 
Saskatchewan — three times the national average. 
 
I believe that putting local people, people from the communities 
involved in local district health boards — 30 of them in total — 
in charge of the administration of their local health needs is the 
correct way to go. It has always bothered me that some 
bureaucrat in Regina has made decisions about what kind of 
health care facilities would be provided in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. And I don't want to run down the 
bureaucrats, but that person may never have been in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood but is making the decisions as to what is 
best for those people — or on the other hand, some politician 
building a hospital in a town, not because of the need, but 
simply because to buy votes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just touch for a minute . . . Last year I 
went on behalf of the Minister of Health to take part in the 
opening of two hospitals in the Arm River constituency, two 
identical hospitals — nice buildings, built by the former 
administration. On those occasions I had the opportunity to talk 
to many 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard February 11, 1994 

of the people from those towns, and many of them told me in no 
uncertain terms that they did not want those hospitals. In fact, 
they realized that they could not afford them. But the member 
from that constituency did not listen to his people; instead he 
wasted taxpayers' monies to try to buy votes. Those two 
hospitals now have been converted to wellness centres. Mr. 
Speaker, what a waste of taxpayers' dollars by the past 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, district boards are now beginning the task of 
shaping the health system to meet the particular needs of their 
residents. These boards will bring forth a more coordinated, 
responsive, community-centred health system. The government 
will continue to enhance its support of the district health 
system. 
 
Changes being brought forth in this legislature to The Public 
Health Act will assist the boards in achieving that 
community-centred health system. This government, along with 
the district boards working together, we will renew our health 
system to keep it secure for our communities, for our families, 
for our children, and for our grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to spend a minute or two on the 
fiscal policy of our government. When we came to power in 
1991, we were handed a province that was on the very edge of 
bankruptcy; an enormous debt load that was left by the former 
administration, leaving the people of Saskatchewan with an 
$800 million per year interest bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I relate that to entering into a poker game, being 
dealt a terrible hand but not being able to fold — you have to 
stay and play the hand. And we are playing the hand that we 
were dealt the best that we can. We have drawn to that hand — 
still doesn't look that good — and we are going to try and make 
something out of it. We're going to try and win that pot. 
 
When those people from the former administration took over in 
1982, interest on the provincial budget was not even a budget 
line. It wasn't even recorded as an expense. Now it is the third 
largest expense that the people of Saskatchewan have to pay, 
surpassed only by health care and education. 
 
By the time, Mr. Speaker, that we bring this yearly deficit to 
zero, we will have added another $100 million of interest to 
that. That will be about $900 million per year, or over 900 per 
man, woman, and child in this province. This will be a cost that 
we will never see the end of — I know I won't. And in fact 
unless someone in this room is going to live to be over 120 
years old, none of us will see the end of it. We will never see 
the interest removed from the provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would have balanced the budget — in fact, we 
would have had a surplus in our budget last year — if it had not 
been for the interest costs. That is $900 million going out of this 
province every year — 900 million that we have to pay and 
receive nothing for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said it was leaving the province, but because of 
our introduction of Saskatchewan savings bonds two years ago, 
now because of that move by the government, some of that 
interest is now being paid to the people of Saskatchewan. It is 
staying in Saskatchewan to be used in Saskatchewan, not being 

paid to New York for their benefit. This interest will again be 
used here to enhance our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can make health care cuts, you can make 
education cuts, you can cut programs of agriculture, or any 
other cuts. You can do many of those programs to save money, 
but on the interest there is no cutting. It is the first thing. And 
most of us know that if you go to make a loan payment at the 
bank and if you can't make the entire payment, the first thing 
they take is the interest. They worry about the principal the last; 
the interest is the first to come off it. It is the same with our 
provincial budget. There is no changing the interest. It has to 
come off of there first before anything else. There's no way of 
saving on it. 
 
And I want the members and the people in the public to realize, 
just imagine what we could do with that $900 million per year 
if we had it in this province, or how many taxes we could cut if 
we didn't have to have that cost each and every year. Mr. 
Speaker, the horrendous debt was accumulated because the 
Tory administration did not have the courage or the will to 
make the tough choices in order to keep their spending in 
check. 
 
And one would have to wonder about the courage of the Liberal 
Party of Saskatchewan. One would have to wonder about their 
ability to control spending. Well we know how much courage 
the member from Shaunavon has. As soon as the heat started to 
rise, he ran. And it would appear that his main principle is to 
take the easy route, just as he did on the west coast lockout. He 
wasn't sure where he stood so he didn't even speak on the 
motion in this House. And I wonder where he's going to run to 
when he has to come to some tough decisions over there. He 
could maybe move sideways if they'll accept him, but there is 
nowhere else for him to run. 
 
Many of our people, Mr. Speaker, say that we are abandoning 
our principles as a party. Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that. The 
tradition of a socialist government is to have control of your 
finances, control so that you can make decisions that help the 
people of your province without having to answer to anyone 
except those people that you serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has stated before we do not want to 
get the debt under control because of what the banks say; we 
want to have fiscal stability so that we never have to care what 
the banks say about us again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel: — Mr. Speaker, I want to close in quoting from the 
Leader-Post of December 21, 1993, the Hon. Minister of 
Finance for Saskatchewan, and she says: 



February 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

What is happening now in Saskatchewan is we are returning the 
province to its basic traditions, which is a tradition of living 
within your means. You believe in social programs, like health 
care, but you also believe you have to afford them. 
 
She also goes on to say: 
 

If you don't make the right choices, you permanently cripple 
the province in terms of what it could provide for future 
generations. And permanently crippled in terms of your 
capacity to make independent decisions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we are on the road to recovery, on the 
road to renewal. We have taken this province from a track of 
destruction, put it back on a track of fiscal responsibility, of 
fiscal stability. Because of what the Minister of Finance says, 
we have made the right choices so that we do not permanently 
cripple this province for our future generations. Because that 
would be a crime, Mr. Speaker, if we were to pass this province 
to our generations, to our children and our grandchildren with 
them . . . no room to move except the banks of New York and 
Zürich dictating to them what they can do, when they can do it, 
and how much they can spend on it. And I do not want to be 
part of any government that would do that. 
 
That's why I think that we, as a New Democratic government, 
we have made the tough choices and we have done it not just 
for ourselves but for our future generations that come behind us, 
to allow them the ability to build their own country and their 
own province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason I will be supporting the throne 
speech. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave now to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:48 p.m. 
 
 


