




















































Hansard: March 02, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 557 

 March 2, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday 

next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Justice, February 22, 1994, 

Andrea Seale received salary increase from $3,950 per month 

to $4,454 per month: (a) why was Andrea Seale given this 

salary increase; (b) why was Ms. Seale's salary increase 

retroactive approximately one and a half years to September 

1,'92; (c) what is the total amount of retroactive pay that Ms. 

Seale will receive; (d) where is Ms. Seale located and what is 

the title of the position; and (e) what are Ms. Seale's 

qualifications for this position? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to introduce to you and all members of the Legislative 

Assembly the general secretary for the Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation, Mr. Fred Herron.  I would like to welcome Fred to 

the legislature and hope he enjoys this afternoon's proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

High School Curriculum 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to be able to bring forward the first question in the 

third series of questions phoned or faxed or written into us by 

the general public.  We've had a very good response to this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier comes from Gary 

Hyland of Moose Jaw.  Mr. Premier, I want to know if it is the 

intention of the Department of Education to follow the 

recommendations of the High School Review Advisory 

Committee to slash high school English credit requirements by 

33 per cent against the advice of the province's English teachers 

and at a time when illiteracy is becoming a costly and 

burdensome problem for society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for raising Mr. Hyland's question in the legislature.  As 

all members will know the High School Review Committee has 

just tabled its report with the minister, and it was released about 

two weeks ago, indicating the high school review's position on 

what a high school curriculum should look like in the province 

of Saskatchewan going into the next century. 

We have indicated to the public that we will be responding to 

the high school review by the end of March and we will 

respond in a forthright manner because our curriculum has not 

been changed in high school for some 20 years.  So I want to 

assure Mr. Hyland that we will obviously take into 

consideration the recommendations of the High School 

Advisory Committee, but obviously we are interested in what 

other members of the public have to say about that report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Boards' Expenses 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is also a question from a constituent out in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this question comes from Claude Peel of 

Brownlee.  Mr. Premier, I want to know who set the rate of pay 

for those people handed jobs on the new health boards.  These 

people are paid $155 per day and the chairman is paid $235 per 

day.  You're supposed to be saving money with your cuts but 

these appointments don't much look like that.  I've sat on 

boards and committees in my day and we did it for our 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Health I'll take notice of that question. 

 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Elimination 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a question from one of 

our constituents and this is from Prince Albert.  This comes 

from a man by the name of Clifford Swenson. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to know why you took the pension plan 

away from mothers who choose to stay at home to raise their 

families.  These people do not demand assistance from the 

government for child care and hence are not a burden to the 

taxpayer.  On the other hand you have introduced gambling 

into the province.  Mr. Premier, where are your priorities?  

How can you do this to us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

member's question, I think as a member of the former 

administration who for 10 years watched the unbridled 

expansion of gaming and at the same time did little to control 

internal government expenditures, built year after year deficits 

that were unparalleled not only in this province but I suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, in this country, the member should know full well 

why this government has had to restrain the costs and its 

expenditures. 

 

So I suggest that the member look at what he did in the 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

past 10 years and in that regard he will be able to send to Mr. 

Swenson an answer as to why the debt was incurred, why this 

administration has cut back on expenditures, and why we are 

trying to achieve a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Alcohol Advertising 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier comes from Alvin Vinge from Outlook, who asks:  Mr. 

Premier, I want to know when the current government will 

reverse the authorization for beer and wine advertising 

implemented by the official opposition -- that's us -- when they 

were in power.  And will the official opposition be requested to 

support such a move? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in the letter that the 

members of the opposition will send in response to this 

question, they want to apologize for the mistake that they 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest that there is no way you can put 

boundaries around this province at a time when trade barriers 

are coming down, when communications are expanding.  

American television is prevalent within this province; it carries 

liquor and wine advertisements.  I think it would be foolhardy 

to suggest that we can stop the advertisement of alcohol 

products in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Budget Effects on Farmers 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On another vein, I 

wish to bring information to the Assembly this afternoon 

which, if confirmed, will have dire consequences, Mr. Speaker, 

for farm families and small businesses in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our federal government brought down a budget 

which had very little if anything to do with agriculture, at least 

so it seems.  What was not announced, Mr. Speaker, was a tiny 

little change which is outlined in a document called Tax 

Measures: Supplementary Information.  That change 

outlines the way the federal government handles any debt 

write-offs that farmers and small businesses may be able to 

negotiate with their banker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just when farmers are given a hand up by 

agreement with their banker or FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) 

or ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), I 

understand that the federal government intends to consider that 

write-off as taxable income. 

 

My question is either to the Minister of Finance or the Minister 

of Agriculture, and I sincerely hope that both of them are aware 

of this information.  Can you tell us how many Saskatchewan 

farmers are in a position to be affected by this new tax? And 

what submissions in opposition to this grab have you brought 

to the federal 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, what the members opposite are saying to us is of great 

concern to us, not entirely surprising.  One thing that did 

surprise me about the Liberals' budget was farmers were simply 

not mentioned in it.  And it was surprising because Atlantic 

fishermen were mentioned, quite rightly, in the budget.  So we 

share your concern.  We can get you the numbers as to what 

exactly would occur and who would be affected. 

 

But I have also said outside this House, if you look at the 

wording of the federal Liberal minister's statement, I do not 

believe that the capital gains exemption for farmers is secure.  

It is to be reviewed.  So there is another issue which we will 

have to cooperate on to force the Liberal government to leave 

the capital gains exemption intact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm getting a distinct feeling here, Mr. 

Speaker, that although I agree with some of her comments, that 

the minister probably does not know exactly what I am talking 

about.  So perhaps the Minister of Agriculture would be able to 

pick up. 

 

Mr. Minister, on page 37 of that document it states that section 

80 of the federal income tax will be changed so that debt 

write-off will effectively become taxable.  That affects forgiven 

loans from banks, credit unions, Farm Credit, Saskatchewan 

ACS, and so on. 

 

This change, I submit to you, represents a significant blow to 

the families in Saskatchewan and just when they are going to 

be restructuring their debt, just as they're getting back on their 

feet. 

 

On behalf of those families, Mr. Minister, and on behalf of all 

people in Saskatchewan who depend on a strong agricultural 

industry for their livelihoods, I ask you to immediately 

investigate this matter and report to this House how many 

farms will be affected, Madam Minister, how many small 

businesses will be affected, and how much federal tax will be 

generated; and what you are prepared to do to counter this 

blatant and backward tax grab by the federal Liberal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 

hon. member for raising that issue.  We certainly will be 

investigating.  As I understand the tax Act -- and I'm not the tax 

expert and certainly don't have all the numbers with me here 

today; we can get those numbers -- this has always been 

taxable.  They have to, as have we as a provincial government, 

passed orders in council in order to rebate those taxes, which 

we have done to a good number. 

 

Now if there's changes to that which makes it even tougher on 

our farmers, we certainly will be protesting 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

that.  I think they will collect little money.  I think it would be 

very detrimental to farmers who go through and into our 

six-year leaseback and other programs who certainly do not 

have any cash left over to pay taxes with, and it could be the 

final blow if indeed this has made it any more detrimental than 

it already was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, one initial question.  How much 

is the provincial government going to be gaining by this tax 

grab?  Are you going to gain your . . . and grab your 55 per cent 

on this as well?  That's one question, Mr. Minister. 

 

But to clarify for you, Mr. Minister, if a farmer or a 

businessman owes $100,000, the banking institution forgives 

50,000, that means that there's $50,000 now potentially as 

taxable income after the capital allowance deductions have 

occurred.  I grant you that, and that could vary from place to 

place. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, that's what we're talking about here.  

Saskatchewan families cannot stand another hit like this.  

They've been getting hit by the provincial government, by you 

folks, for too long, and now they have the federal government 

joining in on the fray.  Neither can small business take a hit like 

this along with farmers. 

 

Now it's my understanding that these changes will also affect 

write-offs in businesses -- all the businesses across the 

province -- at a time when job creation and economic 

development is at an all-time low, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the Minister of Economic Development and the Premier 

to lend their voices in opposition to this tax and to report to this 

Assembly what effect it will have, not only on farmers but on 

small business in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I understand what the 

member opposite is saying, but what I want to say to the 

member opposite is: let's first of all find out the facts.  When 

we were advised of changes in the budget, we were not advised 

of any changes in terms of the income tax status of write-offs. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's in the supplementary. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Okay, but we were advised of any 

changes which would affect Saskatchewan and this was not in 

the information given to us.  So we will first of all establish the 

facts.  Did they just omit to tell us, or is there a problem with 

the information coming from that side?  So we will establish 

the facts. 

 

If there is something that is done that is prejudicial to the 

interests of farmers, we will be very vocal in ensuring that we 

can do what is possible to get that changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Health Services in Climax 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

this question is for the Minister of Health, or Associate 

Minister of Health.  The Rural Health Coalition recently came 

to an agreement with your Department of Health.  Both groups 

agree on a common goal of ensuring a safe level of quality care 

throughout the province.  They agreed that provision of 

essential emergency services is a priority concern for residents 

of rural Saskatchewan and these services should be provided by 

professionals 24 hours a day.  They also agreed to provide 

stabilization facilities including labs and X-ray, as well as 

observation and assessment beds, and long-term care services. 

 

To the minister: will you confirm you agree with the statement 

of principles arrived at by your department and the Rural 

Health Coalition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice of that 

question and get an answer for him tomorrow. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary 

question to the Health minister or nearest relative.  Mr. 

Speaker, whether the minister agrees or not -- she signed the 

agreement, so we can only assume that she does support 

this -- a meeting in Climax last night was filled to capacity with 

only one day's notice.  Those attending wanted their health care 

services replaced.  To the minister:  how do you justify cutting 

funding to this unique area when the people only wish to have 

their health care services upheld as per your own statement of 

principles you agreed to with other communities in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, while taking notice of 

the previous question, we'll also get an answer for that. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister opposite who is 

not attempting to answer the questions is very familiar . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think that the member 

knows full well the minister took notice of the question and 

he's not to comment on it.  If he's got another question, he can 

ask it. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite does 

know that area very well . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member has a question, he can 

ask his question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the Minister 

of Health: the people of Climax get a tax allowance from the 

federal government for living in an isolated community.  It is 

just like the northern tax allowance provided for those in 

isolated communities in the North. 

 

To the minister:  if the federal government recognizes that this 

is a unique community, why can't you, and stop risking the 

lives of its residents by taking away 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

essential health care services in their area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice of that 

as well. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, if there is a clear message I 

bring you today from the people of Climax, it is they need to 

have their health care services restored. 

 

Madam Minister, I have here several pages of names requesting 

that you do so, and I would like to table them now.  I will 

provide you with them if you'd . . . 

 

Will you now admit you were wrong, acted without 

compassion, and replace the health care services these people 

require to live in this unique community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll take notice of that 

question as well.  In noticing the member has them all written 

out, if he would send me the written questions I would . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The minister has taken notice. 

 

SaskPower Office Closures 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, we just learned that your government has struck 

another blow against rural Saskatchewan.  You and your 

department will be eliminating a number of SaskPower district 

offices and closing a number of customer service centres on 

March 31. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many offices will be closed, and how many 

jobs will be lost in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my understanding is 

that SaskPower is working on a program of reorganization of 

the Power Corporation in rural Saskatchewan.  I want to make 

it clear to the member opposite, who was not around while the 

previous administration started out on the rural underground 

program which meant burying hundreds of miles of power 

lines, which means you need fewer people in rural 

Saskatchewan to take care of power lines, this strategy was 

worked out by the previous members, the member from 

Thunder Creek and other constituencies, while they sat at the 

cabinet table.  The number of jobs that will be directly affected 

when you exclude early retirement, I believe, are 23. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister.  Among 

the 18 districts you are eliminating are:  Avonlea, Foam Lake, 

Herbert, Ponteix, Hodgeville, Lake Alma, Ogema, Lampman, 

Montmartre, Norquay, Rockglen, Wawota, and Uranium City. 

 

Mr. Minister, are there any other district offices that you plan to 

eliminate?  Which other offices will be closed?  Are there any 

more job losses directly 

associated with this?  What is being done in rural communities 

to replace the hundreds of jobs that have been lost due to this 

and other destructive policies of your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, just to correct the 

member who tends to exaggerate drastically, there are not 

hundreds of jobs.  I mentioned 23.  But I want to say to him 

that the reorganization that is going on and under consideration 

by SaskPower at this point in time is not complete.  As the 

program is fully fleshed out, there will be appropriate 

announcements made.  At this point in time I can tell you that 

the reorganization is taking place.  There is consultation going 

on with communities and the full dimension of the 

reorganization will be announced in due course. 

 

MLA Travel Expenses 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Recently the official 

opposition submitted a written question regarding the travels of 

three government back-bench MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly).  And the Government House Leader 

decided to forward those questions to the place where answers 

go to die, in other words returns (debatable).  So I would put 

this question directly to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Minister, the 1992-93 Public Accounts document reports 

that, and, Mr. Speaker, I quote: under minister's travel, Ron 

Harper, $1,274; Eric Upshall, $259; and Grant Whitmore, 

$783. 

 

Mr. Minister, please provide details with respect to the date of 

travel, the destination, the mode of transportation and 

accommodation, the purpose of the trips including itineraries 

and meetings scheduled, and a reason why you were unable to 

serve these functions. 

 

To that end, I would ask you to provide information with 

respect to that type of question.  And, Mr. Minister, unlike your 

House Leader, will you provide that information for us today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously the answers 

will be forthcoming.  These are obvious questions for 

estimates. 

 

But I would like to say this to the member opposite.  When it 

comes to MLAs travelling at government expense, the member 

from Thunder Creek who went to Hong Kong at taxpayers' 

expense while an MLA -- not as a cabinet minister but as an 

MLA -- travelling to Hong Kong, to which many people in the 

province were very, very suspicious as to what he was doing 

there, it's hardly the role of that group of people in opposition 

to be questioning members of this government who travel to 

rural communities to do government business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, any government that wants to be 

forthright and open and honest with the public, as you claim to 

be, would answer that 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

question very readily.  Because there was nothing untoward in 

our asking and wanting to know why these people were paid 

the money.  And we expected you to answer that forthrightly 

when the opportunity arose. 

 

You decided that you were going to hide that, not come 

forward with the information.  So we're asking you now, either 

you answer the question the way we're asking it or you answer 

to the media and to the public.  You have it your way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say again, obviously 

we will be answering the questions, but obviously these 

questions about a hundred dollars here or a hundred dollars 

there are appropriately answered in estimates, and they will be 

answered.  I've made a commitment to answer it. 

 

But I can tell you one thing, that the thousands and thousands 

of dollars that were spent by MLAs of the Conservative 

government to travel out of country, i.e., the member from 

Thunder Creek, should be very careful in the kind of questions 

he asks, and not to be so sanctimonious about members of a 

government who travel in rural Saskatchewan to work with 

farmers in rural communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-Fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, there's a great deal of speculation 

lately that SGI is considering implementing no-fault insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell us, is it your intention to introduce 

no-fault insurance to Saskatchewan and if so, how exactly will 

your system of no-fault insurance work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'd like to respond to the member.  No 

decision has been made at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

is it your intention to create a system where the right to take 

legal action is taken away by the government just like you did 

with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program)?  If so, how can 

you justify taking away one of the most fundamental rights in 

our society, access to our court system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In case the member didn't hear last time, 

we'll make it very clear the decision has not been made yet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, can you at 

least give some assurance to the people of Saskatchewan that 

that will not take place?  Otherwise they are going to assume 

that it is indeed going to be 

the effect. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well one of the things I can assure you is 

this.  When you were in government you spent about a million 

dollars on privatization.  We wouldn't be spending that type of 

money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, if you take 

away the right to go to court as the final recourse in settling 

insurance disputes, you will be turning the fate of many 

Saskatchewan residents over to you and your army of SGI 

bureaucrats. 

 

And that's a pretty disturbing thought, Mr. Minister, when you 

look at the way you and your bureaucrats handled the issue I 

raised yesterday concerning Mr. Vern Klein.  The minister 

referred that issue to the assistant vice-president; the assistant 

vice-president referred it to the communications director; and 

the communications director was unavailable for comment. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to start taking some 

responsibility for the Crown corporation you are supposed to be 

the minister of?  And how can Saskatchewan people have any 

faith at all in the ability of SGI adjusters to provide a fair and 

final . . . fair resolution of insurance claims, when the minister 

himself doesn't seem to have a clue what's going on in SGI? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- For the third and final time, no decision 

has been made.  But I might say again that you spent a million 

dollars in regards to the privatization strategy, and all we got 

was a little symbol, you know, out of it.  It was a symbol of big 

expenditures by the government of the day at that time and it 

didn't amount to anything. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I have a statement to 

make in regards to a point of order that was raised on February 

28th.  On February 28, 1994 a point of order was raised by the 

Opposition House Leader respecting the form of petitions and 

the grounds on which they can be found to be irregular. 

 

The right of petitioning parliament for the redress of grievances 

is an ancient right and has been part of our rules and practice 

since the beginning of representative institutions in the 

province.  Petitions in this Legislative Assembly are governed 

by rule 11 in our Rules and Procedures and by the practice of 

this Assembly and by that of the House of Commons of 

Canada. 

 

The basic requirements for a petition are: that it be addressed to 

the Legislative Assembly; that it express the subject matter of 

the request in temperate 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

language; and that it conclude with a prayer.  The wording of 

the form of petition is formal. 

 

(1430) 

 

The member from Rosthern had concerns about how the public 

was to know what the requirements are for a proper petition.  

The rules respecting petitions and information on obtaining a 

copy of the form of petition are advertised monthly in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette.  Copies of the form of the petition are 

also available on request from the Clerk's office.  For the 

information of members and their constituents, I have asked 

that copies of the form of petition be distributed to each 

member and to constituency offices. 

 

The petitions which gave rise to the point of order were 

reviewed in accordance with rule 11(7) and were found to be 

irregular because the petition was not addressed to the 

Legislative Assembly, did not contain a prayer and further, was 

not the original document but a photocopy. 

 

Should members continue to have concerns about the formality 

of the rules and practices regarding petitions, this matter could 

be raised for consideration by the Special Committee on Rules 

and Procedures. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like leave before orders of the 

day to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I'd like to 

introduce a gentlemen in the Speaker's gallery, a former 

member of this Assembly who served from 1964 to 1965 in the 

Ross Thatcher government. Mr. Tom Weatherald served the 

constituency of Souris-Cannington and I'd like to ask . . . or 

Cannington, I guess it was, of the day.  I'd like to ask members 

to greet the member. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I would like 

to move a motion that would allow for a member to travel out 

of the province. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence to Attend Seminar at Westminster 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

members opposite giving leave for a member to travel out of 

province, but I would move that by leave: 

 

That leave of absence be granted to the hon. member from 

Humboldt from Monday, March 7, 1994 to Friday, March 18, 

1994 to attend the 43rd seminar on parliamentary practice 

and 

procedures at Westminster on behalf of this Assembly. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Regina Churchill 

Downs. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Would the member for Saskatoon 

Wildwood please come to order. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:33 p.m. until 2:42 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Members should be in their place by 

now when the division vote is taken.  I want to just 

remind -- and this does not pertain to all members, but certain 

members just don't seem to have acquired the knowledge of the 

rules that you, yourselves, have adopted in this 

Assembly -- that when we are awaiting the vote to be taken on 

division, decorum should still be maintained in this House, not 

to the same extent as we do when we carry on the business, but 

we really would appreciate that if some members had a little 

more respect for the rules that you yourselves have set for this 

Assembly.  So I ask members to please keep this in mind in the 

future. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Van Mulligen Trew 

Thompson Draper 

Wiens Serby 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Teichrob Cline 

Johnson Scott 

Goulet Crofford 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Carson Kluz 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall Jess 

Hagel Langford 

Bradley Swenson 

Koenker Neudorf 

Lorje Boyd 

Pringle Toth 

Lautermilch Britton 

Renaud D'Autremont 

Murray Goohsen 

-- 48 

Nays 

-- Nil 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of Bill 18, which is to amend The Meewasin 

Valley Authority Act.  This Bill implements a number of 

budget-related decisions arising from the 1993-94 statutory 

funding reductions and establishes a 1994-95 statutory funding 

level for the Authority. 

 

As a result of budget constraints, the Meewasin Valley 

Authority Board has requested that their Act be amended by 

reducing the number of statutory committees.  They have asked 

that two of their statutory committees be consolidated and 

replaced.  The planning and development and the engineering 

advisory committees are to be replaced by a single 

development review committee.  This will reduce operational 

costs and streamline the Authority's review process. 

 

This Bill also establishes the statutory funding for the 

Meewasin Valley Authority.  The city of Saskatoon, the 

University of Saskatchewan, and the province all contribute to 

the Authority's budget.  For 1994-95 this funding will be 

maintained at the 1993-94 level.  This amendment suspends the 

statutory formula for another year.  This should not have a 

significant impact on the operations of the Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as we have done in the past and 

would like to continue the process of reviewing the Bill after 

it's fully introduced and the second reading has been given by 

the minister, as he's just indicated to us, and we'd like to take 

the time to do some research and follow up with any third-party 

interest groups that are out there who might be directly affected 

or concerned regarding this Bill, and therefore at this time I 

would move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to move second reading of a Bill, The Wascana Centre 

Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill maintains the statutory funding for the 

1994-1995 fiscal year at the same level as that of the last fiscal 

year; that is, there will be no reduction from the funding that 

was available for the centre last year. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, remains 

committed to the Wascana Centre.  We have all taken great 

pride in the centre over the years.  It has attracted people of all 

ages for a variety of reasons, from Regina and all over the 

province and from other areas of Canada. 

 

Some are the naturalists, the environmentalists who enjoy 

bird-watching, the royal museum, etc., while others are seeking 

recreational pursuits such as tennis, 

canoeing, and skating.  There are historians and students who 

find their interest in the Legislative Building and the 

Diefenbaker homestead.  Other students are particularly 

enthused with the science centre. 

 

The Wascana Centre has also been host to a number of family 

activities.  July 1, Buffalo Days, now the Chinese dragon boat 

races, and other events.  In addition, there are people employed 

and educated within the centre.  On almost any given day, you 

can see the whole range of people enjoying the centre 

harmoniously. 

 

Wascana Centre has truly been a success.  It offers something 

for everyone and is an idea which is the envy of many other 

cities across Canada.  This was evidenced recently at a 

conference of capital cities of Canada which took place in 

Ottawa.  The purpose of their meeting was to seek solutions to 

the specific problems facing capital cities.  They concluded that 

the key element required is cooperation between the provincial 

and municipal governments as well as other agencies involved 

in the capital. 

 

Once again, Saskatchewan leads the way.  We have an 

excellent model of cooperation in the Wascana Centre 

Authority.  Much interest was expressed in the Authority and 

its operation.  In fact the next meeting of this group will occur 

here in Regina. 

 

The Wascana Centre is important, not only to the residents of 

Regina but to all people of Saskatchewan, because it is the seat 

of government.  It is with a sense of pride and the realization of 

the value of the programs and services that we continue to 

support the purpose and role of the Wascana Centre Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with my colleagues in 

partnership -- the city, the university and the Authority.  Much 

has been accomplished over the past 32 years and we look 

forward to an exciting future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with that in mind that I move second reading 

of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

respond and make a short response to the Bill that's been laid 

before this Assembly by the Government House Leader, I 

guess there's a couple things of interest.  And number one, I 

think both the Meewasin Valley Authority and the Wascana 

Centre Authority are pleased that their funding hasn't been 

reduced any more.  We're both more than pleased to have it at 

the '93-94 levels, although it would seem to me they would, 

like everyone else, would feel that it would have been 

appropriate to have some increases, and it's quite possible that 

Meewasin Valley may even see some increases as they look at 

other means of finding funding to run the Meewasin Valley 

Authority. 

 

I think the major concern that we have here is the fact that 

Wascana Centre, even though it sits in the city of Regina, it 

surrounds this Legislative Assembly, certainly people across 

this province come and take 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

advantage of it.  The citizens of Regina certainly enjoy the 

beautiful scenery around this Wascana Centre Authority. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, with the daylight that we have such as 

today and as we get closer to spring and the grass starts to 

grow, we'll see families and men and women of all ages, 

children, taking advantage of the beautiful weather, picnicking 

in Wascana Centre. 

 

But I think the major concern when you look at the two centres 

is the fact that Wascana Centre receives a significant amount of 

money from the provincial government that Meewasin Valley 

Centre Authority doesn't receive.  I think if there's a concern 

between the two groups, it's the fact that there is more money 

and I would think the members from Saskatoon will be arguing 

for a little more money into their facility as well, because of the 

fact that they are facilities that are utilized by people from all 

parts of the province. 

 

For that fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it would be 

appropriate at this time, as well, to just review the Bill a little 

more in depth and therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- At the end of my remarks, I would like to 

move second reading of Bill No. 20, An Act to amend The 

Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

The urban Act is a major piece of legislation setting out the 

powers and duties of cities, towns, villages and resort villages.  

Each year, there are numerous requests for amendments from 

municipalities, interest groups, and the public. 

 

Updating the Act ensures that it meets the needs of all 

interested people.  I would like to comment on the key 

provisions of the Bill.  The main areas dealt with are: parking 

enforcement, petitions, assessment, and the administrative 

updating. 

 

An amendment in this Bill responds to a SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) task force request to 

improve ways of enforcing parking fines.  Each year, cities lose 

significant sums of revenue because parking tickets are not 

paid.  This Bill includes measures that encourage payment of 

tickets.  It provides that a vehicle with multiple ticketing 

offences registered against it may be impounded by the 

municipality until the owner pays the fines required.  This 

amendment provides an effective and less costly means of 

enforcing outstanding parking fines.  The need for a more 

effective enforcement was reaffirmed at the 1994 SUMA 

convention. 

 

A further amendment dealing with parking will allow 

municipalities to, by by-law, provide for the removal of 

vehicles parked without authorization on private property.  

Currently there is only authority to ticket such illegally parked 

vehicles.  This will allow a 

municipality to have such vehicles towed if the council chooses 

to pass an appropriate by-law. 

 

Several provisions clarify the rules and procedures for petitions 

to councils and binding votes on by-laws.  This includes criteria 

for evaluating when petitions are valid.  Clearer rules for 

establishing the validity of petitions had been requested by 

municipal administrators and clerks.  A new provision will 

provide that a plebiscite need not be held on a matter provided 

the council passes a by-law as requested by the petition.  This 

Bill also allows a council to amend or repeal a by-law that was 

petitioned for after a period of three years. 

 

A few amendments deal with assessment and the appeal 

process in particular.  One provision responds to a request from 

cities and the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency 

to limit the use of a particular appraisal method, the income 

approach, for assessment appeals until they are able to prepare 

for its use.  This provision applies for a limited period of time.  

Some municipalities would prefer to see this appraisal 

approach eliminated entirely by rewriting property assessment 

rules.  This would have a permanent impact on the business 

community, which the government is not willing to support. 

 

Other assessment provisions include the following:  allowing 

an extra week's notice to appellants of their hearings before the 

Assessment Appeals Committee of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board; allowing for notice of outstanding 

assessment appeals to be placed on tax certificates; clarifying 

that the Assessment Appeals Committee of the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board can raise as well as reduce or retain the 

assessment value of a property after it has heard an appeal. 

 

Administrative updating provisions in the Bill were requested 

by municipal administrators.  The Act is updated in several 

places to accommodate electronic financial transactions such as 

electronic transfer of funds.  Currently the Act has some 

requirements that cannot be met if transactions are done by 

computer. 

 

Other administrative amendments include no longer prescribing 

the manner in which signatures on cheques are reproduced, 

allowing municipal clerks to enter into agreements on behalf of 

councils for routine administrative matters, and no longer 

requiring the minister's approval of the format for urban 

municipalities' bank deposits.  As indicated, the provisions in 

this Bill respond to a number of requests from SUMA, 

municipalities, and the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support me in this Bill; take 

steps to make urban governments in this province more 

effective.  Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as the 

minister indicated, the Act is updating the current Act and 

bringing it in line with some of the requests that have been 

coming from, the minister indicated, 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 565 

towns and villages and cities across this province. 

 

When I hear the minister talking about parking enforcement, it 

would sound to me like that was an issue that is more pertinent 

to large centres like the Saskatoons and the Reginas and, I'm 

not sure, maybe some of the smaller centres. 

 

What I see in it, inasmuch as the cities are looking at a way of 

trying to curb the ongoing problem of trying to follow up with 

people on outstanding traffic violations, especially parking 

violations, at the same time I can see that it in a lot of cases will 

be a significant revenue generator to most cities.  And I think 

the taxpayers of the cities, although they're looking for a more 

efficient way of following up and making sure that people are 

paying their fines, probably on the other hand would also like 

to see that maybe if we're cutting down on some of the other 

services or the need for some of those services, that that should 

be passed on to us. 

 

(1500) 

 

There was another thing about parking in the automatic 

tow-away.  I think there should be . . . one of the things that 

should be very clear in that is that there is very clear signage.  

Because I think for people who are not familiar with most of 

our two larger cities or don't spend a lot of time and are . . . can 

drive in and are just looking for some place to park for, say, a 

10- or 15-minute stop, and quickly pull up and may not read the 

signage very clearly, it could be very frustrating to have to run 

into a store and then come out and find that their vehicle's been 

towed away. 

 

So I think it should be . . . there should be something that is 

clear, that has clear signage, so that it just doesn't allow 

tow-away of vehicles simply because they have infringed on a 

no-parking area or overstayed their time in a parking area. 

 

I think as well there should be sufficient notice sent out 

regarding assessment and be very clear on that. That's another 

area.  And the minister laid out some guidelines that they are 

bringing forward, and I think the cities have brought forward, 

as suggestions regarding assessments and appeal of assessment 

notices. 

 

And those are some of the questions, Mr. Minister, that I think 

will and have been raised with us and through us.  And we 

want to do a little more research on them before we get into 

further discussion on the Bill before us as well as getting into 

committee.  And some of those questions certainly we look 

forward to raising with the minister as we get into committee. 

 

However at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to Amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I 

will be moving second reading of Bill No. 21, An Act to amend 

The Rural Municipality Act, 1989. 

 

The rural Act, Mr. Speaker, is a major piece of legislation 

governing Saskatchewan's 299 rural municipalities.  This 

statute is sometimes referred to as a constitution of rural 

municipal government.  Traditionally it is amended every year 

or two to keep pace with changing times and requests from 

rural councils and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. 

 

This year's amendments, Mr. Speaker, are not as wide-ranging 

as was in the case of 1989 when the statute had a major 

overhaul.  Nevertheless this Bill contains some important 

advances to assist elected rural councils and the rural residents 

of Saskatchewan.  Let me mention a few of the key 

amendments. 

 

First are provisions adjusting the relationship between 

organized hamlets and the rural municipality.  This is done by 

giving organized hamlets of a certain size the option of 

becoming a division within the rural municipality with its own 

representation on the RM (rural municipality) council. 

 

Hamlets in the rural councils are given more flexibility in 

negotiating hamlet financial arrangements.  For example, the 

council and the hamlet board may be able to negotiate 

agreements whereby an organized hamlet may be able to 

deliver limited services to its own residents. 

 

We feel this reform will give rural residents, particularly those 

in resort areas, a more attractive option to remain part of rural 

municipalities, yet preserving their community's identity and 

purpose.  It provides an entirely voluntary alternative to the 

proliferation of small villages, particularly resort villages, 

which may not be viable in the long haul.  It will also make it 

easier for small villages which are not viable to move back into 

rural municipalities.  Generally, this Act broadens a range of 

options for rural residents in terms of the type of governance 

they want for their own small communities. 

 

A second key provision in this Bill permits rural public utility 

boards to borrow funds to establish water distribution systems 

for rural residents who are not now served by running water.  

These utility boards are voluntary associations of rural people 

who are using water network technology to supply 

much-needed water to often widely dispersed farms.  The only 

practical way they can finance their operation is to borrow 

initially and recoup the cost of the work over a period of time.  

We have included financial checks and balances in this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that borrowing by public utility boards 

is done in the most responsible manner possible. 

 

A third key feature of this Bill is the new authority for rural 

municipalities to provide fire protection and emergency 

response services.  These amendments are 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

needed to complement the new Fire Prevention Act that was 

passed two years ago.  They permit municipalities to issue fire 

prevention orders and to supply emergency response services.  

They also make it easier for RMs to enter into cooperative 

arrangements with urban municipalities and Indian reserves to 

provide joint fire protection.  Similar amendments have already 

been made in The Urban Municipality Act. 

 

In addition, in this Bill conflict of interest provisions have been 

clarified and strengthened.  Assessment appeal procedures have 

been updated and more authority has been provided to rural 

municipalities to collect taxes owing on buildings situated on 

property owned by another person. 

 

This Bill contains the government's commitment to foster 

effective rural local government.  It has been reviewed in detail 

with SARM's (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) board of directors before its introduction in this 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 21, A Bill to 

amend The Rural Municipalities Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I certainly 

don't want to belabour the issue as the member from Churchill 

Downs is asking me.  But I would suggest that as an opposition 

member it's certainly the responsibility of opposition members 

to at least take some time to review the Bills.  And I've listened 

very carefully to what the minister has mentioned to some of 

the changes and it would sound to me that some of the changes 

and recommendations that are coming forward in this Bill are 

certainly a number of the concerns that were with council and 

raised on council when I was on council, and one of the areas is 

fire prevention. 

 

I know it's difficult at times for RMs and towns and different 

municipalities and hamlets trying to come to a consensus as to 

how they provide and especially provide the funding and the 

different formats.  And as we look into the Bill we'll get a 

better understanding. 

 

But it appears to me that there are formats that are being 

brought forward in this Bill that will make it a little more easier 

for the towns, local towns and RMs, to find ways and means of 

arriving at workable agreements and solutions to some of the 

areas where they work together and cooperate.  And so we 

appreciate that. 

 

And before I just stand here and say we're going to move 

through committee and pass the Bill later this day, Mr. Speaker, 

I think maybe we should take the time to review it a little closer 

and so therefore I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 9 -- An Act 

to repeal The Agriculture Development Fund Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is nice to be able 

to rise to discuss such an important issue with the members 

opposite and to once again have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

to try to convince the Minister of Agriculture just how 

important these programs have been in the past and how 

important it would have been for him to keep this program 

either in place or to bring about some new vehicle to provide 

the same kinds of services to the agricultural community that 

we are seeing lost by this Bill taking out the agricultural 

diversification fund. 

 

The fund, Mr. Speaker, was so important to agriculture because 

it provided that very nucleus of activity that the government 

now espouses to want to have as its number one priority in 

agriculture, and that being diversification. 

 

I put simply the question this way, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 

of Agriculture:  how do you plan to diversify agriculture if you 

have nobody working on the research and the development and 

the planning of new ideas? 

 

When a farmer or an industrialist or a marketer comes up with 

an idea, who would finance that idea?  Who possibly could 

have the money or the ability to go out and find scientists to 

develop a program in the agricultural community. 

 

There are no farmers that have that kind of money available, 

Mr. Speaker.  And of course I'm sure that somebody will find 

some rich farmer that inherited some money or won a 649 just 

to prove me wrong.  But there would be an exception, I'm quite 

sure.  But in general practice, farmers simply don't have that 

kind of cash around, and while they have the innovative ability 

to see projects that can be done and need to be done, they don't 

often have what it takes to put those into practice. 

 

And that's what we're losing with this Agriculture Development 

Fund being lost.  We're losing that ability to have that building 

block there in place, where a person with a good idea can go to 

that office and say, here's my idea, help me to develop it. I want 

to grow a new kind of potatoes, or I think I can invent a new 

kind of fish tank that will keep oxygen in the water without 

expensive pumps, or something new and totally innovative. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture needs to consider 

this.  He needs to consider what he is throwing away when he 

dissolves this important program. 

 

And then there's the question, Mr. Speaker, that was brought to 

my attention by some of my constituents.  The question of 

where did the allocated money from 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

last year go and why did $10 million seem to have 

disappeared?  We want to know why that money didn't go into 

agricultural programs, and because it didn't show up that it 

went into agricultural programs, then where is it?  What was it 

used for?  Whose pocket got lined?  That's what one guy out 

there asked me.  And that's the kind of impression that we get 

when money disappears from an account and has not an 

obvious place where it has showed up. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I put it to the Minister of Agriculture, that for 

the sake of all people involved in the political process, show 

the public where you put these monies, show the public what 

you've done with your program, and bring back some kind of a 

building program so that in fact we can truly see diversification 

in agriculture become a reality, a reality that is necessary. 

 

There's absolutely no one involved in our industry that will 

deny the fact that we have to diversify; that we have to do that 

by going out into the world to find markets.  We have to find 

things that people want to have out in the market-place and 

then we have to come back to the drawing table and learn how 

to produce or how to build it or how to manufacture and supply 

that good or product. 

 

If we don't do it that way, if we don't go out and find markets 

for what we think we have ideas for, then there's no object in 

making it.  What object would there be, Mr. Speaker, for me to 

go back to the old buggy-whip story?  What object would there 

be for me to make a warehouse full of buggy whips in this day 

and age, if I didn't know somebody that had some horses that 

they wanted to whip around? 

 

And I say the same thing with agricultural diversification.  

There's no object in us going into the production of some kind 

of new spices or herbs if we don't have a market for them.  And 

so we need this vehicle, or something like it, and I'm asking the 

minister if he would reconsider his position and go back to the 

drawing board. 

 

And having said all of those things, Mr. Speaker, I think my 

colleagues have indicated that they want to throw something 

into this argument and this debate, and as soon as they get their 

notes in order I'm going to let them take over. 

 

In the meantime, they did want me to explain how people 

manage to end up growing fish in granaries in Saskatchewan 

through the agricultural diversification fund.  It's quite a story, 

Mr. Speaker, but it is a real fact of life.  It has happened and it 

did work reasonably well, and of course the obvious answer 

was that they put tanks in the granaries; the granaries were used 

for shelter. 

 

An innovative farmer discovered that when he put fish into his 

dugout, the birds of prey decided to eat all of his fish.  The 

mink and animals of prey decided they wanted to have lunch 

off of the fish.  Everything in nature seemed to go against this 

fellow.  And then it got hot in July, the oxygen level went 

down in the water, 

and of course the fish died there as well.  So, he thought, there's 

got to be a way around this.  If we can put the fish in a tank in a 

granary, then we can stop the birds of prey from coming in 

from the air, the animals won't be able to get through the walls, 

and we can control the temperature and the oxygen by putting 

pumps into the tanks and we won't have to have all of these 

things that nature does to my new crop, and have those fish lost 

and lose my new crop and my new profit-motive innovation. 

 

And so he moved the tanks into the granary and started with the 

fish.  I'll carry on with the story just a little bit more because 

there are some things, in case people are thinking this is the 

way to go to get rich quick, because there are some pitfalls.  

Simple things, like washing your hands before you check the 

water -- very important.  This individual found through the test 

of hard knocks that if you play around with your field sprayer 

and you get chemicals on your hands and then walk into the 

granary and check the temperature of that water, the fish will 

all die.  And that's a lesson to be learned, not to go into this 

kind of a project without some research and without knowing 

exactly what you're doing. 

 

All the more reason why a program like agricultural 

diversification fund should be kept into place and continue to 

work.  So I just wanted to let you folks know that the program 

of growing fish in a granary can work; it is possible.  But it 

needs some more research and so do a lot of other things. 

 

(1515) 

 

And so having said all those things, Mr. Speaker, I want to let 

my colleagues take over and explain their ideas of why ADF 

(Agriculture Development Fund) shouldn't be cancelled. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

be able to rise and debate the issue of the end of the ADF 

funding program, which we believe would be a mistake, Mr. 

Speaker, to end this particular program.  This program has had 

quite a number of benefits for Saskatchewan and for 

Saskatchewan farmers.  And it's ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government would try to eliminate the ADF corporation when 

at the same time they are presenting new legislation to this 

Assembly to bring forward another Crown corporation which 

would provide a similar type of programing; in a different area 

but still the same mainframe ideas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that deals with the Crown corporation 

dealing with university foundations.  University foundation 

legislation will allow individuals or corporations to put assets, 

either money or property, whatever they may have, into the 

foundation to be used for research and for programs at the 

university. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's exactly what the ADF fund does.  It 

provides for monies for research, research in agriculture, 

whereas the university foundation could be research in 

whatever areas that the university may 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

choose.  But it is nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, research to 

develop new ideas and new programs, new projects, new 

businesses in Saskatchewan.  And what the government is 

taking away with one hand, they are giving back to another 

sector of their choosing, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 

 

And we've seen in the last couple of years with this government 

that  anything, good or bad or indifferent, that had to do with 

the previous administration is to be dismantled and destroyed.  

It's irrelevant to the government opposite whether that program 

is good or not; if it was brought in from 1982 to 1991, then it 

has to go.  We saw that example with the Co-op upgrader, Mr. 

Speaker, where the government tried to destroy that program 

simply because it was done by the previous administration. 

 

The Agriculture Development Fund, Mr. Speaker, was a fairly 

broad-ranging program that was established in 1985 to 

coordinate and facilitate agricultural research, development, 

and demonstration projects in Saskatchewan.  When you tour 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if you have the opportunity 

to do so during the growing season, you will see signs around 

this province, green signs with white borders that say ADF 

program on it.  This particular plot of land is an ADF program 

that is studying something important to the farm economy of 

Saskatchewan.  And if you stop and look at it, it'll have a little 

explanation on what they're doing there, Mr. Speaker.  You can 

find out about canola growing or forages or brush control, 

whatever the case may be, Mr. Speaker.  It's going on across 

this province. 

 

Canola is a good example.  Canola traditionally has been grown 

north of the Yellowhead Highway.  But in the last 10 years or 

so, canola has spread south.  Even to the Maple Creek area, Mr. 

Speaker, they're now growing canola. 

 

But that just didn't happen by accident, Mr. Speaker.  That 

happened because somebody . . . and that somebody was part 

of the ADF program that moved canola south.  They grew it in 

the Yorkton area, then they grew it in the Langenburg area, 

then they grew it in the Moosomin area, and Carlyle, down to 

the border.  And the same thing down the west side of the 

province, Mr. Speaker.  People have run test plots on the 

various crops across this province using ADF funding, and 

there has been a substantial benefit to the Saskatchewan 

economy. 

 

If you look last year across this province at the amount of 

canola that was grown, it was very significant, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would suggest that in the coming crop year it will be even 

more significant.  And the ability to grow canola in areas that 

are hotter and drier than what you find across the grain belt of 

northern Saskatchewan came about because of research both at 

the universities and through ADF funding.  And that is what 

this government is trying to eliminate, Mr. Speaker.  And we 

think it's wrong.  The people of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, think it's wrong. 

 

The object of ADF is to support the diversification of 

Saskatchewan agriculture and food sector.  The results are put 

to the test through ADF demonstrations and development 

programs.  These programs display, test, and evaluate new 

technologies and innovations with the goal of helping 

Saskatchewan farmers be competitive in global markets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you could almost pull that whole paragraph 

out of there and stick it in the minister's Agriculture 2000 

pamphlet and it would fit right in.  Because that's what the 

Minister of Agriculture is talking about in his program, is 

diversification, Mr. Speaker.  And that is what ADF funding 

provides for.  It provides for diversification in Saskatchewan in 

various crops. 

 

Traditionally Saskatchewan has been a wheat-growing 

province.  It goes right back to the British Empire, Mr. Speaker, 

where Canada was assigned the task of providing foodstuffs for 

the British Empire, in particular, wheat.  South-east Asia had 

tea; Canada had wheat. 

 

We did a very good job, Mr. Speaker, of growing wheat.  A 

very good job.  But a good many other places across the world, 

Mr. Speaker, are now doing also a very good job of growing 

wheat, and we need to expand ourselves.  That's what 

diversification on the farm is all about -- growing different 

crops, growing different crops for better markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program was established in 1985 and then 

turned into a corporate body in 1989.  And since it was 

established, almost 3,000 applications have been received and 

over half have been approved for a funding of over $62 million.  

Another $48 million has gone to irrigation projects around the 

province. 

 

The ADF has assisted in making successful a broad range of 

initiatives related to crops and forage, irrigation, soils, 

livestock, land improvement engineerings, economics 

extension, marketing, and new product development and food 

processing. 

 

Now on food processing is an interesting thing, Mr. Speaker.  

Across this province we have not traditionally done anything 

with our raw products.  We load our wheat on boxcars and send 

it out some place else.  We cultivate our potatoes and we haul a 

few of them to town and sell to our neighbours.  But we 

traditionally have not processed our own products.  And that 

was one of the areas in which ADF funding was working. 

 

We look up north at Delisle; I believe that there is a food 

processing plant in place there.  And I don't know whether or 

not they had any ADF funding for that particular program, but 

ADF funding was the route that started us exploring more and 

better avenues of food processing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a good many projects that have taken 

place around this province, projects that need to be examined in 

this House so that the people and the government can see the 

benefit that this program provided for us.  And since the 

government is trying to 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

bring in another foundation which provides for research, I 

would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the government allow this 

particular corporation to remain in place and carry out its 

mandate.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the ADF 

fund has been important in a number of areas in Saskatchewan, 

and I would just like to touch on it for a few moments and give 

some, I guess, personal testimony to the benefit and the . . . that 

it had to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In our area, Mr. Speaker, of the Kindersley constituency, 

particularly from the area that I'm from in the Eston area, the 

ADF fund has had involvement in a tremendous number of 

demonstration projects, particularly relative to soil 

conservation, tree planting, marketing clubs, crop clubs, things 

of that nature.  And I'm very proud, Mr. Speaker, of my 

association with the ADF fund over the years. 

 

I had prior to my political life, I guess you would say, 

involvement in a number of soil conservation initiatives in 

Saskatchewan and had experience with the ADF fund.  And I 

found it extremely valuable, the demonstration-type projects 

that they helped organize and helped put on, Mr. Speaker.  In 

fact I think what we're seeing in Saskatchewan today, with 

things like marketing clubs, crop clubs, tree planting clubs, are 

a direct result of the ADF fund providing a small amount of 

funding towards these types of projects. 

 

And the one I'm most familiar with was the Eston Crop Club.  

It was essentially started, Mr. Speaker, by a number of 

interested farmers, particularly interested in things of the soil 

conservation nature, Mr. Speaker.  It started with that focus.  

It's broadened its focus substantially from that time, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I think there was tremendous value and 

tremendous experience gained in soil conservation in 

west-central Saskatchewan that has spread throughout southern 

Saskatchewan as a result of the projects and the initiatives that 

the ADF fund helped promote and helped bring into being. 

 

Particularly when you look at things like zero tillage, 

conservation tillage, things of that nature, chemical fallow 

tillage, Mr. Speaker, were helped.  The ADF fund helped fund 

them initially.  It's given rise to a tremendous interest in those 

types of soil conservation measures.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's of 

great benefit. 

 

I was very proud, Mr. Speaker, to be the president of the Eston 

Crop Club and have the opportunity to go around and see a 

number of the ADF-funded projects throughout Saskatchewan.  

We were very fortunate in our small, little group out there, to 

win the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Award group award, 

the very first inaugural award that they gave out, Mr. Speaker.  

And it was through our association with the ADF fund that that 

came about. 

 

It funded, Mr. Speaker, you might be interested to know, it 

funded a whole host of demonstration projects from crop 

variety trials right through to 

grassing saline areas to grassing water runs to a whole bunch of 

particularly soil conservation related projects. 

 

Which, when you look at the area that I'm from, soil 

conservation is an extreme concern to the people out there.  It's 

an area that's highly productive, Mr. Speaker, but unfortunately 

from time to time we see significant soil erosion problems that 

result from over-tillage, generally speaking, and inadequate 

crop cover. 

 

And I think that what we saw, Mr. Speaker, through the ADF 

fund, was the fund allowed people to try a new project, to try a 

new, innovative type of cropping technique or a new type of 

machinery or anything of that nature.  I remember, Mr. 

Speaker, our crop club, for example, brought in one of the very, 

very first zero-tillage pieces of equipment into Saskatchewan. 

 

And we bought it, I believe it was out of North Dakota, a piece 

of equipment that has been used for a few years down there and 

we brought it into Saskatchewan.  And from there, I dare say, 

Mr. Speaker, that the revolution that we are now witnessing in 

Saskatchewan with respect to soil conservation and zero-tillage 

started from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was a tremendous interest to the farmers in the area, Mr. 

Speaker.  I recall the first demonstration sites and the few 

people that would come out to them, Mr. Speaker.  There'd 

maybe be 15 or 20 interested people.  Farmers would come to 

these demonstration sites.  And it grew from there to literally 

hundreds of people turning up at demonstration sites. 

 

There was one just this past summer out in the Moose Jaw area, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's my understanding there were something like 

1,200 Saskatchewan farmers, which represents 1,200 

Saskatchewan farm families, a significant portion of the 60,000 

farm families of Saskatchewan, turned up at a one-day seminar 

to look at the various pieces of equipment that were available 

for conservation tillage at that time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the ADF fund has had a tremendous impact 

on that kind of thing.  It allowed producers to come together 

and to share the common experiences with respect to soil 

conservation.  From there we also saw the formation of the 

Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association which is 

essentially a group, again, a voluntary group of farmers who 

have come together to share their experiences and pool their 

resources and to deal with the problems with soil conservation. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now we see throughout Saskatchewan, sponsored by the ADF 

fund, projects all over the place from virtually in every area of 

the province.  The Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 

Association has representation from . . . completely 

non-political, completely self-funding, as far as the soil 

conservation association I believe now is concerned.  It started 

initially with some seed money I 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

believe, from the ADF fund. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what it has done, it has given an opportunity 

for farmers to try new techniques, to witness new techniques, to 

go and see the new kinds of innovative ideas that are out there.  

We see, I think, a real revolution developed as a result of the 

Agriculture Development Fund and the Saskatchewan Soil 

Conservation Association. 

 

The Soil Conservation Association started out with virtually a 

very small group of people interested in it and since then has 

grown to be a very, very large group of interested producers.  

Funding from the ADF was extremely important for that 

reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another project that is of interest to me and I think 

out of all of the farm families of Saskatchewan, that started as a 

direct result was, I recall in our area a farmer who received 

some funding from the ADF fund in which he started an 

evaluation of spices and alternative crops for Saskatchewan. 

 

And from that, in conjunction with the crop development centre 

in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Al Slinkard, who I congratulate 

for his fine, fine work on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers, has 

evaluated a number of crops -- oh, it's in the hundreds I 

understand, Mr. Speaker -- from all over the world to try and 

see whether they can be adapted to Saskatchewan conditions 

and become economically viable, an economically viable 

alternative to the wheat-based economy in agriculture in 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

From that, Mr. Speaker, from that simple project which started 

out with just . . . I believe it was just a very, very small project, 

something in the order of a quarter of an acre, Mr. Speaker.  

But they evaluated a number of spices and they found from 

there that there was some potential for those crops in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, particularly the crops of coriander 

and caraway, which are both used primarily as spices, Mr. 

Speaker, in the process food market. 

 

And I think it's opened the door to a whole new industry in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  From that single farmer's 

experience, Mr. Speaker, we now see that there's a 

Saskatchewan spice association is set up -- a number of 

interested producers.  I don't know what the total acreage of 

those two particular crops are.  It's not that large yet; I would 

guess it's probably only a few thousand acres.  But what it has 

done, it has opened up the opportunity for another alternative 

crop to come into Saskatchewan. 

 

In Canada we imported up till then, 100 per cent of the needs 

with respect to caraway, coriander, and other spices like that.  

So we were bringing in from other countries around the 

world -- California, I understand, primarily as well the middle 

eastern countries of Europe.  They were sending their products 

over here, exporting them into Saskatchewan and Canada.  And 

this has given an opportunity for Saskatchewan farmers to have 

an alternative crop.  And it's a crop that has become important; 

important 

to a number of farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it has opened the door for some processing now in the 

community that I'm from, Mr. Speaker.  Right as we speak, 

farmers are putting together their money and pooling it into a . . 

. forming a processing plant in Eston.  They are planning on 

processing a number of crops, Mr. Speaker.  Chick-peas is one 

of them, caraway, coriander, a number of other spices, 

fenugreek, anise seed, I believe it's called. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think these are probably crops that a lot of 

people in Saskatchewan have never even heard of, and yet I 

think what we have seen though the ADF fund is those very 

kinds of initiatives being started and we see the opportunity for 

crops to develop.  And if we think back in the history of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we look at crops like canaryseed, 

which represents now several hundred thousands of acres of 

very, very good alternative crop, a very viable alternative crop 

in Saskatchewan.  But started, particularly canaryseed and 

lentil, Mr. Speaker, started exactly the same way.  Although 

they haven't had the boost forward that these spices and other 

alternative crops have as a result of the help that the ADF fund 

and the crop development centre in Saskatoon has been able to 

help them along with. 

 

There's been a number of other initiatives started.  When we 

look at game farming, Mr. Speaker, has given rise to . . . been 

given help by the ADF fund.  I know of a farmer in our area.  

It's really quite an experience, Mr. Speaker, to go to his farm.  

He had a small grove of trees and he had that grove of trees 

fenced off, and go up and look into his barn and it was 

amazing.  It certainly wasn't filled with the traditional livestock 

that you would be expecting, cattle and horses and things of 

that nature. 

 

This barn was filled with elk, Mr. Speaker, and it was really 

quite an experience to see that kind of initiative that this farmer 

had taken in an area in probably one of the driest areas of 

south-western Saskatchewan, in an area that you wouldn't 

normally associate with that kind of livestock being raised.  But 

it has given that kind of opportunity. 

 

I can think of other producers in our area.  When you look at 

the Brock Shelterbelt Group, they are farmers that have got 

together and are putting trees into their fields, Mr. Speaker, to 

alleviate the problem with wind erosion.  And I believe they're 

planting something in the neighbourhood of 4 or 500 miles of 

trees over the last number of years.  And it's not only visually 

enhancing the area, Mr. Speaker, it's giving opportunity for 

things like more game in the area and better aesthetic values to 

the overall area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see as well other crops that are coming up, Mr. Speaker.  

We see the production of things like fruits and berries as a 

result of the ADF fund.  I only have to think as far as a relative 

of mine, Mr. Speaker, that has got into the saskatoon berry 

production with help from the ADF fund and their expertise. 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a whole number of areas of concern 

with respect to this Bill.  I think I've only highlighted a very, 

very few of them, Mr. Speaker.  We do however believe that 

we'd like to move on to the business of other things this 

afternoon, and therefore we would ask that this Bill now be 

allowed to move through to the committee stage.  At that point 

we'll be asking the minister further questions. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to rise and address this matter.  I've listened quite carefully to 

opposition members advocating that there be no changes in 

ADF.  And I'm curious how it is that opposition members can 

be advocating that we continue to spend dollars largely on 

bureaucracy, largely on government-driven programs, as 

opposed to listening to farmers who are saying to me, and I'm 

sure to many of my colleagues, don't make farmers dependent 

on government. 

 

And that's what this is all about, is not making farmers 

dependent on government.  We are listening to the farmers and 

helping them in their economic development, but taking their 

lead.  Mr. Speaker, I don't know how it is that the member for 

Kindersley -- who I didn't heckle at all during his 

speech -- doesn't have the courtesy to listen to my speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know how it is that opposition members 

can expect to garner reform votes when they are so vehemently 

anti-reform; when anything that farmers tell us it's time we got 

on with and tried to make more workable, they're dug in.  And 

they say no, no, we've got to do everything as it was in the past. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's 1994 and the year 2000 is fast 

approaching.  I know that the Minister of Agriculture and 

government members -- particularly my hat goes off to rural 

government members -- have been looking very diligently at 

the matter.  We are looking at helping farmers meet the 

challenges, not just of the remainder of the 1990s but into the 

next century or millennium or whatever other term it is you 

want to do.  And I'm just again really puzzled how it is that 

opposition members could ever expect to garner any reform 

vote when the are so clearly anti-reform. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 15 -- An Act 

respecting Certified General Accountants be now read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to please 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have the 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the committee, Ms. Shiela Bailey, seated to my left, who is the 

chair of the Public Service Commission; Mr. Rick McKillop 

who is the executive director of the employee relations 

division; and behind me, Ms. Elizabeth Smith, who is the 

director of administrative and information services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few 

questions that we would like to ask.  Being the Public Service 

Commission has come up today, we've done a little research to 

find out exactly what's going on with the Public Service 

Commission.  And just for the general public, I want to read the 

first note that I've got here that tells me what I'm supposed to 

be doing and it says: 

 

 The mandate of the (Public Service) Commission (PSC) is to 

provide Executive Government with human resource 

management programs, policies and standards which improve 

the quality of services to the public, while enhancing 

productivity and employee well-being. 

 

I'd like to know, Mr. Minister, I suppose I'm asking for a bit of 

an overview of just which government departments are 

provided with these human resources and how it all works and 

where the public's money is going and how it's being spent in 

such a good way. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, you are 

correct that the mandate of the Public Service Commission is to 

be the central human resource agency for executive 

government in accordance with The Public Service Act and it 

does in fact perform this function in the broad sense of the term 

for all of what we refer to as executive government.  That of 

course does not include Crown corporations, who have their 

own human resource functions within their organizations. 

 

The commission is responsible for a broad range of activities, 

as the member will know, which includes the negotiation and 

the administration of collective agreements, the staffing for the 

human resource needs of executive government, and for a 

broad range of related human and personnel services that are 

designed to meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, of 

the Government of Saskatchewan, and for the people who are 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The idea is to provide as high a quality of public 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

service as we are able to deliver to the people of this province.  

These have been exceptionally difficult times in the last while.  

The member will know that.  This has resulted in the 

downsizing of government over three successive budgets now.  

And I believe that to have been the case prior to the last 

election as well. 

 

This has created a new and challenging demand for the Public 

Service Commission.  And I think that we can all look with 

some satisfaction at the way in which this bundle of problems, 

this basket of problems, has been handled by our professional 

staff within the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, as I 

started to do my research and reviewed this arm of government, 

the thought came to my mind that if we're going to eliminate 

programs like the agricultural diversification fund, which 

actually goes out and tries to create jobs and create new 

diversification in an entire industry, and we're going to listen to 

the minister tell us that he justifies that because we need to save 

money in our province, and we've got to do all these good and 

great and glorious things, the first thought that I came to when I 

started to study this department was: what a grand way to save 

a pile of money if we just eliminated this whole process. 

 

So I think what I'm going to say to you here is that in the next 

minutes, hours, days, weeks -- whatever it takes -- I hope that 

you can convince me of the need for this whole department and 

that it has some value to the Saskatchewan taxpayer.  Because 

as someone who is relatively new at looking at this whole 

process, the first impression I had was exactly that, that it looks 

like it's a paper-pushing, computer-punching operation that 

basically wastes an awful lot of time and money for the 

taxpayer. 

 

So that's probably not true, and I suspect you're going to 

illustrate to me how wrong I am.  Remember that you're not 

just educating me in this process.  You will be educating the 

Saskatchewan people, because most of the folks that I talked to 

in the last little while about the Public Service Commission 

knew absolutely nothing about what this commission does or 

what its purpose is or even that it existed, to be quite honest 

with you. 

 

And so let's go through this process with that in mind, that the 

people of Saskatchewan want these days for people in politics 

to prove that there's a need before the money is spent.  And so 

let's go into it on that basis. 

 

My first question, I guess then, will go on to: does the Public 

Service Commission staff government departments?  And you 

have said I think yes, but I want you to qualify that for sure.  

And then go on to, which departments does the PSC (Public 

Service Commission) staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to answer the member's question, 

Mr. Chair, generally and then specifically with respect to the 

question that he asked. 

 

In general terms, let me say this, Mr. Chair. The 

government will . . . no matter how you organize yourself with 

respect to these human relations matters, there are some things 

that government is going to have to do.  One of them is that the 

government will from time to time hire people and will be 

advertising to the public for applications from people who may 

wish to apply for those jobs.  You could organize it in such a 

way that each department did that themselves. 

 

Similarly, a government is bound by law to negotiate collective 

agreements.  I'll just repeat that.  Similarly the government is 

bound by law to negotiate collective agreements with the trade 

union that is certified to represent employees.  There's no if, 

and's or but's about that.  You simply have to do it. 

 

You have to renegotiate those agreements periodically as they 

expire and you have to have professional staff to conduct those 

negotiations.  Because as the member will appreciate, 

collective bargaining is a highly specialized activity that 

requires a good deal of expertise. 

 

Now that function also could be performed by the departments 

involved.  But if the member were to look at that and the other 

related matters that are encompassed in this idea of the 

management of human relations and the management of 

personnel, you would find that if we did it on a 

department-by-department basis we would be talking about a 

very much larger number of staff than is now the case. 

 

This has been examined in the past and it's very clear that if 

you can take all those functions and exercise them in one 

central agency, you can do it much more efficiently than if you 

try and get each department to do the same thing.  If you asked 

each department to organize themselves to perform these 

functions you would find yourself with some large multiple 

more . . . large multiple of employees more than are now 

employed in the Public Service Commission.  With a very 

small, centralized service here, we're able to serve the human 

resource needs of quite a large government. 

 

Now that comes now to the member's specific question as to 

what departments we relate to in performing the functions of 

the commission.  I believe there are 15 and I will just go over 

them: Agriculture and Food; Economic Development; 

Education, Training and Employment; Energy and Mines; 

Environment and Resource Management; Finance; Health; 

Highways and Transportation; Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat; Justice; Labour; Municipal Government; Provincial 

Secretary; Public Service Commission -- ourselves; 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board; Social Services; and the 

Women's Secretariat. 

 

Those are the departments that the Public Service Commission 

serves as the central agency responsible for human resource 

management. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, 

Minister, for that list.  So we can now 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

determine more specifically which departments are represented. 

 

The main collective bargaining that you do through your Public 

Service Commission, is that Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union exclusively that you deal with or do you 

have other unions that you deal with as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The main one is the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union.  But we also bargain with 

CUPE 600, Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 600, 

with respect to a number of facilities in Saskatchewan, 

including for example, the Valley View Centre at Moose Jaw 

and a couple of others -- the Saskatchewan Hospital.  But the 

bulk of the employees are represented by SGEU. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, in any 

case, does the Saskatchewan Public Service Commission work 

in conjunction with human resources staff in other 

departments?  If so, do the duties overlap in any way?  Could 

you please inform the Assembly as to what exactly the Public 

Service Commission human resource role is for the government 

of Saskatchewan?  And I think you've done a lot of that 

already, but I want some of the detail. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The question is difficult to answer.  

There are, of course, people on the ground in each 

department -- I think in each department -- who are responsible 

for the day-to-day management of personnel-related matters, 

human resource-related matters. 

 

When they get to the question of a recruitment, and when you 

get to the question of the policy and the guidelines with respect 

to things like recruitment, these will be laid down by the Public 

Service Commission, and all of the competitions are run by the 

Public Service Commission.  There are, however, personnel 

people in each department to take care of the day-to-day 

administrative and other personnel questions that might arise 

within the department. 

 

We also, the Public Service Commission, that is, establishes, as 

I say, all of the policy and the guidelines which affect the entire 

government human resource operation.  We don't . . . we have 

no overlap, in effect.  That's the point I'm trying to come to.  

We're very careful about that. 

 

(1600) 

 

The commission also is responsible for the classification plans 

of government and the development of those plans, and 

keeping them up to date.  And of course the entire question of 

compensation plans and the administration of those plans is 

done under the control of, or the supervision of, the Public 

Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, I'm glad 

that there is, in your opinion, no overlap.  But I'm sure there 

will be somebody that will argue about that.  I have a little 

footnote here that in fact some 

people think there is some overlap and some problem with 

waste and mismanagement, I suppose is the term they would 

use.  And I'm sure that you will look into that. 

 

In the area of Crown corporations, you've already said that you 

don't provide any service for them.  Could we be saving any 

money if we did in fact do some of this work for the Crown 

corporation?  Should we be looking at that perhaps from a 

different angle and expanding the role of this operation instead 

of eliminating it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This, Mr. Chair, and to the member, is a 

very good question, if I may say so, and not the first time that 

it's been asked in the history of this province and I suppose 

every other province, every other jurisdiction. 

 

In a general and very quick sort of way you can say yes, there 

would be savings if all of the work were done by the Public 

Service Commission for the Crowns that is now being done for 

executive government.  It's not that simple, though, because 

you have the . . . you're faced with the legal reality that Crown 

corporations are a separate corporate body from government.  

They have boards of directors and a statutory mandate and 

those sorts of things.  And because they're set up as separate 

corporate entities in that sense, they have always had their own 

personnel functions, and it's a function that is seen to be 

important in relation to the concept of an independent 

operation. 

 

You know, there are arguments around that have been made for 

as long as any of us can remember, that Crown corporations 

should be part of government.  I think that the opposition, that 

the member's party were sort of implying that in connection 

with the budget.  And anything is possible of course in the 

organization of government, but we have chosen in this 

province for a long, long time to perform certain functions 

through these separate corporations.  And because they are 

separate, they have always exercised their own personnel 

functions and they continue to do that. 

 

I'm dancing around this question because of course there are 

sensitivities here.  And it wouldn't be appropriate for me to 

stand up, as the minister responsible for the Public Service 

Commission, and start staking out a claim for the commission 

to start representing the Crown corporations. 

 

I can say though -- and this is repetitious to some extent -- it is 

a question that has arisen from time to time and been reviewed 

from time to time.  It is not currently under review but it has 

been looked at in the past and the decision, when all is said and 

done, has been that they should continue to exercise their own 

personnel functions.  And that's the state of play right now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

it's probably better that you dance than to sit on the fence and 

get splinters.  I wonder though, just 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

from your comments, SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union) probably represents most of the workers in 

the Crown corporations.  An awful lot of the work of this whole 

body seems to be in labour relations. 

 

In view of that and in view that you are looking at mostly 

dealing with the same union and the same kind of work in a lot 

of cases, probably -- at least I think our union friends would 

argue that they try hard to have contracts that give equal pay 

for equal work and all those kind of things and try to job 

classify and have related results -- probably it could work to 

some advantage. 

 

I want to go into some other questions, and you can allude to 

this if you want, but I don't want to take up the whole day on 

that one issue.  And I want to go into something more specific 

in terms of the staff parking privileges here in the city.  I 

understand the PSC staff receive subsidized or free parking 

downtown, here in the city and perhaps even in Saskatoon.  Is 

this true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, just 

briefly with respect to the Crown corporations, the SGEU 

doesn't represent any of the employees in the Crown 

corporations, in the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) Crowns. 

 

They are represented by the Communications, Energy & 

Paperworkers Union, the office and professional employees 

union, the Amalgamated Transit Union, the international 

woodworkers union, and the International Brotherhood of 

Electrical Workers.  So I think those are the five unions that are 

representing Crown corporation employees, but SGEU doesn't 

represent anybody in that part of government. 

 

Now on the question of staff parking, I'll describe the situation 

that pertains.  With the lease of the premises that we occupy in 

Regina, the landlord provides 41 parking spots in Regina, and 

there are four such spots with the lease in Saskatoon.  There are 

62 employees in Regina who are parking -- 62 cars for those 41 

spots. 

 

And what the employees all do is this: the employees all chip in 

$28 a month each, the people who drive those 62 cars, and they 

get enough money from that to lease enough additional parking 

spots in the building so that all 62 cars can park in the building.  

And each employee apparently antes up 28 bucks a month and 

they all get to park that way.  I think that's responsive to the 

member's question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, that's 

responsive, but it somewhat contradicts some of the 

information we have, so I want to just lead this question a little 

bit further.  The thought came to mind that perhaps they all had 

Japanese cars and they were able to squeeze them all in, but 

obviously not; they're renting some other space. 

 

We have some information that staff members receive $95 

parking spots for free, and you have alluded to the fact that they 

all contribute so that they can buy extra 

spaces.  But what about the 41 original spots?  How many of 

those are provided free of charge as free parking -- any or all?  

They do contribute $28 each to rent the extra 21 parking places 

from some place else, but the original 41 -- who pays for those? 

 

How much was spent last year on employee parking?  How 

much is allotted for parking for the 1994-95 year?  And is 

parking provided because of a union agreement?  And from 

which budget would this parking allowance come from if, in 

fact, it does happen? 

 

And I guess I'll leave it at that, and I'm going to turn the 

questioning over to the Leader of the Liberal Party after this 

question.  I'll come back at you after a while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, what I've tried to convey, Mr. 

Chair, to the member is that the 41 parking spots in Regina 

come with the lease.  So we're not shelling out any extra money 

for parking spots or anything like that.  We're not providing 

parking in addition to the lease arrangements. 

 

So as far as we're concerned, there is no free parking.  There is 

the arrangement that I described that I won't repeat, but there it 

is not a question at all of the commission running out and 

buying or renting $95 parking spots and providing them for 

anybody.  Everybody chips in their $28 a month and 62 cars are 

parked as a result of that.  But there's no other extra 

subsidization or any extra arrangement that seems to be of the 

type that the member's question is suggesting. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's my 

pleasure to be able to talk with you about the Public Service 

Commission this afternoon, Mr. Minister, and I do welcome all 

of your officials. 

 

Could you please review for me the changes that have occurred 

in the subvotes of your department?  In the 1993-94 Estimates 

you had five categories of subvote and they were: 

administration; second, accommodation and central services; 

third, staffing and employee development; fourth, employee 

relations and compensation; and fifth, job classification. 

 

In this year's Estimates, there are four categories of subvote.  

First, administration; second, accommodation and central 

services; third, staffing and development; and fourth, employee 

relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 

changes that you've noted are as a result of a reorganization 

within the commission in which employee relations and job 

classification were merged, brought together into one unit, and 

resulted in some efficiencies. And it explains why it's being 

presented in a different way. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, can 

you tell me where the issue of employee compensation is now 

handled? 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, it is in this unit that we're 

talking about.  It's in this unit that we're talking about, the 

employee relations unit. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and where is the 

issue of job reclassification now handled?  Is that in employee 

relations as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, the same unit. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I 

have some very specific questions regarding the functions of 

the Public Service Commission.  How many employees have 

been hired for government departments and agencies through 

the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, can the member just say in 

what period of time we're talking about.  I think we have 

numbers for the last complete year which would be up to the 

end of March '93, but then this year we've been operating . . . 

we're not quite to the end of the fiscal year.  So could the 

member just specify what time period we're talking about. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I'm most 

interested of course in the period up to and including this time 

if you have that available. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can come fairly close.  I've got the 

statistics for this fiscal year up to January 31 which is up to a 

month ago.  Let me just summarize these numbers.  First of all, 

with respect to in-scope appointments, there were 688 

competitions held from April 1, 1993 to January 31, 1994.  Out 

of scope, there were 190 appointments made and the total of 

those two, therefore, is 878 appointments made in the 10-month 

period that we're talking about. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I 

understand that you have committed to the official opposition 

to answer some statistical questions that they asked earlier 

regarding your department, but I do want some clarification 

with some of the things I'll be posing. 

 

How many employees have been transferred from in scope to 

out of scope in this period of time to which you've been 

referring?  I would very much prefer that I be provided with a 

list of those transfers including employee name, department, 

old classification or title, new classification or title, and salary 

change, if any.  And I, of course, agree that you can provide me 

with these details outside of the House, but would prefer very 

much if you would attempt to answer the original question here 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Could I just ask the member, Mr. Chair, 

for some clarification?  Are we interested in jobs that have been 

moved from in-scope status to out-of-scope status?  Or are we 

talking about individuals who have in one way or another find 

themself in an out-of-scope position that used to be in an 

in-scope position, and I assume that took place in 

this last 10-month period? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I'm talking 

about employees, not jobs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, we can provide that information, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Do you in fact have some of that 

information available for us today, or is that too specific? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, we haven't developed that 

information so I can't give any of it to the member today, but it 

is available and we can dig it out. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, how 

many employees have been reclassified government-wide in 

the past year through the Public Service Commission's 

reclassification process?  And for my information and for the 

information of the House, could you please briefly outline the 

process, the process through which an employee or a 

department must submit in order to have a position 

reclassified?  And that would include such things as the forms 

used, the interviews with employee and supervisors, that kind 

of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I apologize for taking a few 

minutes to acquaint myself with the details of the 

reclassification procedure, and I'll come to that in a moment. 

 

But first with respect to the question of the reclassifications that 

have taken place, I have those numbers in the 10 months that 

we talked about up until the end of January this year.  There 

were a total of 1,028 transactions during that period.  These 

reclassification transactions can occur and do occur as a result 

of requests from employees who feel that their position is not 

properly classified, or from departments who may feel that a 

position does not bear the proper classification. 

 

In a situation like we've experienced so often lately with 

merging departments or parts of departments, we'll often have, 

in effect, a new job that appears as a result of combining duties 

formerly done by two positions and that would be a department 

request for reclassification.  So they come to the commission in 

two ways, either from the employee or from the department. 

 

In this period now, going back to the period in question, there 

were -- I'll deal with them in two classifications -- there were 

encumbered positions where there was somebody there and 

then there were vacant positions that form a second category.  

In the encumbered positions, as a result of the review of the 

classification, there were 473 upgrades, 54 downgrades, and 

262 no changes.  Now in the second category, the vacant 

positions, there were 96 upgrades, 124 downgrades, and 19 no 

changes. 

 

Now that is a total of 1,028 transactions.  And if you 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

add those together the upgrades were 569, the downgrades 

were 178, and the no changes were 281. 

 

I also have the numbers for the preceding year, 12 months, and 

they're similar.  And if the member nods, I'll go through those.  

Or I can send them over, whatever -- I'll send them over to you, 

fine. 

 

Now I want to spend a moment talking about the procedure.  

We have a classifications unit within the Public Service 

Commission.  It reports to Mr. McKillop.  There are eight 

classification officers whose job it is to deal with these 

reclassification requests as well as other related duties. 

 

The request is received either from the employee or from the 

department.  It must be accompanied by a job description 

showing the job that the employee actually performs.  We also 

require an organization chart from the department. 

 

The classification officer who is put in charge of the case 

thereafter interviews the employee to confirm the work that's 

being done in the job. And the officer then interviews the 

supervisor of that employee and often the manager of that unit, 

the person to whom the supervisor reports, or ultimately 

reports. 

 

The purpose of those interviews is to confirm the job that is 

actually being done.  And then the classification officer 

evaluates the job in relation to or up against the job evaluation 

standards that have been developed within the commission, and 

that will lead to a classification decision.  And it'll be one of the 

three kinds that we talked about, either an upgrade or a 

downgrade or no change. 

 

There is of course an appeal mechanism.  It's different for 

in-scope jobs than for out-of-scope jobs, but there is a 

mechanism by which the employee or the department can 

appeal the decision of the classification officer. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Earlier I asked 

about employees and now I'm going to ask about positions.  

Could you commit to provide me with a list of all positions that 

have been reclassified by the Public Service Commission in the 

same period of time.  And I ask that in each case that I be 

provided with the position number, the employee name, the 

department, the old classification or title, the new classification 

or title, and salary change, if any. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I'll undertake to provide that 

information to the member. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, in a 

letter to the editor of the Leader-Post, Mr. Garry Aldridge, the 

chief of staff to the Premier wrote, and I quote: 

 

 The 16 staff referred to in your article are employees in 

Executive Council who received promotions to new jobs last 

year, or had their jobs reclassified because they involve 

greater responsibility. 

Can you confirm for me that those reclassifications were 

reviewed by the Public Service Commission and went through 

the entire process, as you have just described in my previous 

question to you. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Could I clarify again what 16 positions 

we're talking about?  I probably read Mr. Aldridge's letter but I 

don't recall it.  And are we talking about ministerial assistants 

or are we talking about other people employed?  The member's 

nodding, indicating that these are ministerial assistants?  Okay.  

I will just take a moment, Mr. Chair, and then answer the 

question. 

 

The classification of ministerial assistant is excluded from The 

Public Service Act, or a lot of positions in the public service 

that are excluded from the Act, you know, and these are among 

them. 

 

And with respect to excluded positions, the commission isn't 

involved either in the staffing action or in the salary 

administration for these positions, nor in the . . . included in 

that we're not involved in the classification of those positions.  

They do not follow the route that I have described to the 

member. 

 

So we did not deal with any reclassifications within the 

classification of ministerial assistant. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister.  

Specifically can you tell me what interviews were conducted, 

job descriptions completed, and other procedures undertaken 

by the Public Service Commission with the following 17 

individuals from the Department of Executive Council. 

 

First, Sandra Loden; (2) Lynn Gidluck; (3) Yvonne Gray; (4) 

Sharon Husnik; (5) Sharon Lyons; (6) Lindy McIntyre; (7) 

Jacqueline Pitre; (8) Chandra Prasad; (9) Bill Rybotycki; (10) 

Monica Sanchez; (11) Lorena Sawchyk; (12) Susan Shoulak; 

(13) Barbara Storer; (14) Margaret Tustin; (15) Wendy Ward; 

(16) Sheena Weir; and (17) Virginia Wilkinson. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not familiar with most of the names 

on that list.  I'm familiar with some of them.  Would it be a 

satisfactory way to deal with this if the member sent over the 

list and we'll provide her with that information when we check 

it out? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I will indeed. In fact I will 

do that now. 

 

Mr. Minister, in last year's Committee of Finance for the 

Department of Executive Council, the Premier was asked about 

reclassifications of employees in ministers' offices.  And his 

written response was given to me as stating the following, and I 

quote: 

 

 Generic job descriptions for ministerial assistants do not 

exist.  Job duties and responsibilities are delegated to staff 

members by each individual minister. 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

How many government employees for which the Public 

Service Commission is responsible enjoy this level of 

autonomy and freedom from rules by which all other thousands 

of bona fide public civil servants must abide?  And in other 

words, is it commonplace for individuals to earn in the 40 to 

$60,000 pay range without any documentation regarding their 

duties when they are bona fide public servants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, speaking as the minister 

responsible for the Commission, the unclassified service are not 

under our wing.  We're not responsible in the human resources 

sense, so we do not know whether job descriptions exist or not 

in any formal way.  The unclassified service would include all 

of the order in council employees of government. 

 

For example in my Department of Justice, the lawyers are 

appointed by order in council.  And I must say I don't know as I 

stand here whether we have formal job descriptions or not.  I 

expect we have, but I don't know, and I certainly don't know as 

the minister responsible for the Public Service Commission.  

So I'm just not able to answer the question that the member 

presents.  It is in effect not within our reach, as a Public Service 

Commission. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I think perhaps 

my preamble may have had you not focus on my specific 

question to you.  I'm wondering how many government 

employees for which the Public Service Commission is 

responsible enjoy that kind of level of autonomy and freedom 

from rules, as far as job descriptions and other things are 

concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- For those employees for whom the 

Public Service Commission is responsible, every position has a 

job description. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I thought that 

that would be the answer.  Is it common practice for the Public 

Service Commission to advertise vacant positions, and under 

what circumstances do you not advertise competitions, and is 

that policy under review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, all permanent positions are 

advertised in the broad sense of the term.  Sometimes the 

advertising will be in the newspapers, sometimes it will be in 

the internal bulletin. Where the job is a promotional 

opportunity or in scope, the movement will be from within the 

public service and you're not recruiting outside, so you do it 

internally. 

 

There is an exception.  We don't advertise when we know of 

someone who is on a re-employment list who's coming back to 

do the job, bidding back in.  There is no purpose in advertising 

that because the employee has a right to the job, so we don't do 

it there.  But the general answer is that all permanent positions 

are advertised. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So just for my 

own understanding of this, what you're saying is that all vacant 

positions, all competitions are in fact 

advertised in some way?  Thank you. 

 

I'll ask one more question of you and your officials and then 

turn it over to the member from Souris-Cannington, and I hope 

we have an opportunity to meet again soon to have further 

discussions on this. 

 

In your own ministerial office, as minister in charge of the 

Public Service Commission, how do you recruit and did you 

recruit your own staff?  Did you conduct any form of open 

competition to the general public, for example? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I assume that the minister does not mean 

the senior management of the commission but rather refers to 

my personal staff in my office.  There's been some turnover 

over the two and a half years, but in no case was there public 

advertising for those positions.  I think the member will 

appreciate that. 

 

In the case of two of my ministerial assistants, they are people 

that I knew from my previous life, if I can use that term, and 

who I did not approach personally but one of my other staff 

approached on my behalf to indicate whether there was any 

interest.  And then sometimes there was and sometimes there 

wasn't, you know. 

 

If there was, then it was followed by interviews basically with 

my staff to determine whether that person would be a fit in the 

office.  Very important, as you will appreciate, that people be 

able to get along in a workplace. 

 

When the comfort level was high enough -- and it wasn't 

always high enough -- then we would make an offer.  Just as I 

recall, that was the case with I think all of my ministerial 

assistants. 

 

As I indicated, there would be some turnover.  Debbie Hartung, 

who the member will know, was my first chief of staff, as it 

were, the lead ministerial assistant.  She did, in effect, the 

recruiting pursuant to my suggestions, in the case of the 

ministerial assistants. 

 

In the case of the secretaries in my office, I didn't have any 

direct hand in that.  I didn't know the people who we hired until 

they came to work for us.  That work was all done by my 

ministerial assistants and the other secretaries who were 

working there.  And I think they all participated in interviews, 

trying again to find a fit and the kind of skill level that you'd 

want to have. 

 

But again, I want to say to the member quite plainly, there was 

no advertising or bulletining or anything like that.  I think we 

were deluged with rsums, and there's a steady flow of 

rsums.  And I think that likely all of the people were picked 

out from that source, although I couldn't tell you just as I stand 

here. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and 

Mr. Chair, and your officials.  I do want you to know that I did 

publicly advertise for every position in my offices, and I look 

forward to having the 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 1994 

opportunity to question you further.  Thank you very much. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, having 

given you a little time to reconsider your answers earlier this 

afternoon, I'd like to go back to this problem that I'm having 

figuring out who's getting what for free in the area of parking. 

 

Now your explanation to me was that you have 62 cars to park 

in 62 lots, of which you've had to rent 21 by the employees, 

who all contributed $28 each.  However, the 41 were supplied 

by the government through its lease from the landlord.  And 

that means that the government is now paying the landlord 

more money for the building, the offices, plus the parking lot.  

In other words, it is a perk to 41 people with free parking.  And 

even though they're contributing themselves to alleviate the 

problem of the rest of the people that are working there, this 

becomes a subsidy and a perk. 

 

Was this a negotiated perk as a result of collective bargaining 

with the union in charge, or is this something that just sort of 

accidentally happened?  And I have some other questions; I'll 

let you answer this one first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the lease in question is in the 

Bank of Montreal Building in downtown Regina on the corner 

of Scarth Street and 11th Avenue.  And that lease was entered 

into on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan by SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation).  It was 

entered into in 1988, and the provisions that I speak of for the 

provision of the 41 parking spaces were a part of that lease.  

That is a 10-year lease and there it is. 

 

My understanding, my advice is that it was provided on the 

basis of a government policy that is approximately a decade 

old, as I understand it, that two parking spaces will be provided 

for every five employees; two spots for every five employees.  

Now I don't personally know that, but I'm told that that was the 

policy and remains the policy and has been the policy for about 

the last decade. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, I 

wonder if you would take the time to check that policy out and 

find out for us exactly what the policy is and report back to us 

because there seems to be some disgruntled workers that are 

passing us questions about this particular matter.  So knowing 

that, I think that should be a red flag for everybody involved 

and obviously while some of these little things are little things, 

they do seem to fester and grow as time goes by. 

 

So my question that follows then has to be: do other 

government workers get the same kind of break?  And I don't 

know if you know that yet or if you'll have to report back.  But 

it's key I guess to the question being asked, is:  are other 

government workers in other 

departments -- for example the very people that these folks 

employ for other departments -- are they getting those kind of 

perks through some negotiation of the unions or union contracts 

or are they excluded from this kind of perk? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The policy in question is not a Public 

Service Commission policy of course.  I think the member 

knows that.  The policy that I referred to was and is a 

government-wide policy, and those spaces are allocated to a 

department and how the department deals with those spaces 

and how they allocate them is up to the management of the 

department itself. 

 

I have described the way in which the Public Service 

Commission has dealt with its allocation, with the 62 spaces 

and the $28 a month for parking in Regina, so I'm not able to 

answer any further than the Public Service Commission itself.  

I don't know what the situation is in other departments as to 

how they allocate the spaces that have been allotted to them 

pursuant to the policy. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you.  Well, Minister, I guess this leads 

me to ask the question: should the government be providing 

these types of perks in this kind of economic climate?  What 

message does this send out to other workers in the downtown 

core of Regina, for example -- people, for example, that work 

in places like Eaton's and maybe The Bay or some place like 

that?  It sends them a message that workers of equal rating, in 

many ways, if you have a government job, are allowed to have 

just that much better lifestyle and things provided for them.  

And so it gives a kind of a negative connotation to the whole of 

the way we treat people in our society.  As soon as you work in 

the public sector, you automatically get extra breaks. 

 

I want to go on to the subject of computers, Minister, and if you 

want to comment on this, you can certainly do that as you think 

about the computer question.  Last year we received as part of 

the PSC estimate package, a 10-page list of computer 

purchases, which I have attached here.  Do you have a total for 

those purchases for '92-93?  And I know that we will be 

receiving another itemized list for the 1993-94 fiscal year, and I 

appreciate the minister's cooperation in this regard. 

 

However, I am curious about the total.  Do you have a total on 

what was spent on computers for the last fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think the member has the information 

for the purchases for '92-93 that total $334,189.  And the 

estimate for '93-94, which is the year ending the end of this 

month, is $138,000.  And I just remind the member that those 

costs are to support a system of data that includes all of the 

employees of executive government, all 10,000 of them.  So I 

just ask the member to keep that in mind when he's assessing 

the information I have given to him in light of similar 

information from other departments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank 



March 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

you, Minister.  Obviously you have twigged onto the need for 

the public to be able to see that the money spent on all of this 

technical equipment is reasonable and fair.  Certainly for 

almost $500,000 worth of computers in two years' time is an 

awful pile of money to be spent on equipment.  It's a lot of tax 

dollars.  And most people, knowing that they can buy a 

personal computer of their own for 2 or $3,000 at the very 

most, even with programs, would have a hard time realizing 

that half a million dollars needs to be spent unless you put it 

into the perspective of 10,000 people. 

 

I guess one of the unfortunate things that comes to mind is that 

it seems like in many of the jobs the job description seems to 

have boiled down to which party you have a card with in 

Saskatchewan, and a lot of folks worry about that.  They worry 

about the fact that patronage seems to be served more than 

other criteria. 

 

Last year, Minister, we sent you a package of questions -- we 

call them our generic questions.  They seemed to take in all of 

the sort of little what you might almost call nit-picky types of 

things that we do need to have answered.  And I was 

wondering, sir, if you would comply with that same package, or 

should we reprint it and have it sent over again this year?  Or 

could we have you just use the same package of questions and 

answer them for this year the same as we did last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I certainly have no objection to 

that, Mr. Chair.  Last year, as I recall it, the arrangements were 

worked out with the . . . involving more than one department.  I 

think all departments answered the same questions, and I 

assume that you're in touch with our House leadership to try 

and deal with it in that way.  I have no objection to it. Speaking 

on behalf of the commission, we'd be prepared to respond to 

the same questions as last year.  But it is a larger question of 

course, and the member may want his House leadership and our 

House leadership to work together on this same question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Minister.  Of 

course if that's the process we want to do we will initiate that 

immediately, and most certainly we will want to pursue that.  

Because it did work very well and I think it saved us a lot of 

time in committee.  And that, I think, is important so that we 

can get on to some of the more important issues that the public 

want to hear about. 

 

In the area of employment, I'm not sure if you've gone into 

individual hirings, but there are some people concerned about 

certain positions and I want to take up one with you as an 

example here of what people are concerned about. 

 

Now it says as the minister responsible for PSC you are 

supposed to ensure that people are treated fairly when applying 

for jobs.  Your government also promises to make sure the jobs 

were not filled with patronage.  Patronage appointments were 

not going to be made.  How is it possible then that you are 

allowing individuals like Virginia Wilkinson, an NDP partisan 

member of your cabinet press office, to walk into a 

position in info services? 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


