




















































Hansard: March 28, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1177 

 March 28, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

Regarding Sask Water and the Alameda dam.  Presently a 

heavy flow of water is coming from the headwaters 

passing through the dam structure because the gates are 

not closed: (1) are the gates going to be closed so 

Saskatchewan may benefit from this precious natural 

resource; (2) if the gates are not going to be closed, what is 

the reason; (3) this is an opportunity to retain water to 

which all Saskatchewan people have a right; will you 

guarantee that the gates will be closed if possible, 

therefore providing more opportunities for recreation and 

to provide water to meet our international commitments at 

a later date; (4) does it make sense to hold the position that 

the United States is not entitled to purchase water from 

Saskatchewan when presently the U.S. (United States) 

receives the water from the Souris system, to which we are 

entitled, for free? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that 

I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the department of Provincial Secretary: (1) was 

a recent poll conducted regarding the question of 

Provincial Court judges' salaries, and what are the details 

of that poll; who conducted the poll; what was the cost of 

the poll; how many people were called in the course of the 

poll; what were the results obtained from all respondents 

surveyed in the poll; who was responsible for writing the 

questions used in the poll; and what were the specific 

questions asked in the poll? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding agriculture and Saskatchewan producers in the 

north-east, areas such Preeceville, Kelvington, Livingstone 

and others are in a crisis situation.   Because of early frosts 

and wet seasons these producers have had failed crops for 

the past two years.  (1) Has the minister responded to the 

requests brought to your attention by over 13 rural 

municipalities regarding making money available to these 

producers in order to put their seed into the ground this 

spring; (2) has the minister approached the federal 

government regarding a joint effort in assisting these 

between 500 to  

700 desperate producers; (3) what options has the minister 

given the producers in the north-east who are facing this 

crisis? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation: (1) what is the current policy regarding use 

of Executive Air Services by cabinet ministers and 

members of the Legislative Assembly; (2) how has that 

policy been communicated to all affected parties; (3) who 

is responsible for enforcing that policy; (4) what 

enforcement mechanism is in place to refuse use of 

Executive Air Services if the reason for travel does not 

comply with the government's policy? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Department of Agriculture: (1) given the 

fact that one-third of between 900,000 and 1 million acres 

in north-east Saskatchewan was unable to be harvested, 

what has the minister done to assist these producers; (2) 

why is it possible for the minister to say that he cannot 

favour one region over another when recently the 

north-east crop season was favourable while the 

south-west regions of our province were experiencing 

drought and assistance was provided; (3) is the minister 

aware that between 50 and 90 Farm Credit Corporation 

accounts are in arrears in these regions; (4) in addition, is 

the minister aware that 50 to 60 per cent of Agriculture 

Credit Corporation accounts are also in arrears and it is in 

the best interests of our province to assist these producers? 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Triwaste Reduction Services 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the most pleasant small 

towns in Saskatchewan is Naicam, which borders my 

constituency and lies between Melfort and Watson.  And 

people who travel through on Highway No. 6 will know it for 

its train station turned into a fine restaurant, but it's also a 

vibrant and progressive place in which to live and work. 

 

A new facility has just opened up in Naicam, a facility which 

will give employment, provide necessary industrial materials, 

and contribute to the clean-up of our environment.  Good news 

on all fronts. 

 

Triwaste Reduction Services, a division of Trimac, is a facility 

set up to recycle metal and plastic pesticide containers.  The 

plant removes the pesticide residues 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

and turns the plastic containers into chips which are then 

shipped to another facility which converts the material into 

fence posts and curb stones. 

 

The Naicam plant employs six people at the moment and can 

process three to four tonnes of material a day.  Mr. Speaker, 

every fence post made in this process is a tree not chopped 

down and every container recycled is a space in the landfill not 

taken up.  And every pesticide residue removed here is not 

released into the environment. 

 

I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the operators and the 

workers of this new facility at Naicam for their economic and 

environmental contribution to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Corporation Taxes in Arrears 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Our viewer mail 

first question today comes from Arthur Bird from Porcupine 

Plain, and it says this: Mr. Premier, I would like to know the 

dollar amount of provincial taxes owed to the Saskatchewan 

government by Canadian and multinational corporations 

combined, that is in arrears, and what measures are being taken 

to collect them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll have to 

take notice of that question. 

 

Gravelbourg Health Facility 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We will wait with 

anticipation for that answer, Madam Minister. 

 

The second question comes today from Mr. J. Grismer from 

Hodgeville.  He says: Mr. Premier, I want to know why we are 

building another hospital in Gravelbourg after we have closed 

52.  The doctors can't do anything for you, but give you a pill 

or send you on.  They can't even deliver a baby on account of 

regulations, Madam Minister.  Whatever you do, don't move 

Jack Messer, or we will have to build another bathroom. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government is not building a hospital in Gravelbourg.  The 

long-term care facility, the Foyer, is going to be replaced 

because it is breaching fire regulations, as we've been advised, 

but there is not a hospital being built in Gravelbourg. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Office Closures 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a Mr. 

Premier question.  I would like to direct this to the 

Premier.  This is from Frances King of Wilkie, and she's 

asking: Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are moving our 

Power and Energy employees out of our towns.  You are 

helping kill our rural towns.  The same is true when you close 

hospitals in towns of 1,500 people.  You live in a city and have 

no concept of life in a rural town. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- On behalf of the Premier, I'd like to 

answer that question to the member from Wilkie.  It is true that 

some offices are under consideration for redistribution under 

SaskPower's management plan.  And the situation in the Wilkie 

office is that there's consideration being given, although not 

finalized, to moving those positions to the town of Unity which 

is also in the member's constituency.  And if the member 

opposes the move of those employees to the town of Unity, I'd 

be interested in hearing that from him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gambling Expansion 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question too 

is put to the Premier.  This question comes from Eldon and 

Mary McLaren from Davidson.  It is a very serious question, 

Mr. Premier.  How can you, with any sense of right and wrong, 

condone the closing of our rural hospitals and take funding for 

acute care beds, and then contemplate using that money to set 

up gambling casinos in Saskatoon and Regina which will cost 

thousands to rehabilitate addicts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, in answer 

to the member's question, let me say that there are no dollars 

from the health care budget that will be going to the 

establishment of the expanded casino operations, either in 

Saskatoon or in Regina.  I want to say that the health care 

budget has remained whole.  It's one of the priorities of this 

government, and it will continue to be a priority of the 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rental Rates for Cattle Ranchers 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

comes from David Sawkiw from Preeceville.  Mr. Premier, my 

question is, when you raise the rental rates of Crown land to 

cattle producers of Saskatchewan and justify it by saying that 

cattle prices are high, will you give us your assurance in 

writing that if cattle prices drop in the future that the rental 

rates will drop accordingly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank Mr. Sawkiw for that 

question.  As he knows, the rental rates are based on cattle 

prices, and the formula will create a reduction 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

in rates if cattle prices drop.  And I can certainly give that 

assurance. 

 

We are talking to the stock growers and others about possibly 

changing that formula, if they had some ideas about how it 

could be changed, and we're now working on that.  But as the 

formula remains, if cattle prices drop, then rental rates will 

drop. 

 

Senior Bureaucrats' Salary Increases 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question to the . . . well maybe I'll refer it to the Deputy 

Premier today. 

 

Mr. Premier, or Mr. Deputy Premier, we have received a copy 

of the document obtained under freedom of information 

regarding a salary raise given to your deputy minister of 

Justice, Brent Cotter -- and this is referring to the Minister of 

Justice.  Mr. Deputy Premier, while the deputy minister was 

making recommendations to the independent panel that judges 

should receive no salary increase or at the most a 2.5 per cent 

increase, you recommended and approved a $6,300 salary 

increase for Mr. Cotter from $105,000 to $111,300. 

 

Mr. Premier, or Mr. Deputy Premier -- whoever wants to 

answer the question -- do you think it is just for you to 

recommend and approve a $111,300 salary for your deputy 

minister of Justice when you find the salary of $108,000 to be 

an outrageous sum to pay Saskatchewan judges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd be 

pleased to answer on behalf of the Minister of Justice with 

respect to the question that the member opposite raises. He is 

incorrect in some of the suggestions that he makes on what the 

facts really are. 

 

The increases that were provided in this particular case, I 

suspect, was not in excess of 5 per cent.  And therefore that is 

far from what was provided or what was voted as to an 

increase, which is what the Conservative opposition and the 

Liberal opposition urged this House to do, and that is provide a 

24 per cent increase to the judges, which is really quite 

unconscionable. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, clearly that there is no great difficulty 

here.  It's in keeping with the guidelines that are in place, and 

certainly not the 24 per cent that the members opposite wanted 

for the judges. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Premier, as 

usual you are missing the point and refusing to answer the 

question as well.  You broke the law, your minister broke the 

law, broke a legally binding contract, broke your word to make 

sure that judges received an increase of no more than 2.5 per 

cent.  Yet while you were doing this, you signed a contract to 

give your deputy minister of Justice a 6 per cent to $111,000 

plus lots of perks, including car allowances. 

 

You, sir, in your quote on Friday said, don't stand up 

for those who've got $90,000 a year and want 24 per cent in 

increase.  Mr. Premier, you said, stand up for the farmer and 

the workers; stand up for the people. 

 

Mr. Minister, or Mr. Deputy Premier, what about your own 

hand-picked bureaucrats who have $105,000-a-year salaries 

increased to $111,000 a year?  There is a law and there is 

justice.  Will you break this contract to bring it in line with the 

judges' increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite is again reinforcing the kind of double standard which 

members in the opposition and the third party have applied on 

this issue.  The issue being, is it correct or is it appropriate or in 

fact is it moral to provide any group in society with a 24 per 

cent increase, as was the case which the government is trying to 

correct with respect to the judges.  I think the public has spoken 

loud and clear in support of that decision. 

 

That is not different . . . the increase that is being provided in 

fact, the two and a half and the two and a half per cent, is in 

line with the kind of increase which the member opposite talks 

about with respect to the deputy minister of Justice. 

 

So there is no double standard here; there is certainly 

consistency. And I think that is a pretty fair judgement as to the 

way the government has been applying these kinds of 

decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, again to the deputy Premier, it 

would seem, Mr. Deputy Premier, it is politically correct to 

increase salaries to high-level bureaucrats but it's incorrect to 

follow your own legislation.  Mr. Deputy Premier, it would 

appear that these two situations are a clear example of the 

hypocrisy of your government. 

 

Here is another example of hypocrisy.  Mr. Deputy Premier, 

can you confirm that recent orders in council have given Crown 

prosecutors in the Department of Justice pay increases as high 

as 25 per cent, and that some of these pay increases were made 

retroactive for periods up to two years.  Can you confirm this, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, and give an explanation of why these 

raises were given in light of your new salary policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 

answer the member's question that he asks.  I find it ironic that 

last week the members opposite were arguing for the judges to 

have an increase of 24 per cent; this year the members opposite 

are saying that 5 per cent is too much.  So I think, Mr. Speaker, 

maybe the members opposite should have another weekend; 

maybe the long weekend of Easter will give them a chance to 

reconsider. 

 

Directly in response to what the member opposite is asking, 

there is -- and I would have to check the fact as I am not the 

Minister of Justice, and I am prepared to do that -- but there is 

no one in the Department of 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Justice, no lawyer who received the kind of increase the 

member opposite . . . and is still in the same job.  Now there 

may very well be some reclassifications or some promotions of 

people to different positions in the department which means a 

different salary scale.  But if the member opposite is suggesting 

that some people who are lawyers in the Department of Justice 

in their existing positions receive 24 per cent increases, he is 

wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the Deputy 

Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, you're just confirming what 

your Minister of Justice said the other day about law and 

justice.  It's politically correct to give increases to MAs 

(ministerial assistants) or deputy ministers, but it's incorrect to 

recognize other officials across this province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Premier, the orders in council that we 

received are dated February 15, 1994 and are signed by the 

Premier.  In one instance a Crown solicitor 3, with no apparent 

increase in responsibility, was given two pay increases which 

amounted to 18 per cent increase made retroactive nearly two 

years.  And there are many more examples in today's batch of 

orders in council. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, we have asked for more information on 

these increases in written questions but so far the Premier has 

stalled in his answers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, why is it that some people in the 

Department of Justice can get enormous and perhaps arbitrary 

retroactive wage increases with a stroke of your pen, yet others 

go through an independent and legal binding process and they 

are rejected?  Is that appropriate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it a mystery 

how the member opposite can refer to orders in councils which 

are public, and therefore that's why the member has access to 

them soon after they are processed, can be secret at the same 

time.  I mean, I guess that comment from the member opposite 

in itself kind of indicates the dilemma that the members of the 

opposition in both political parties face here today. 

 

Having taken the wrong position in a standing vote in this 

House on the question of 24 per cent increases for judges' 

salaries, having gone back to their constituencies and having 

their constituents telling them in no uncertain terms that they -- 

the Liberals and the Conservatives -- have taken a wrong 

position on that issue, they now try to twist and turn in order to 

try to extricate themselves from the kind of hole which they 

have dug themselves, not only politically, but I suspect 

morally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I say to the member opposite, get your facts straight.  There 

has been no increases for people unless there's been a 

reclassification or a promotion.  It is not the same as the 

increases that were denied the judges, which is 24 per cent.  

Get your facts straight before you 

get into this House, and find a better way to defend the wrong 

position which you took last week, which now finds you in 

such an embarrassing position here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that we must all be concerned by the . . . 

that the standards by which business operates in Saskatchewan 

are fair to people, particularly people who do not have the 

stability of a full-time job, and nobody wants to see people 

being taken advantage of. 

 

At the same time, we must create a balance that will ensure not 

only people are treated fairly, but that they have a place to 

work.  I ask the Minister of Economic Development if his 

department has thoroughly assessed what effect the labour 

standards amendments will have on the job creation potential of 

the Saskatchewan economy and how his department conducted 

that assessment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I would say 

to the member from Saskatoon Greystone that we did do a cost 

analysis of this legislation, and it has been provided; it has been 

tabled. 

 

The cost analysis indicates that the increased cost of The 

Labour Standards Act in the macro sense will be minimal.  I 

would refer the member from Saskatoon Greystone to the 

report by Price Waterhouse.  It may temper some of your 

ongoing opposition to The Labour Standards Act and the relief 

which we're trying to provide to part-time workers. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I shall refer later 

to the Price Waterhouse study and in fact what they have said.  

This is not a contest, Mr. Speaker, between the interests of 

workers and the interests of business. There's only one issue, 

and that is the creation of a climate which will produce jobs for 

people, and this is quality jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, the economic successes of our province is based 

on three things:  quality jobs, the viability of businesses that 

issue the pay cheques, and the stable tax base to finance 

government programs that all of us, the people of 

Saskatchewan, rely upon. 

 

What assurance can you give the working people of 

Saskatchewan and the unemployed who are looking for work 

that the amendments that your government proposes to labour 

standards will have an overall net impact that creates more jobs 

and puts more money into the pockets of workers in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It was precisely to allay the kind of 

fears being fanned by the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

that we did have the study done by Price Waterhouse.  This was 

done by one of  



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

Saskatchewan's more eminent chartered accountants, and I 

think his work stands for itself and speaks for itself.  And he 

indicated the effect on the economy and the cost would be 

minimal. 

 

So I suggest to the member from Saskatoon Greystone that you 

may want to rethink your continuing ongoing opposition to this 

government's attempt to provide some relief to the part-time 

workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- This, Mr. Speaker, is for the Minister of 

Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, we do not live on an 

island, and job creators outside of Saskatchewan borders see 

this legislation as problematic.  The Premier, however, 

considers it to be, and I quote him, as trail-blazing. 

 

What I want to know from you, the minister responsible for the 

development of our economy, is what this legislation will mean 

in terms of keeping Saskatchewan competitive in world 

markets, and in terms of protecting the very jobs that people 

already have in the province of Saskatchewan.  What has your 

department done, the Department of Economic Development, 

to evaluate the costs of legislation such as workers' 

compensation and labour standards on the capacity of our 

economy to create jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, to the member from 

Greystone, I want to say that in many meetings that we have 

had with the chamber of commerce both here in Regina and 

Saskatoon at the provincial level, along with Mr. Botting, the 

Minister of Labour and myself had met jointly many, many 

times with them to work on this piece of legislation.  And I 

must say that the cooperation we've had with business has been 

stellar, to say the least, both from the chamber here in Regina, 

in Saskatoon, and at the provincial level. 

 

What I find, I think, curious and even irritating is that the 

member opposite from Greystone would come here in a 

political manner and try to raise the political level to see if she 

can't get some folks to protest against the legislation that will 

indeed help working women, in particular, to have a better 

standard of living.  And try in a political way to pit the working 

people of this province against business people. 

 

I find that sad today to see the Leader of the Liberal Party 

taking a very, very political stand, old-style politics of trying to 

pit working people against business to elevate herself 

politically. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

you have not done your homework.  The very people this is 

going to hurt are women who are trying to get back into the 

work force, the disabled. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, Price Waterhouse, to which the Minister of 

Labour has referred, has admitted and has admitted as of Friday 

night in front of me, Mr. Minister, they have admitted that they 

could not calculate the 

costs of the amendments to labour standards accurately because 

the draft they worked from is different from the final 

legislation. 

 

The Labour department has been meeting with business behind 

closed doors to change the legislation because if the truth be 

known, Mr. Minister, it is considered to be poorly drafted and 

filled with technical errors. 

 

Mr. Minister, workers deserve to know the long-term impact of 

the labour standards amendments.  And as well, the job 

creators, the business community, and the investors that can 

deliver economic success, they deserve time to figure out how 

this will affect their bottom lines.  In the best interest of 

Saskatchewan's economy, Mr. Minister, will you promise that 

this legislation will be refined and not reintroduced until the 

next session so that all of the groups affected will have a few 

months to analyse the impact of these amendments to the 

labour standards legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, I can tell you I can guarantee you 

exactly the opposite, that the legislation is here.  We are going 

to be working on it very, very carefully with business.  We 

have spent months working with labour groups as well as with 

business groups. 

 

I want to say as well that the cost of this proposal is less than 

one-tenth of 1 per cent.  We believe very firmly that it will 

make a better working circumstance for business people as well 

as working people.  I say again it surprises me, the old-style 

Liberal politics which we see here, not unlike Ross Thatcher in 

the 1960s and his attack on labour.  One should not be 

surprised that they would . . . shoulder to shoulder with the 

former premier from Estevan, the now Leader of the Liberal 

Party tried to work her magic of pitting workers against 

business people.  I find it shocking and disturbing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fair Wage Policy 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour as well.  Mr. Minister, on Friday your 

Premier announced that your government will soon be 

introducing a so-called fair wage policy which of course means 

a government-regulated wage policy, for all the contractors 

who wish to bid on government work. 

 

Now could you please tell us exactly what your 

government-regulated wage policy will look like, and why 

wasn't the industry consulted on this major change before the 

Premier announced it at a union meeting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is interesting how Liberals and 

Conservatives both, in tandem, seek to pit workers against 

management.  I just say generally that is not our policy.  Our 

policy is to try to get them 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

working together.  And that philosophy underlies the work we 

have done on the fair wage policy.  Mr. Speaker, we have been 

working on a fair wage policy.  We have received some degree 

of encouragement to so do from both businesses and labour, 

and that's the way we're going to continue to proceed, to work 

with both sides to provide policies which are mutually 

beneficial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to 

the Minister of Labour.  Minister, it doesn't surprise me that the 

people of this province are uniting to save this province in spite 

of you. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please tell us how much additional 

taxpayers' money would be spent on the government contracts 

if a government-regulated trade policy were introduced?  What 

studies have you done to cost out such a policy, and what 

studies have you looked at that analyse the cost to taxpayers of 

the province, where government regulations will be brought in 

and implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the most prominent 

union in this Assembly today is the unity of purpose between 

the Liberals and Conservatives, in trying to pit management 

against labour. 

 

I would just say to the member from Maple Creek that we have 

discussed with the business community and with the trade 

unions whether or not they might be interested in considering 

some policy of the sort mentioned by the Premier.  Both have 

encouraged us to proceed to consider it and we're doing it.  It 

hasn't got beyond that.  But I want to assure the member from 

Maple Creek that as soon as government policy has been 

formulated and finalized we'll let you know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Minister, 

you're not willing to answer my question so I'll have to supply 

the answer to you.  Now, Minister, I have here such a study as 

the one I just asked you about.  It is an analysis of your 

government-regulated wage policy enforced by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government in B.C. (British Columbia). 

 

Now this study has been prepared by three economics and 

business professors from the Simon Fraser University of the 

UBC (University of British Columbia).  They estimate that the 

government-regulated wage policy in B.C. cost that province's 

taxpayers about $100 million -- $100 million, Mr. Minister.  At 

this time of fiscal restraint in this province, can we afford a 

policy that is going to cost taxpayers millions of dollars every 

year just to make sure your Premier gets a round of applause at 

a union meeting over the weekend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I note the comments made by Mr. 

Chase in the newspaper article responding to 

these comments.  All I can say is I will look forward to 

receiving those comments directly from Mr. Chase, rather than 

being translated by the member from Maple Creek. 

 

It is not that we don't trust you to deal with figures.  It's not that 

we don't implicitly believe that you can handle large sums like 

a million dollars.  The deficits which you had when you were in 

office show that you are not to be trusted with sums of any 

amount. 

 

So I'll look forward to receiving the information directly from 

Mr. Chase and I suspect I'll get it in a reasonably accurate 

fashion in contradistinction to the nature of these questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Court of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1988/Une Loi modifiant la Loi de 1988 

sur le Tribunal de la sécurité routière de la Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- A Bill to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 2:06 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

Bill No. 18 - An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act respecting the Convention on the Law 

Applicable to Trusts 

Bill No. 25- - An Act to amend The Trustee Act 

Bill No. 26- - An Act respecting Frustrated Contracts 

Bill No. 12- - An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

Bill No. 13- - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Act 

Bill No. 01- - An Act Respecting The Saskatoon Foundation 

Bill No. 02- - An Act to amend An Act to Incorporate Full 

Gospel Bible Institute 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

Bill No. 15- - An Act respecting Certified General 

Accountants 

Bill No. 14- - An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

Bill No. 16- - An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 

Bill No. 9- - An Act to repeal The Agriculture Development 

Fund Act 

Bill No. 10- - An Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey 

Sales Act 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1995 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:09 p.m. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Act, 1980 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

give second reading to The Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the proposed changes to this Act are 

relatively minor, they are a necessary house cleaning matter.  

As most members are aware, these changes to The 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Amendment Act relate to 

the investment powers of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance). 

 

At this time the investment powers refer to the Canadian and 

British Insurance Companies Act (Canada) and The 

Department of Finance Act, 1983.  The key change in The 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act is section 10(1)(a) 

subsection (2), where the proposed legislation refers to the 

Insurance Companies Act (Canada). 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act came into effect in June 1992 when it 

replaced the Canadian and British Insurance Companies Act 

(Canada).  The SGI Act needs to be updated as it currently 

refers to a federal Act which no longer exists.  The proposed 

legislation now refers to the Insurance Companies Act 

(Canada) and The Crown Corporations Act, 1993. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, the proposed legislation will allow a 

corporation to dispose of any investments in any matter that it 

considers expedient.  It also indicates 

that the corporation may take any regulations respecting any 

investment authorized. 

 

The deletion of the need to have the investment board approve 

investments should have been done in 1988 when a number of 

legislative changes were enacted to accommodate the creation 

of the Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

In comparison, the same requirement was in The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act with respect to Saskatchewan Auto 

Fund investments but was correctly deleted from the AAIA 

(Automobile Accident Insurance Act) in 1988.  The ability to 

make regulations regarding investments simply clarifies what is 

presently in the Act but stated as a general provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these proposed changes to The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Amendment Act are minimal.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, they are necessary to ensure the corporation operates 

within the current legislative requirements.  This means the 

investment powers of the corporation will continue to refer to 

the federal Act respecting insurance companies and the 

provincial Financial Administration Act, previously the 

Department of Finance Act, through The Crown Corporations 

Act. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I now move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Amendment Act, 

1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think it 

would be appropriate to give the opposition a bit of time to 

review the Bill in a little more depth, and certainly contact 

interested parties and seek their involvement and their input 

regarding the Bill before we would move further on in second 

reading or even into committee.  And therefore at this time I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1415) 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- I ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, two guests that are seated in the west gallery that I 

grew up very close to -- Karl Kalina and his wife now, Brenda.  

And I've also taught their children at Milestone School.  So I'd 

just like to have you join with me in a warm welcome to them 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the Minister of Finance 

to please introduce the officials who have joined us here this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my 

right is the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright.  Behind 

John is Arun Srinivas, taxation policy analyst, budget analysis 

division; and behind me is . . . well, got them backwards -- 

Arun Srinivas is here behind me and next to him is Brian 

Smith, executive director, Public Employees Benefits Agency. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

wonder if you could just bring us up to date as to the purpose of 

the Bill and why it's before us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, to 

the member opposite, the purpose of the Bill is to bring the Bill 

up to date so that it complies with The Pension Benefits Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And, Madam Minister, could you explain a little 

bit about how this Bill ties in and refers back to The Pension 

Benefits Act, as to the real purpose of the Bill.  Or would it 

have been possible just to have tied it in to The Pension 

Benefits Act in the first place? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, they're separate statutes so they could not be 

combined.  And what this does is ensures that this statute is 

consistent with the other statute, which is The Pension Benefits 

Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, I noticed, I just take note of one 

area where it talks, and this is on page 3: 

 

Where a member who has named his or her spouse as 

beneficiary dies prior to the earliest day on which he or 

she could have elected to receive an allowance, an 

allowance is payable to the surviving spouse, the 

commuted value of which is equal to the greater of: 

 

And it goes through a bit of an explanation there.  What I'm 

wondering is, what is the purpose of this?  When we've talked 

about The Pension Benefits Act, we were just reaching out I 

believe at that time, making sure that spouses or whatever 

would receive the appropriate pension that was due them if one 

of their . . . or the other spouse happened to precede them 

through death.  Is that what you're basically talking of here too? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the member 

opposite is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

would you explain to us how the plan moves for giving the 

pensions on what was happening before 

to what is going to be happening under this plan.  And detail 

some of the ways that the plan will operate upon the 

termination, upon the individual receiving a pension plan, what 

his excess accounts are going to do and all of those kinds of 

things.  Would you give us a detailed assessment of those 

points, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could give 

to the member opposite some of the most significant changes 

that will affect the average person.  Your colleague mentioned 

one, which means that to ensure that a member upon his or her 

death will know that the spouse will receive the pension. 

 

Another change is that any excess contributions into the plan 

made by a member can be transferred out of the plan, or paid to 

the member when the member leaves employment.  Another is 

to enhance the portability of the pension asset so that there are 

more options to members upon termination of employment.  

And another will allow earlier payment of a pension asset to a 

member's spouse upon marital breakdown. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the individuals who receive early 

retirement be able to use the lump sum payment function as 

well; is that a part of how you're going to operate within the 

framework of this Act? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, one of the enhancements in terms of portability is that 

upon termination of employment the member can withdraw the 

funds and take them elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That will be under the restriction of an RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan) or a registered income 

fund; is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the member 

opposite is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I've had some discussions with individuals 

who had had their terminations made and then had actually 

difficulty in finding other employment.  And they had very 

serious concerns about this problem, and I'm happy to see that 

you're taking that seriously.  In fact they encouraged us to do it 

within the last year. 

 

Now where a court makes a property division in a marital . . . in 

The Matrimonial Property Act, would you explain to us how 

that is going to work.  Is it going to relate directly to the court 

order, or how is it going to make this money available; and will 

both parties be able to transfer those funds in an equal amount 

to what the court order says into another RRSP or registered 

income fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, and member 

opposite, if I could use an example: you and I are married -- 

which would be an interesting prospect -- but then we're 

divorced.  The court orders half of say my portion to be moved 

out.  Before, this wasn't possible.  It would have to occur upon 

-- say you were the employee -- your retirement.  Now it can 

occur 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

immediately.  But the only qualification is only half . . . the 

maximum amount that can be transferred out is half. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Only half of it can be transferred; 50 per cent 

of the total amount can be transferred to the spouse that wasn't 

working.  And that's regardless of what the court order says? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes.  The member opposite is 

correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 

Saskatchewan Universities 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Chairman.  Sorry.  I didn't mean to promote you so quickly. 

 

Madam Minister, this Bill deals with Crown foundations for the 

universities.  Who did you talk to about putting this together?  

Who was promoting this idea? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the main impetus for this Bill has come from the two 

universities which see significant benefits to them in terms of 

encouraging people to make contributions to the university. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Did you 

talk to any of the other educational institutions across the 

province, such as SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) or anyone else other than the 

universities, about setting up a foundation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, no, we haven't talked to other agencies.  This is an 

approach which has been taken in other provinces.  It began in 

British Columbia and other provinces have followed suit.  But 

we want to start here in a small way at first, that is, we want to 

try the approach with respect to the universities and see how 

that operates before we look beyond the universities to other 

post-secondary educational institutions. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I can 

certainly understand why the universities would be sponsoring 

such an idea because with the cut-backs to their funding that 

your government has provided, they have to find their money 

some place and research is one of the areas that they can cut out 

of the budget to maintain their core teaching services.  The 

establishment of a Crown foundation would 

allow them to gain access to funds to carry on research 

programs. 

 

Madam Minister, while I support this idea, I think it is a 

condemnation of your education policy that the universities 

have to seek outside funding to support their ongoing research 

because the provincial government is no longer prepared to 

fund the universities in a proper manner. 

 

Just how will this foundation help the universities, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, first of all, I'll comment on education funding.  It is 

true the province has made cuts to post-secondary education 

over three years in the neighbourhood of 8 per cent.  I would 

remind him as well though that the province of Alberta is 

proposing cuts to post-secondary education in the 

neighbourhood of 17 per cent. 

 

I would also remind the members of the Liberal Party that we 

have said as a province that we do not foresee any future cuts to 

post-secondary education, but the federal Liberal government 

has made it clear that in 1996-97 there will be cuts to 

post-secondary education. 

 

And we are telling people in the province to direct their 

concerns about that to the Liberal Party in Ottawa, because we 

support the idea that there should be a federal . . . a strong 

federal presence in funding for post-secondary education 

because provinces like Saskatchewan often educate students 

that end up working in other provinces. 

 

So although I agree with your point, I think that you should 

now be targeting your fire at the Liberal government in Ottawa 

because that's where the future cuts to post-secondary 

education are coming. 

 

And with respect to the technical question you asked, right now 

if you want to make a contribution to a university, the income 

deduction would be considered a charitable donation, and a 

charitable donation of course is only . . . you're only allowed to 

deduct 20 per cent of your net income. 

 

By passing this legislation it will mean that the total grant, or 

the total contribution, can be deducted.  So it's more attractive 

to you to donate money to a university than it was in the the 

past. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm sure 

that our Liberal colleagues in the House are prepared to defend 

themselves or their federal colleagues; I'm not. 

 

But when you talk about future cuts, Madam Minister, the 

impact is being felt today at the university on the cuts that you 

initiated.  In fact in . . . Which day was it?  In Saturday's paper 

it talks about the severe cuts to the university at Saskatoon 

where their tuition fees are going up 6.6 per cent and you're 

cutting eight and a half million dollars out of their budgets. 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Madam Minister, when you talk about the tax system favouring 

the foundations where the people will be allowed tax 

deductions, will this also apply to federal taxes as well as 

provincial taxes? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, just to leave off the 

debate on education cuts.  Tune in tomorrow, because you'll 

find students themselves who have said we haven't cut enough 

out of the university.  And you'll find me taking issue with that, 

saying that we do not believe that more should be cut. 

 

The tax system, yes, it will affect the federal government, and 

the federal government is aware of and approves of the change. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I will indeed be 

very interested in hearing which student says you haven't cut 

enough, because the students' union president from Saskatoon 

was complaining about the exact opposite on the radio this 

weekend.  So I will be interested in finding out just where the 

students think the further cuts should be taken. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that you've only consulted with the 

universities in dealing with this particular proposal.  Would it 

not also be beneficial to the other post-secondary education 

institutions to be allowed to have this type of a Crown 

foundation where funds could be donated to them and also 

receive tax considerations? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  Again, what I would say is what we're doing here is 

something akin to a pilot project, that is, we want to see what 

the effect of this is before we do it on a broader scale. 

 

So the request came from the two universities.  We have agreed 

to do this with respect to the universities, but we want to see 

what the impact is before we proceed further.  So it's, as I say, 

more in the nature of a pilot project.  Let's see how it works 

here before we expand it elsewhere. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What kind 

of an impact are you expecting and what are you studying for 

impacts? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  One of the things we'll be monitoring is the effect on 

the tax regime.  How much will the province lose in terms of 

foregone income.  We have no basis upon which to gauge that 

until we try the experiment for a period of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It seems 

to be a question then of how much money the government is 

prepared to forego.  What is the level that you will consider it 

to be a failure?  How much money would have to be donated 

before you would say that we can't afford this any longer and 

you would cut it off? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the 

member opposite.  What we're saying is, we have no intentions 

of reversing this policy.  That is, once this is in place we would 

not revoke this.  But one of the reasons why we want to 

proceed carefully and cautiously is we want to see how much 

revenue will be lost.  Because if we lose a significant amount of 

revenue here, then that will dictate how much . . . what future 

expansion into other areas would mean for the province.  So 

there is no intention of revoking this.  The issue would be we 

will learn from this about the possibilities of expanding it or 

not expanding it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if there was enough 

monies contributed to this foundation that it would be of 

concern to you on the tax side, I would suggest that the 

province of Saskatchewan would be doing very well in the 

research end of it. 

 

When the university gets into this funding of research, how will 

it be determined which programs are funded and which are not? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  One thing I should clarify is this will not be 

dedicated to research; it will be for the general use of the 

university.  So it does not have to be used for research. 

 

A board will be established.  The make-up of the board is 

established by the criteria of the federal government.  The 

board will be comprised of three government representatives, 

two university representatives chosen by the two boards of 

governors, and they will review requests. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Are you 

saying then that the funds that would be contributed to this 

Crown corporation could be used for administration, for the 

operating funds of the universities? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  As the member opposite would know, the 

government will not be setting criteria as to what the use of the 

funds should be.  Consistent with the idea of the independence 

of the university, the board of governors of each university will 

decide what the use of funds . . . what use the funds should be 

made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, there's a board set up 

here to administer this Crown foundation.  What do they do 

then?  Do they simply turn the money over to the university 

and the university board of directors says, oh, this is how we're 

going to spend it? 

 

What it seems to me what you're building here is another 

method of taxation on the people so that if enough people 

contribute to this Crown foundation to fund the universities, 

that your government will be able to then further cut grants to 

universities because they're getting their money from another, 

indirect source. 

 

Madam Minister, I think that's, in my mind, not the 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

intention of what a Crown foundation or a foundation at a 

university is for. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  A board has to be established in order for the agency 

to be considered a Crown.  So according to the federal criteria, 

the board has to be established with three government reps; two 

from each of the universities.  The money then flows to the 

board of governors at the university and they decide how 

money is spent, the same as they decide how the rest of the 

money coming to them from other sources is spent. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I think a large number 

of people in the province would be prepared to support a 

Crown foundation that was being given a particular mandate, 

such as research.  But when it comes to funding the general 

operations of the universities, most of the people in this 

province believe that is the duty of the provincial government 

through the education taxes and the other taxes collected in this 

province.  It's not the duty or not the area of jurisdiction for 

anyone who wishes to contribute to a Crown foundation to be 

funding the general operations of the university.  That should 

be the purview of the provincial government, the Department 

of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as someone who taught at the university, there's not 

that clean distinction.  Every faculty member engages in 

research, and the salary that you are relying on when you 

engage in research is the same salary you're relying on when 

you're teaching.  So the provincial government already funds 

research.  There is not that ability to make a clear, hard-line 

distinction between research and non-research.  And that is a 

decision that will be taken by the board of governors which is 

consistent with the idea that the university should be 

independent to make those choices. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, are there any funds 

currently going to the university in which someone, either the 

provincial government or a contributor from outside of the 

government bodies . . . designating that certain funds be used 

for research? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, there are huge dollars going to universities in the 

form of charitable donations which are designated by the donor 

for a particular purpose, and that will continue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would 

those contributions, if they were now made to this particular 

foundation, also be able to have that kind of direction put on 

them? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, what can occur is 

that the donor can, as a donor can now, say I'm giving X dollars 

to the university for this purpose, and they can designate a 

purpose. 

 

Now legally, we can't legally say to the university, you 

have to comply with this request.  But you know, common 

sense tells you that if the university wants people to contribute 

to the university, if somebody . . . if I'm prepared to donate 

money to the university, if I specify a purpose, they will want 

to comply because they'll want to encourage my neighbour to 

do the same thing.  But legally we can't go in and force them to 

comply, but we obviously pass on the request.  And there's no 

reason to believe that the universities will not see every reason 

to comply.  I believe they will comply. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When 

funds are passed through this Crown foundation to the 

university with a specific mandate, and let's say it's some area 

of research and the university is successful in their research, 

who has ownership then of that research?  Does the university 

have ownership?  Does the Crown foundation have ownership? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the university has ownership of all research of that 

type. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- When the university enters into a 

research agreement with an outside body, say a chemical 

company or a forestry company, who has ownership under that 

kind of a circumstance when there is research involved? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, it would depend on the agreement made. But again I 

think what you need to do is when the Department of Education 

is here, I would ask these detailed questions.  What I can tell 

you is under this particular legislation the university would 

have ownership unless there was some other reason, some other 

overriding consideration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You 

mentioned the board of directors for the Crown foundation, that 

there would be three appointees from government, and I 

believe you said there would be two appointees from each of 

the universities.  Is that the case?  Or is it two appointees from 

a list supplied by the universities? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, if I understand the 

member's question correctly, I think what you said is right, but 

I'll repeat it.  Three of the choices will come from the 

government; the other two will come from lists drawn up by the 

board of governors. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wasn't 

sure if I heard you right the first time when you said two from 

each of the universities. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the rationale in appointing . . . having 

three appointees from the government and only two from the 

universities? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

member opposite, first of all, this is the criteria set down by the 

federal government.  The idea behind it is this:  you're creating 

a Crown agency.  In order for it to be a Crown agency, it has to 

be a body in which (a) the people are appointed by the Crown, 

and (b) the Crown is well represented on it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Does the federal legislation designate 

that the Crown hold the majority of seats on the board? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  The member opposite is correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Within the 

Bill, it gives the government regulatory authority to set a 

quorum for a meeting.  Madam Minister, I believe it's outlined 

-- if I can find the correct page here: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may fix a quorum for 

the transaction of business at meetings of the board. 

 

My concern there is that you could set, say, a quorum at three; 

you could have all of the government members at a meeting 

and none of the representatives from the university.  I think if 

you're going to have board meetings, that you should at least 

have one representative from the universities there, and that a 

quorum include such. 

 

I have sent you across an amendment.  I had sent it previously 

to the Minister of Education on this, that a quorum would 

include one member from the university.  Now as you set the 

regulations in this, you may set it at two, you may set it at 

three, or even all five members of the board, as you wish.  And 

I will be proposing this amendment, that at least one member of 

quorum be a member taken from the universities' lists.  Do you 

have any comments on that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I have no problem with the intent of the amendment; I 

support the intent.  What I'm being advised though, is that from 

a technical point of view, that intent is better expressed in the 

regulations rather than in the legislation.  So what I can say is, 

yes we support the idea, but what we would commit to is to put 

it in the regulations instead of in the legislation.  And that is 

merely for technical considerations.  That is, it is more 

appropriate in the regulations than here. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may think it 

better suited in regulation because of the technicalities.  I'm not 

sure what technicalities you're talking about.  If it was included 

in the legislation, then it would make it somewhat more 

difficult to change.  In regulations, you can designate today that 

one of the board members from the university lists would be 

part of a quorum, but tomorrow you could change that again, 

and there's no recourse from anyone within this House to do 

anything about it.  And there's no recourse for the universities 

to do anything about it either. 

But if it's in legislation, Madam Minister, then you would at 

least have to come back to this House to make a change.  And 

the general public would see that there's a change being made 

and they could question why. 

 

So, Madam Minister, exactly what technicalities are in place 

that makes it difficult to put it in the legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  Section 10(7) establishes that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council will establish a quorum.  And what 

follows from that is that the details as to how that quorum will 

be established will be outlined in the regulations. 

 

So what we're saying is there's no problem with doing this.  It's 

a worthwhile addition to what is here.  But the proper place to 

do it is in the regulations because 10(7) allows you to do it 

within the context of the regulations.  So it's a matter merely of 

where it's placed. 

 

With respect to, we would change it to try to ensure the 

universities weren't represented on and on and on.  We're doing 

this to assist the universities.  This is their idea.  We think it's a 

good idea, a worthwhile idea.  Our role is one of a pass-through 

-- to pass, to make it easier for people to donate money to the 

university and to pass the money through to the university. 

 

We have no power here.  That is we have no power. If an 

individual wants to donate money to scholarships, we have no 

power nor desire to change the purpose of the original 

donation.  So we have no reason to want to change this except 

at the request of the universities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll come back to 

this because I think that while it can be done in regulation -- 

certainly that's what this clause outlines -- I think that it would 

be better placed in regulation. 

 

You mentioned that the foundation is simply a mechanism to 

pass funds through to the university.  Exactly how would they 

go about doing that?  Let's say someone . . . the foundation had 

a capitalization of a million dollars.  Now how do they pass that 

funds through?  Do they just simply say, University of 

Saskatchewan you get X dollars and the University of Regina 

you get X dollars and here we go? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  There are two separate foundations.  So if you 

wanted to make a donation to one university, that would go 

through one foundation, and to make a donation to the other 

university, it would go through another foundation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When the 

foundation -- either one of them -- have some funds, what do 

they do?  What determinations do they make in dealing with 

those funds?  You say it's simply a pass 

_through.  So someone gives the foundation for the University 

of Regina some money. 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

Do they simply just turn around and turn it back over to the 

university?  Or what happens to the money in the process? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  If I could take him through an example of how this 

would work -- I say that I want to donate money to the 

University of Saskatchewan to be used for libraries. I go to the 

University of Saskatchewan.  They begin the process.  They 

notify the government that they would like to have this flow 

through the Crown foundations process.  The board is 

constructed.  We pass through the Crown foundations board the 

donation.  It goes back to the university, and the university 

determines -- it has the power to do this -- it determines that 

yes, the money will be donated to libraries. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Then it's 

simply a legal mechanism for people to funnel money to the 

university.  The board of directors actually has no authority.  

They in turn, say they're given a certain amount of money, they 

would pass that entire sum of money on to the university and 

perhaps directing it to whatever the person who was donating it 

wished it to go to.  But the foundation itself will retain none of 

the funds? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will the 

people who are sitting on the board of directors receive any 

remunerations, or will they receive any expense allowances.? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite -- expenses only. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, and where 

will these expense funds come from if the money donated to 

the foundation are simply passed straight through and the total 

dollar value, as you said, would be passed on to the university? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  The university development offices have agreed to 

handle the costs associated with these sorts of expenses because 

the legislation is being brought to the legislature at their 

request. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So 

therefore indirectly the monies that are given to the foundations 

once they've been passed on to the university, the university 

can turn around and fund the administration of this particular 

program.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is essentially correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm not sure that 

the people who are prepared to contribute would like it done in 

that particular fashion.  Perhaps they do; I don't know.  Very 

few people around the province, I would suspect, are aware of 

these 

foundations at the present time because they're simply in the 

initial stages of their set-up. 

 

Madam Minister, why are the funds turned over as property to 

the Crown initially? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I think the member opposite answered that a few 

minutes ago yourself when you said, it's a way to ensure that 

there can be different tax treatment of these funds to make it 

more attractive to people to donate to the university. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How long 

will the funds sit in the Crown's hands before they're passed on 

to the Crown foundation or to the universities? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that will be decided 

by the universities as soon as they're ready to access them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm sure in light 

of the funding situation of universities, they would prefer to 

access them immediately.  Would it be possible for them to do 

so?  How long of a notification time will be in place from the 

time that someone applies or provides funds to the Crown 

foundation before the university would have access to that 

money? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this can be done as 

quickly as the universities want it to be done.  All that has to 

happen is that the request has to be made, the board has to 

meet, the funds have to be passed on to the university when 

they have designated the purpose for the funds.  So from our 

point of view, there's no reason for any time delays. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, would it be 

possible then whenever the Crown and the Crown foundation 

receive funds, to simply pass it on to the university accounts? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes, that's what I said.  As soon as the university is 

ready to access the money, it'll be passed on to them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would it be possible for the university to 

put in a blanket request then that all funds be immediately 

passed on to them rather than an individual request? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, there would be a 

problem with that in that what the universities will want to try 

to do is to respect the donor's request.  So that one donor . . . I 

may want my money to go to the library and my colleague may 

want his money to go to research at vet med; somebody else 

may want their money to go to something else.  So what we 

have to ensure is that the process is in place for the university 

to receive that particular donation and to look at the purpose for 

it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

How would these Crown foundations differ from those in our 

neighbouring provinces? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, there are no 

differences that we're aware of. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How 

would they differ from those in other parts of Canada, not 

necessarily our neighbouring provinces, or throughout North 

America?  I'm particularly thinking here of the foundations that 

provide funds to such universities as M.I.T. (Massachusetts 

Institute of Technology) to Harvard down in the States, where 

funds are contributed to a foundation.  They in turn use that 

money for research.  They own the intellectual property rights 

that are generated from that research. 

 

I believe it's the Hewitt Rand or Hewlett Packard Corporation, 

one of the two, which is owned by a university on the eastern 

seaboard that was provided its initial seed money through these 

research and through Crown . . . not Crown foundations down 

there, but research foundations at the U.S. universities. 

 

Was any consideration given to this type of a foundation? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the intent is the 

same, but we worked around Canadian tax law obviously and 

the need to comply with that, and American tax law is quite 

different.  So the intent is the same, but the details obviously 

are specifically geared to the Canadian situation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Can -- and I'm familiar with this, and 

perhaps I should be asking the Minister of Education -- but can 

the universities hold patents on various intellectual property? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite is right; you should be asking the Minister of 

Education.  I can tell you tentatively, when I was at university 

they were doing a lot of work on exactly that issue and exactly 

what their rights were. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In clause 

3 of the Bill, it talks about restricting and regulating the powers 

of a foundation.  This Act is dealing strictly with foundations 

for the universities.  I just want to make that clear.  There is no 

other possibilities of restricting or regulating other foundations 

or designating head offices, etc.? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  That's 

all the questions I have for you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to make an amendment to this clause if I could, please. 

 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "may fix a quorum" where 

they occur in subclause (7) thereof the following: 

 

", to include at least one of the persons appointed pursuant 

to subsection (2)," 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, as we discussed 

earlier on this particular amendment, we were talking of the 

technicalities that you felt restricted or better suited allowing it 

to be left in regulation.  I would suggest, Madam Minister, that 

while regulation can indeed deal with this situation, regulation 

is somewhat more fluid than I would like to see in this piece of 

legislation. 

 

I would like to have it fixed that indeed one member of the list 

appointed from the university would be part of the quorum.  

Now in regulation it would still allow you to set the number of 

people who would form a quorum, and if you so desire you can 

set it at one, or you can set it at five or any place in between.  

But I sincerely feel that at least one member from the university 

list should be a part of any quorum that is established. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, I'd like to take an opportunity 

to respond to that.  Again I have no problem with the intent.  

As I said, I think it is more appropriate in the regulations. 

 

But another point I do want to make is a timing issue.  If the 

member opposite wanted this amendment made . . . I know the 

legislation has been available to him for some time.  We only 

were notified of this change hours ago.  We haven't had a 

chance to talk to the two universities.  We haven't even had an 

opportunity to consult fully with Justice yet.  So really this is 

one of the reasons why I would prefer to do it in the 

regulations.  Give us the time to talk to those folks. 

 

If you in future want an amendment made, I think one of the 

key things is to give us a little bit more lead time, and then it is 

quite possible that this would be appropriate.  But without 

having an opportunity to go through it with the two 

universities, go through it with Justice, to have somebody look 

at any implications that I am not aware of today, I would prefer 

to leave it to the regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, let me ask you, 

what would you foresee as a negative aspect of allowing at 

least one person from the university list as being part of the 

quorum? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, none that I'm aware 

of.  That's why we're prepared to do it in the regs.  But what I'm 

saying is, the timing has not allowed us.  For example, I would 

like to have the 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

Department of Justice go through it and see if there's a 

problem.  So the timing just has not allowed the kind of 

scrutiny that I would like in order to put it today in the 

regulations and to lock it in. 

 

But my point is more a constructive point.  In future I think this 

government is always open to amendments, but they should be 

presented to us with enough lead time that we can actually do 

some homework and be sure that there is nothing that is a 

problem.  I do not foresee any problems, but I'm not a Justice 

official either. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What 

would you feel would be an appropriate lead time for an 

amendment? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm . . . (inaudible) . . 

. to kind of write this is in stone, but two or three days.  I 

received this.  I attempted to go out in question period and get 

Justice to give us an opinion, but they were not able to do it as 

quickly as I'd hoped.  So had we had . . . had I had two or three 

working days, it would have been possible to get the kinds of 

opinions I needed and then, quite possibly, would have said I 

have no problem.  I don't know.  But without those last checks, 

I prefer to do it in the regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, what types of 

legal concerns arise in your mind by accepting this type of an 

amendment?  I believe that it's a fairly straightforward 

amendment.  Your legislation allows the cabinet to set a 

quorum.  The only thing this would do is say that one of the 

people appointed from the universities' lists would be part of 

that quorum. 

 

And I don't understand how it can be such a major problem to 

say that we can't have, as part of quorum, somebody from the 

university.  There's two people to choose from.  It doesn't 

designate which one, from which university, but rather that just 

one of the university people be part of the quorum. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  I want the member opposite to think carefully about 

what I'm saying.  The idea, I think, is a fine idea. I have no 

problem, and I think the intent I agree with. 

 

What I said from the very beginning is the concerns are merely 

technical as to whether or not it should be in the legislation or 

in the regulations.  Off the top of their heads, my department 

has said the regulations is the more appropriate place, but we're 

not Justice department officials.  Had we had more lead time, 

had we had the capacity to say to Justice, technically does it 

matter to you whether it is in the legislation or in the 

regulations, we may very well have been able to say, lock it in 

to the legislation. 

 

So my point is that I think one of the key things in government 

is to realize what your job is and what your job isn't.  I'm not a 

Justice official.  I do not know if there is a technical problem 

here at all -- there may 

very well not be.  But I want to be sure that the process is 

followed and it's signed off and Justice says, no problem. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, while you admit that 

you're not a Justice person, a lawyer, neither am I.  But it seems 

fairly straightforward, clear, common sense.  It's only an 

addition to the clause that you have put in place in the Bill.  It 

merely adds the fact that one of the university people would be 

part of the quorum.  And I don't understand what the legal 

ramifications would be of allowing this amendment to pass. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, could I propose to 

the member opposite a compromise: that is, we will give to you 

in writing the commitment that that criteria will be there.  

Okay?  So you can be assured that it will be at least in the 

regulations.  And then you can have your point satisfied; I can 

have my point satisfied in ensuring that there is no . . . Because 

as I say, my department says to me, really it should be in the 

regulations; that's the appropriate place for it, not here.  Okay?  

So I will give that commitment to you in writing, that you will 

have it.  It's just that it's more appropriate probably in the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, knowing the 

dynamics of the House, I'm sure that that is probably the best 

commitment I can get from you on this issue.  I would hope 

though that, while I will accept that commitment from you, that 

if the situation arises that this is permitted by your Justice 

people, that they find it acceptable, that they see no particular 

things wrong with it, that you would give consideration to 

putting it in legislation.  I understand that that would not 

happen this session, but at some point in the future if it would 

be possible, providing it's acceptable to your officials, to put it 

in legislation.  I'm prepared to accept your written assurances. 

 

The Chair: -- The question before us then is the amendment 

moved by the member for Souris-Cannington to clause 10 of 

the Bill to: 

 

Amend clause 10 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words "may fix a quorum" where 

they occur in subclause (7) thereof the following: 

 

", to include at least one of the persons appointed pursuant 

to subsection (2)," 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Clause 1 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a number 

of questions regarding this retirement package.  One of the 

things that I'd like to find out from you, Madam Minister, is the 

plans that are in place, they deal with the public employees' 

government contributory plan, the public service 

superannuation plan, the Liquor Board superannuation plan, 

SaskPower, SaskTel, and Workers' Comp.  Are there any other 

agencies that should be included in that list of those people 

involved in the impact of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The responsibility for making the assessments 

of whether you're going to have early retirement, are they all 

going to be made by the Executive Council or the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, whichever way you want to say it, and 

they would be based then on the Income Tax Act of Canada, 

and would you confirm that, and then also tell me what those 

criteria are that the Income Tax Act, in a general sense, restricts 

or puts into place for the parameters that you have to deal with. 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes you're correct in your assumptions there.  And 

with respect to the income tax accrued, you can qualify for 

accrued pension entitlements if your age together with service 

exceeds 80 years, age which exceeds 60 years, or service which 

exceeds 30 years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, so the Income Tax Act specifies that.  

Your retirement package will have to put into place the 

differential between what your early retirement plan calls for 

and the specifications under the income tax.  Or would you 

give me an explanation of how this is supposed to work. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I'll give an example, and if this doesn't answer 

entirely your questions, we can go back at it again.  Let's say 

that my deputy minister retires and he's got $150,000 in his 

pension. He can turn that into a life annuity.  He would also get 

a severance benefit and a bridging benefit -- and I want to 

clarify he is not retiring. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you explain that bridge fund that you 

talked about.  Would you give me an explanation of that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the bridging benefit is $300 a month until age 65 . . . 

$350 until age 65.  And obviously the deputy minister is too 

young; we couldn't afford that level of bridging benefit. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- For each of the groups that contribute to this 

plan, are they all going to be put into the same category in these 

instances under the life annuity and the bridging function of the 

plan?  Is that where each of them are going to get the authority 

to do this? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct for members in the new plan. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  When you decide . . . let's say your 

combination for years of service and age only reaches 70, not 

the 80.  Give me an overview of how that individual would 

then qualify for early retirement. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, that person would 

not qualify.  They have to reach the threshold to be even 

considered, so that person wouldn't even be considered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So this only deals with the thresholds that you 

mentioned, those three.  Okay.  So the person who reaches that 

threshold, okay, he's 50 and he's got 30 years of service.  He 

reaches the threshold and from 50 to 65 he would qualify for 

the $300 a month incremental? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Did you make those calculations that 300 

would be what they were paid or is that just a number that you 

took out of the air? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, the figure 350 -- I'm sorry, it's not 300, it's 350 -- was 

chosen because it's comparable to the Old Age Security figure. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There is 30,000 people enrolled in the plans.  

Have you any idea of how many people meet that threshold?  

Are there a significant amount of them or would you be able to 

tell me how many there are? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, one of the key criteria, from the point of view of the 

government, is there can be no back-filling of the job; that is if 

you want to take early retirement, to be eligible that job has to 

be an abolished job.  So that severely restricts the number of 

people who will qualify.  You know, you could run a computer 

run and find out how many people would meet these criteria.  

But that number would not be a realistic number because unless 

your job is actually going to be abolished, you would not 

qualify. 

 

Now what we're expecting in '94-95 is the maximum, the top 

end, would be 70 people who would qualify -- that is would 

meet these criteria, would pass the threshold, but would also be 

in a position to have their jobs abolished. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So cabinet has made the determination that 

the position has to be abolished first, and then the criteria of the 

threshold have to be met as well.  Okay, you're going to have 

70 people, estimated, in this position.  Have you any volume of 

dollars that you've calculated the cost versus the cost if they 

stay on?  Is there a relationship between those numbers on what 

it would cost to move them off or 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

keep them on as employees? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, this is something that 

we see as cost saving; that is we're better off going this route 

than maintaining the job.  But we won't know the exact mix 

because we don't know how many people will actually be in a 

position of holding a job that is going to be abolished, meeting 

the thresholds, and deciding to opt for early retirement, because 

they have other choices that might be available to them as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, one of those other choices, would it be 

bumping somebody else out who has less seniority? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that is another determination made by 

cabinet to that individual, but it would also be in the 

agreements that they have, their working agreements that they 

have with the government.  Do each of these various agencies 

have a different agreement on those areas, or are they all the 

same where they would be able to bump; or what the criteria 

for bumping privileges would be? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to get your most 

precise answer, I'd ask the Public Service Commission, but 

there will be variations from agency or department to 

department. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are you doing this on the basis of individuals 

or are you doing this on the basis of positions? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, the most correct 

answer is position.  That is that the triggering mechanism here 

will be the abolishing of a job.  Then everything else is 

triggered after that.  But that decision has to be made first in 

order for any of this to come into play. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I don't have a problem with that although I see 

the opportunity for the government to say to this individual that 

that position is going to be abolished.  And then the individual 

in that position is gone and has to go through the process of 

bumping in order to get back as a government employee.  

Because the way I see it here in this 47.5 (2), it says: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may, by order: 

 

(a) designate an employee as eligible to exercise the 

option; 

 

You say it's a position, but the individual is going to be 

impacted in that position, and that makes it fairly significant.  

As you go through all of those, there is the designation of the 

employer being the one that has the focus of attention.  And all 

you have to do to eliminate an employee is to make his position 

abolished and then go and open up another position some place 

else that has different criteria, and then the individual is gone. 

And that is the concern that I would have, and I just raise it as a 

point to consider.  I'm not going to argue with you about it, but 

I would say that you could easily do that and then you could 

eliminate an individual who has maybe had an idea or two that 

were contrary to what the government of the day is suggesting. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I know what the 

member opposite is saying.  That if you don't like an employee 

for some reason, you abolish that job and get rid of that person 

and then you create another job somewhere else.  Okay, so I 

understand the concern.  That concern should be covered off 

because what we look at in the agency is the total number of 

jobs.  That is, if you are allowed three early retirements, the 

number of positions that you are going to be allocated is going 

to be dropped by three.  So there's no idea here of having the 

capacity to back-fill it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that going to be the same with SaskPower 

and SaskTel as well? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly the intent 

will be the same.  The only qualification is, because some of 

the Crowns operate in a competitive environment, there may be 

occasions in which they have a different rationale.  But 

certainly the intent will be the same. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's all the questions I have, Mr. Chairman.  

I want to thank the minister for bringing her officials here 

today, and as usual they have done a noteworthy job.  And I 

want to thank them on behalf of the opposition. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I also want to thank the officials, and 

I want to thank the member opposite for the civility of his 

questions and for taking my proposal instead there. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1530) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 

Saskatchewan Universities 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister if she will introduce her 

officials to the members of the committee again, as it's been 

some time since the department has been before the committee. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson.  To my immediate right is Robin Johnson, acting 

executive director of finance and operations; behind him is the 

associate deputy minister responsible for the post-secondary 

side of the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment; and immediately behind myself is Dr. Ken 

Horsman, who is the associate deputy minister . . . or assistant 

deputy minister for K to 12.  And to my far right is Jim 

Benning, who is the CEO (chief executive officer) for 

Saskatchewan Communications Network. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, officials, I'd like to welcome Jim here today.  I'm just 

wondering how he's making out in his French classes.  Jim and 

I were together in one of those. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How's your French working out? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Pas petit, Pas petit.  Madam Minister, I 

brought up a question or a number of questions to you in 

question period dealing with Ross Joorisity and Petria Racette.  

And I would like to ask, wonder where . . . what has happened 

with that case that you can report on today?  We brought it up 

in question period and you were going to look into the 

situation.  And I wonder if you could give us a report. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised that we've approached the 

private vocational school involved and they are approaching 

the students to work out a repayment plan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think at 

this time what I'd like to do is read a letter from Ross and Petria 

to yourself into the record because 

they tell me that nothing has really changed in their situation 

yet, at least nothing that they've heard about. 

 

Ross, in particular, has an opportunity for employment that 

until this situation is cleared up, his potential new employer 

doesn't wish to hire him because of the collection agencies that 

are pursuing him because the funds have not yet been paid back 

and the situation cleared up. 

 

Their letter is of March 18, and it's addressed to the Hon. Ms. 

Atkinson: 

 

We are writing in regards to the problem we have had with 

student loans and the Reliance College of Business, 

Darlene South-Wilkie.  As you are probably aware, we are 

still waiting to hear about the money that is owed to 

Canada student loans by Reliance College of Business.  

We have been in contact with Darlene Heska-Willard from 

the vocational schools since February 25, 1994.  After 

obtaining information from Reliance College of Business 

and Saskatchewan student loans for vocational schools, we 

contacted Darlene Heska-Willard again on Thursday, 

March 10, 1994. 

 

After looking over our files and examining them 

thoroughly, Darlene Heska-Willard told us that she would 

contact us the week of March 14, 1994, of what 

percentage and the amount of money that the college owed 

to Canada student loans which she has failed to do.  When 

asked if she had contacted Darlene South Wilkie, the 

former owner of Reliance College of Business, for 

information on our behalf as to why the college had not 

refunded our tuition to Canada student loans, Darlene 

Heska-Willard told us that she was unable to reach 

Darlene South Wilkie since she was no longer the owner 

of Reliance and had no knowledge of how to contact her.  

Being that Darlene Heska-Willard is the supervisor of 

Avant-Garde College of Esthetics, you would think that 

she would know that Darlene South Wilkie is the principal 

and part-owner of the vocational school, Avant-Garde 

College of Esthetics. 

 

We are puzzled as to why she would provide us with false 

information.  We felt, after a telephone conversation on 

Monday, March 14, 1994 with Darlene Heska-Willard, 

that she was unprofessional in her position, being a liaison 

between school owners and students.  We can see clearly 

that there is no liaison procedure being done.  We do 

believe that she is lacking respect for consumers and 

taxpayers. 

 

Madam Minister, if you would look under the Canadian 

charter of rights, we are under the position to ask for a 

complete, new investigation and a new, unbiased 

representative. 

 

Sincerely, Ross Joorisity and Petria Racette. 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

Madam Minister, have you responded to this letter?  And if so, 

in what manner? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- No, I have not responded to the letter.  

I've asked my officials in the department to give me a status 

report on the kinds of concerns that the two young people raise 

in their letter.  So I'm waiting for that response. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What is 

the position of Darlene Heska-Willard within the department?  

What are her duties, and what is she supposed to perform? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- She's a liaison person between those 

who own private vocational schools and those students who 

attend private vocational schools. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So in her capacity as a liaison officer, 

exactly what duties would she perform? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- She licenses, monitors, evaluates, and 

deals with student appeals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What duties does she perform in the area 

of licensing?  What kind of reviews are done, what kind of 

ongoing reviews, to make sure that the licensing procedures are 

up to standards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We take financial information from 

private vocational schools each year.  They have to renew their 

licence each year and there are two on-site visits to each private 

vocational school in each year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What time 

of the year?  Is there a particular frame of time in which these 

financial reviews are done?  Is it after the fiscal year, or just 

when would they be performed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Those reports are to be to the 

department before the end of December.  As you know, 

educational institutions have their operating year from January 

to December. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If this was 

being done for the end of December, did the department catch 

the fact that a number of student loans were not being repaid in 

the proper manner?  Those students that had withdrawn from 

the educational process, whose student loans . . . a certain 

percentage of which should have been reimbursed back to the 

student loans, Canada student loans and Saskatchewan student 

loans. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That would not show up in the financial 

information.  As you know, private vocational schools are in 

essence small business or private business, private enterprise in 

the province, and in order to receive any kind of financial 

reimbursement, the student would have to deal with the private 

company involved. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If you're 

not receiving any information from the 

vocational schools because they're private schools, on what 

criteria then do you license them, based on the financial 

situation? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well we do receive financial 

information from the private vocational schools.  We also make 

two on-site visits to each private vocational school. 

 

But as a matter of tuition fee reimbursement, that's a matter 

between the student and the private vocational school, just as 

with the University of Saskatchewan.  If a student drops out of 

a class and they wait for a refund from the University of 

Saskatchewan, that's between the university and the student. 

 

Now as I told you in question period when you raised this 

matter, that under the legislation the student is entitled to 

reimbursement.  This is a situation where there's been a transfer 

of ownership.  The person you refer to no longer owns this 

particular private vocational school; a new person owns the 

private vocational school.  However, the new person takes on 

the old person's or the former owner's liabilities.  So if in fact it 

is found that these students followed the proper process and 

they are in fact entitled to reimbursement, there are measures 

for the department to use to ensure that those two young people 

receive their reimbursement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When 

you're doing the reviews of the finances of the private 

vocational schools, how do you determine then whether or not 

the figures they're providing you are indeed accurate?  Is there 

some form of auditing system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The private vocational schools are 

audited by provincial . . . not provincial auditors but by private 

auditors that are licensed in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, your department 

itself does not provide any auditing of those funds.  You simply 

take the auditing provided to you by that particular firm.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Business in the province for income tax 

purposes usually have private auditors audit their books and 

therefore provide a financial statement.  The private vocational 

schools provide the department with an audited financial 

statement; as does the University of Saskatchewan provides the 

department with a audited financial statement; as does SIAST; 

as does all of the regional colleges. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

wonder if you could explain to me how the student loans were 

not paid back as under regulation they are to be, and how . . . 

who would be checking on this and what is the procedure to 

ensure that student loans are indeed returned from the part of 

the tuition fee that was not used?  How do you ensure that that 

happens? 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Unless the student raises the issue with 

us, we have no way of tracing it because this is a matter of 

Canada student loans, not Saskatchewan student loans.  The 

students took out a loan with the Canada student loan program, 

and the Canada student loan funds were disbursed to the private 

vocational school operator for tuitions.  When the students drop 

the course the funds are repaid to Canada student loan. 

 

So I guess what I'm saying is that this is a Canada student loan 

problem, not a Saskatchewan student loan problem.  We don't 

monitor Canada student loans; we do have information 

regarding Saskatchewan student loans.  And as I said earlier, 

these people, if it's found that they followed the proper process 

for leaving this particular private vocational school, are entitled 

to have those funds repaid to Canada student loan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it may indeed be 

a problem for Canada student loans, but it's also a problem for 

Saskatchewan students.  And as the minister responsible for 

Education, you are the one who licences the private vocational 

schools in Saskatchewan, and you are the one responsible to 

ensure that things are operated according to the law and 

according to the regulations of the department. 

 

When student loans are supposed to be returned, and the 

students are entitled to receive that money reimbursed to them 

or to Canada student loans, then it's your department's 

responsibility to ensure that those legal requirements are met.  

And indeed, Canada student loans are the ones who are entitled 

to receive the money through the students, repaid by the 

vocational college, but you, Madam Minister, are responsible to 

ensure that that happens; that the law is carried out. 

 

What procedures do you have in place to ensure that that does 

indeed happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The procedure is this: that the student 

contacts the department -- because this is a private vocational 

school, this is not a public institution -- the student contacts the 

department and indicates that they have dropped out of a 

program that they were registered in and had student loan 

money paid to, and advises us of that situation.  We then 

contact the private vocational school to determine if the student 

left under the appropriate circumstances, and then advise the 

college that they are to reimburse Canada student loans. 

 

We were not aware of this situation until the end of February.  

In fact, you tell me that the student sent me a letter on March 

18, 1994.  I didn't receive it until today; it was hand delivered 

to my office March 28.  So we have a situation of about a 

month in duration.  We have asked the students to provide us 

with some information.  I understand that that has not yet been 

done.  Your office phoned my office this morning.  My staff 

advised me of this, and I asked the students to come and see the 

staff in my office directly because 

there's some information that I understand we still require.  

We're waiting for that. 

 

Now that doesn't mean that we can't assist in the meantime.  

The problem is with the present owner.  She has the liabilities 

of the previous owner.  We are in the process of trying to help 

these students.  And I can assure you that these students, if all 

of the facts that they've presented are found to be accurate, will 

be helped by the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm 

sure that's of some relief to the students, that they will be 

helped.  But their problem is that they need the help right away.  

It's not your door that the collection agency is knocking on; it's 

their door.  And they need some resolution quickly. 

 

And we brought this up in question period 10 days or so ago -- 

I'm not exactly . . . I don't remember when, but about 10 days, 

two weeks ago -- and still for these students nothing has 

happened. 

 

Madam Minister, you talk of it being the students' 

responsibility to inform your department that they are no longer 

part of the educational process.  But how many students 

attending private vocational schools are aware of that?  When 

these particular students talked to Darlene South-Wilkie about 

leaving her institution, they were told that she would look after 

everything, that they simply returned their books, signed the 

forms that they were no longer going to be part of her school, 

and that she would look after everything.  The next thing the 

students know is they've got a collection agent knocking on the 

door. 

 

So how many students, Madam Minister, know that it's their 

responsibility to contact your department?  Surely there should 

be some other process in place rather than simply the students 

being forced to call.  Who do they call in the Department of 

Education?  Do they call the minister?  Do they call the deputy 

minister?  Who do they contact?  Is there a process in place that 

lets the students know what is supposed to happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- These students receive a student loan 

information booklet.  The information is in the booklet, I'm 

told.  They also receive a brochure; it's in the brochure. 

 

Now let's be clear on this.  This is a private vocational school.  

The students are aware that it's a private vocational school.  

They go to that private vocational school for their private 

educational training.  This is not a public institution.  They 

make arrangements with Canada student loan to have tuition 

paid to the private vocational school.  They go to the private 

vocational school.  They decide that this is not the kind of 

training that they want.  They quit the private vocational 

school.  They go to the owner of the private vocational school 

-- this is a private owner of a private vocational school -- and 

the private owner says, I'll take care of it.  It's not taken care of.  

They have a collection agency contacting them.  I suspect that 

they 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

might have had Canada student loans contacting them maybe 

before the private collection agency contacts them. 

 

You shake your head.  Well I suspect that Canada student loans 

contacted them about repayment.  They come to the 

Department of Education, Training and Employment at the end 

of February, and they want to know where their money is to 

repay Canada student loans. 

 

I'm told by the officials in the department that the officials 

asked for some more information.  I'm told by the officials in 

the department that they had not yet received that information 

when you raised the question in question period.  I'm told by 

the officials in the department that the Act is clear. 

 

The problem that we have is that we have new owners here.  

Darlene South is no longer the owner of Reliance; Dorothy 

Prior is now the owner of Reliance.  Dorothy Prior takes over 

Ms. South's liabilities.  Ms. Prior, as I'm told, is now legally 

responsible to repay this debt to Canada student loans if in fact 

all of the facts as presented by the two students are accurate. 

 

We've asked the students for information.  Once we have all of 

that information, we'll be in a much better position to help these 

students.  If all of the information that the students have 

provided thus far and we get the additional factual information 

from them that we're requesting, we will be able to assist these 

two students. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

students tell me that they were not contacted prior to someone 

knocking on the door from the collection agency, looking for 

their money.  The student, Ross Joorisity, tells me that his 

student loan was through his financial institution.  He had 

moved from the address that was on the list.  He had informed 

the bank that he had moved and gave them the new address.  

When he returned some months later, they still had his old 

address on his account at the bank. 

 

He informed them again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that's 

right, it's not the government, it's the bank in this particular 

case.  He informed them again of his new address.  After he 

was contacted by the collection agency, he returned to the bank 

to check and see what address they had on his files, and they 

still had his old address. 

 

Again he informed them of his new address, and this was in the 

middle of the week I believe it happened.  He returned again on 

the next Monday, and they still hadn't corrected the address.  

He was not contacted at any point in time, is the information he 

gives me, by the bank or by student loans that his accounts 

were in arrears.  His first knowledge of it was when the 

collection agency contacted him.  And then he contacted 

Darlene Heska-Willard and Darlene South-Wilkie about the 

situation, and that's when it ended up in here, Madam Minister, 

when he couldn't get any answers. 

Both of the students in question . . . And since it was raised in 

question period, other students have now come forward with 

the same problems from the Reliance Business School.  So, 

Madam Minister, it's not an isolated case.  It seems to be an 

ongoing, recurring problem that we have here.  So, Madam 

Minister, I would think that there needs to be some tightening 

up of the system here some place that doesn't allow this to 

happen.  Obviously there's something wrong in the system if 

this can go on for a long period of time and occur over and over 

again. 

 

There was a situation also reported about a year ago where this 

happened.  The students in question brought it up to the media 

and they received their . . . the payments were made to Canada 

student loans.  But in this particular case it hasn't happened yet, 

and the school has indeed changed, and new ownership is in 

place.  But the person that was in charge at the time when the 

problem occurred is now in charge of another vocational school 

as the principal and part owner of that school.  Potentially the 

problem could reoccur again, not necessarily just at that school 

but at any of the vocational schools. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I would think it would be incumbent on 

you to take a very serious look at how the student loans are 

administered at the private vocational schools to ensure that if a 

student leaves that the proper procedures are then followed.  

Students, when they're leaving a school, the prime motive, the 

prime thought in their head is not to ensure that the student 

loans coming from the private vocational school are returned to 

Canada student loans, particularly when the administrator of 

the school says everything will be looked after. 

 

(1600) 

 

I would think that there should be some mechanism in place to 

ensure, to start off with, that the students are indeed attending 

the educational institution.  If the student has a one-year student 

loan, wouldn't it not be incumbent on the government or on the 

student loans area to ensure that that student does return to 

university in January, or whatever educational institution they 

were attending to ensure that that student loan was paid out for 

someone who is indeed attending school. 

 

In this particular case, had that happened, it would have been 

discovered that those students were not attending the 

educational institution, therefore that student loan should 

become due and should be returned.  First it should be returned 

from the institution, the vocational school, to the student loans, 

and the students themselves should be starting to make 

payments on it. 

 

But none of that happened, Madam Minister. And should not 

something be put in place to ensure that that does indeed 

happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I don't know if you realize this, but 

Saskatchewan does not pay student loans, the 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Saskatchewan student aid program, to any private vocational 

schools in the province.  Only Canada student loans pays 

directly to private vocational schools.  Saskatchewan student 

aid is paid directly to the student. 

 

The Canada student aid program, as I understand it, pays out in 

one lump sum at the beginning of each program.  In 

Saskatchewan we don't do that. We pay out monthly over a 

period of time.  So Saskatchewan, we have jurisdictional 

control over our own student aid program and we are in a better 

position to monitor it. 

 

The Canada student loan program comes under the auspices of 

the federal government and they have their own particular 

processes for how they handle student loans. 

 

Now what the province does have jurisdiction over is the 

legislation and regulations regarding private vocational schools.  

We do have jurisdiction there. 

 

And as you may know, that the province is presently in the 

process of putting together draft legislation with regard to a 

new private vocational schools Act.  We plan on introducing 

that piece of legislation in the next sitting of the legislature.  

And along with that legislation will go regulations to assist 

with the implementation of that legislation. 

 

I don't know what else I can say to you, Mr. Member, other 

than we have a problem with the Canada student loans here, 

which comes under federal jurisdiction.  We do have authority 

when it comes to the legislation regarding private vocational 

schools. 

 

Once these students provide all of the information that we've 

asked them to provide, we'll be in a far better position to help 

them.  And I can assure you that Ms. Willard, or 

Heska-Willard, will be contacting those two students tomorrow 

to ask them once again for the information that they require.  

And I would hope that the students would be forthcoming with 

that information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  

While Saskatchewan student loans are not directly a part of this 

concern, it is Saskatchewan students, and as you have said, you 

have jurisdiction in this area.  And hopefully when you bring 

forward your new legislation, it will take into account this kind 

of occurrence and will solve the problem. 

 

You mentioned that Darlene Heska-Willard will contact the 

students again tomorrow.  Well we put in a phone call to 

Darlene Heska-Willard last Thursday and she was to phone us 

back after dinner, and we still haven't received a phone call 

from her.  So Darlene Heska-Willard seems to be a difficult 

person to get a hold of. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Let me respond to that.  You say that 

you asked Ms. Heska-Willard to contact you, and she didn't 

contact you.  She was asked by her supervisor to, as I 

understand it, have you relate the 

call to the minister's office, not through the public service.  So 

that's the reason why she did not return your call.  She wanted 

you to contact the minister's office. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, then why was not a 

call returned to our office stating that, and then we would have 

contacted your office about it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I don't know the answer to that, but I 

certainly will find out. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you Madam Minister.  Is it your 

suggestion then, whenever we have a concern dealing with the 

Department of Education, that we contact your office? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I don't have any difficulty with you 

contacting the officials in the department, but sometimes 

officials get quite nervous about that, when the opposition 

contacts them when this has been in the press.  And so 

obviously, you know, if you look at what has been said about a 

civil servant or a public employee in the legislature this 

afternoon, I could understand why she might be quite nervous 

about having you contact her directly. 

 

So I guess what I would say on this particular matter, I would 

ask the member to contact my office because obviously this is 

an official who may have some cause for concern, given what's 

been said about her today by yourself. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well Madam Minister, if the civil 

servant is performing her duties properly, she has nothing to be 

concerned about.  But if that's not the case, then perhaps she 

does indeed have some concerns. 

 

You've mentioned that she has asked the students for some 

information.  I believe part of the information she has asked 

from the one student is a complete financial statement.  The 

student doesn't feel that that's an appropriate request.  He is not 

applying for a student loan.  He is trying to repay a student 

loan, and he feels this request is not appropriate and does not 

wish to provide that information. 

 

Now why would it be important to receive a complete financial 

statement from the student before even looking at the situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- You know, I just have to say to the 

member this, that in opposition . . . and I was in this House for 

five years in opposition, and I was a tough critic. And I fully 

accept that that's the whole point of politics -- the thrust and 

parry of debate.  But the one thing I didn't do was ever go after 

a civil servant that worked with any of the ministers.  I never 

did that.  I went after the minister.  And you can go after me.  

That's fair in this game. 

 

But I would ask you, I would really ask you not to go after any 

of the civil servants that work in our department.  These are 

professional civil servants.  This is a department that was not 

brutalized by the former 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

government.  This was a civil service that was professional; 

they were not politically appointed.  And you can give me all 

the trouble in the world, and I accept that.  But I would really 

ask you not to go after the public employees in the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the person in question 

is a member of your department.  It wasn't you directly that the 

students had a concern with.  They contacted Darlene 

Heska-Willard to look for support.  And she had the means to 

respond prior to it being brought up in the House, and that's 

where the concerns arose.  And so that's why, Madam Minister, 

I have brought this to your attention.  It seems we have lots of 

other people who want to debate this too. 

 

Madam Minister, what kinds of information would be 

important to receive from the student to determine this 

situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised that we usually know when 

the students started the program and when they exited the 

program.  We needed to have the student loan information that 

showed when the money was paid and how much money was 

paid. 

 

As well I'm advised that there was some problem with books.  

The students that . . . some of the Canada student loan went 

towards the books.  And we needed some more information 

regarding the books.  And I understand that that's where the 

problem is.  We don't have the information from the students 

with regard to the kinds of books and the cost of the books that 

they apparently paid for with their Canada student loan and 

which they're now asking to have Canada student loan 

reimbursed for. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So if they provide exactly that 

information, the situation should be resolved then.  Well thank 

you, Madam Minister. I'm sure the students will appreciate that 

and will provide you with that information.  Because, as I 

mentioned earlier, they would like to have this resolved as 

quickly as possible because Ross does have an opportunity for 

some employment. 

 

Madam Minister, we'll go on to another topic now.  Madam 

Minister, I wonder if you could provide us with the list of 

grants to the K to 12 system this year, and what changes were 

made in that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, we'll get that information for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you provided a list to 

the schools back in I believe December, as to what the 

projections were for those cuts to the grants . . . or what the 

grants would be and what the percentages of cuts were.  Was 

there any significant changes to that list? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, there were changes to the list. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Those changes, what did they result 

from? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The changes resulted because the final 

information from school boards with regard to transportation 

costs, enrolment costs, as well as special needs, special 

education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- In particular, on the transportation costs, 

what changed in that area?  Were the transportation costs 

initially calculated in these figures, or were they excluded or 

missed somehow, or why the transportation cost changes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The information that was provided to 

the school boards in December was preliminary information.  

As you know, we were trying to give school boards as much 

information as possible prior to the end of their fiscal year, 

which is December of each year. 

 

The reason for the difference in transportation could be because 

of changes in routes, because of enrolment decline, and a lot of 

that information is not known until after September 30 of each 

year.  And so we were giving preliminary information to school 

boards in order to help them with their strategic planning, and 

once the final information had been received from those school 

boards, we could then give them final numbers. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

think it's worthwhile providing the information up front in the 

beginning.  The notice I have is January 7. 

 

The problem that arose though for the local school boards -- 

and I'll use Oxbow as an example because it's the one I'm most 

familiar with -- their cuts, their grant changes, for this coming 

year were 17 per cent in this document.  When it all shook 

down, it ended up at about 30 per cent, which is almost double 

-- a fairly significant increase in this particular case.  And most 

likely a good number of the other units face similar dramatic 

changes in the amount that they lost. 

 

Madam Minister, I would think that the transportation changes, 

while they could be significant in some cases, could have been 

accounted for with this document coming out on January 7.  If 

the figures are provided to you by September 30 you have a 

better than three-month period in there to include those figures 

in.  What time frame does it take you to work these calculations 

out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay.  I'm advised that we receive 

information from school boards the end of September, October, 

November, December.  And we were going on the basis of 

preliminary information.  We weren't able to finalize all of the 

figures until we had all of the information in from the school 

boards.  I think school boards certainly did appreciate the fact 

that we were giving them preliminary information in 

December.  That was the first, I'm told, in the history of the 

province. 

 

In the old days under your regime, we often didn't get into the 

legislature until April or May.  I think one year 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

it was June when we finally got into the legislature.  And so 

what we're trying to do, given the fiscal realities and some of 

the tough decisions that school boards are making or have 

made, we've tried to give them information in advance.  For 

instance in this budget year we've told school boards that 

barring some unforeseen circumstance, there'll be no further 

reductions. 

 

Now in the case of Oxbow, what we saw was a change in the 

mill rate; we saw a change in the assessment growth; we saw a 

change in basic rates; we saw an enrolment decline; there's a 

reduction in sparsity funding; the small school factor; special 

education funding.  There is change in tuition fee arrangements, 

change in transportation.  So all of this led to a funding 

decrease. 

 

And we applied the same formula in the province to every 

school division in the province, so Oxbow isn't being singled 

out here.  We use the same methodology, the same formula 

across the province, and each school board deals with the same 

set of factors. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now for those school boards that received an enrolment 

increase, obviously they would see some funding increase.  For 

those school boards that might have changed some of their 

school bus routes, it could mean more funding; it could mean 

less funding.  For those school boards that identify more special 

needs children, they would see their funding increase in the 

whole area of special education. 

 

So I guess the point I want to make is that we apply the same 

formula to each school division in the province, and we don't 

tinker with the factors.  The factors are applied in the same 

way, and we use the same methodology. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I was in 

no way suggesting that Oxbow was being singled out.  I 

happened to pick that one because I knew a little more about it.  

I had some more figures for it. 

 

I realize that these figures were not provided to the school 

boards in previous years in advance, and I think that's a good 

change.  The concern that comes in though is that when the 

figures are not close to being accurate.  I'm sure Oxbow and the 

other communities appreciated finding out, in the case of 

Oxbow, that they were going to get a cut of 17 per cent -- not 

that they appreciated the cut, but appreciated the knowledge. 

 

But when it came down at 30 per cent, they still had to make 

very significant adjustments.  So it will be interesting to see 

what the numbers are when you present me with the actual 

figures that did occur, compared to what's happening today or 

what happened in your projections. 

 

And, Madam Minister, it's not just the smaller school 

boards that are being affected by these cuts.  In Oxbow it's 

meant indeed a 2 per cent, a 2 mill rate increase in that area.  So 

again that affects their grant structure on the computational mill 

rates.  As they increase their mill rates, they get less money 

grant-wise at the end of the day. 

 

So not only do you have to make up for your own shortfall in 

the education system; you have to make up for the further cuts 

that you're going to receive to the grants.  And it seems to be an 

ongoing cycle of trying to catch up all the time. 

 

But Oxbow is probably a medium sized school division.  I 

believe it's around 1,200 students -- somewhere in that 

neighbourhood.  There are those that are smaller and there are 

those that are significantly larger.  In Oxbow it's meant that 

there has been staff cuts, bus routes. 

 

One of the things that I did notice you mention was the change 

to the small school allocation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

No, I was going to say, I'm not . . . when you mentioned that, I 

didn't know of any schools that had closed in the area, and I 

was wondering why that would have changed.  I'm glad you 

say now that it didn't change. 

 

But I would like to read to you from a letter that I received 

from what is likely one of the larger school divisions, 

Saskatchewan Valley School Division, which is up in the 

Warman area, surrounding Saskatoon. 

 

They state: 

 

Like any other school board of the province, we have been 

faced with cut-backs, reductions in program offering, and 

general downsizing.  While the board would prefer the 

grant support for education would increase, it recognizes 

the fiscal reality of our economic times. 

 

While the board did not appreciate grant reductions, it did 

appreciate the advanced information provided on the 

reductions, on what the reductions would be for 1992, '93, 

and '94.  This allowed the board an opportunity to plan 

ahead and to make necessary adjustments, reduce 

programs and staff, and remain fiscally responsible with 

respect to the expectations of our taxpayers. 

 

Sure, our board had to reduce staff, 10 teachers in each of 

1993 and '94; reduce program support, band, industrial 

arts, home economics; cut back on purchase of new buses.  

But the part that really hurts is all the increases that have 

been passed on to the board by other government agencies.  

Some examples are UIC and CPP increases, 8 per cent; 

heating fuel cost, 12 per cent; and teacher salary cost, two 

and a half per cent. 

 

It is hoped that through solid fiscal planning the board will 

be able to balance its budget for 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

1994 without a mill rate increase.  Our concern would be 

for further unannounced grant reductions again next year. 

 

In regards . . .  

 

Madam Minister, I think this board outlines the major problems 

that are facing all school divisions across the province; that it's 

not just the cut-backs that they have received in their grant 

structure but it's also all of the additional added costs.  They 

mentioned heating fuel costs but they didn't mention the 

additional cost that they face for SaskPower, for telephone, for 

gasoline to run their buses or diesel fuel, whatever it may be. 

 

Have you calculated, Madam Minister, at all, what all of the 

additional other government costs that have been passed on to 

the department of . . . not the department, but to the education 

boards -- what they would total up to, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well first of all, I want to thank you for 

reading the contents of the Sask. Valley School Division's letter 

to you.  I am quite familiar with this school division.  And just 

for your edification, there was a 1.3 per cent increase in the 

school grant to Sask Valley School Division this year.  And if 

you include the 75 per cent of the salaries for teachers, in fact 

this school division received a 2.85 per cent increase.  And 

that's even with an enrolment decline of 98 students. 

 

I think the point that I would like to make is this: that there is 

no question that school boards have been hit hard by our 

attempt to come to terms with the fiscal situation in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Our school boards have received -- 

and I've said this on many occasions -- a minus 2, a minus 2, 

and now this year a minus 4, for a total of 8 per cent.  And 

because of the formula, for some school boards it's been higher 

than that and for some school boards it's been lower than that.  

But generally speaking, school boards across the province have 

had 8 per cent of their budgets reduced. 

 

Now let me say this: that in order to get to the situation where 

the province will have a balanced budget by 1996-97, third 

parties have been asked to help in that situation.  And that 

means that there have been funding reductions in health, 

education, municipal government -- to name three areas -- 

because that's where a lot of the government spending is 

undertaken in the province. 

 

Now that has meant that school boards have had to wrestle with 

the whole issue of how do we deliver an education to the 

people of our province, given that we have declining resources 

and in some parts of Saskatchewan we have declining 

enrolments. 

 

This situation would not have happened had your party, when 

they were in government, acted in a fiscally responsible 

manner.  You didn't do that and you left the people of this 

province with a $15 billion deficit.  Now some of that debt 

obviously comes from the Crown corporations and some of it 

comes from Consolidated Fund, which is the day-to-day 

running 

of government programs.  I think you left about 6 or $7 billion 

in those kinds of areas. 

 

So I guess all I can say to you is this: that had you not, had 

your party not, you know, given people money for saunas and 

bathtubs and carpets and jacuzzis, and had you not taken off the 

gas tax and you not done the Rafferty-Alameda and the 

GigaText and all of these other little projects that went awry, 

we would not be in the position where school boards are being 

asked to help us present a balanced budget to the people of 

Canada and internationally. 

 

As you know, there's a lot of your long-term debt that's coming 

due, and in order for us to go to the market-place to borrow the 

money to pay off some of your old debt, those creditors have to 

believe that Saskatchewan is financially stable and on the road 

to recovery. 

 

Well I can say that we have been able to go to the market-place 

and borrow money, that the credit-rating agencies are saying, 

across this country and internationally, that Saskatchewan will 

be the first province to come out of this mess because this 

problem exists in other provinces as well.  And as a result of 

what we've been able to do in the last three years, we can now 

say to our third parties, such as school divisions, that barring 

any unforeseen circumstance, there will be no further funding 

reductions in the province of Saskatchewan in 1995-96. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you talk about 

asking third parties to take part in the fiscal restraint in this 

province.  Perhaps you should remember that there's only one 

taxpayer in this province.  And as you download on education, 

they're picking up some of that money by going back to that 

taxpayer because they don't feel it's right to cut the education to 

our young people. 

 

You talked about the fiscal responsibility of the previous 

administration.  Madam Minister, perhaps there was some 

money spent in areas that it shouldn't have been.  You talked 

about the home improvement program.  Well, Madam Minister, 

as I recall, that came out of the 1986 election in which your 

government -- your party, I should say, because you were not 

government; you were in opposition at the time -- promised 

$7,000 grants at 7 per cent and $70,000 7 per cent mortgages 

which was significantly bigger than what had been promised by 

the PCs (Progressive Conservative) in that election -- 

significantly bigger.  You talked about GigaText, but you fail 

to mention the Nabu computer problems that your government 

had back in the 1970s.  You talk about Rafferty-Alameda, but 

you fail to mention that the P.A. (Prince Albert) pulp mill was 

losing $90,000 a day under your administration. 

 

So, Madam Minister, there is fiscal concerns from every 

government, and yours is no different today.  What you're 

attempting to do with your cut-backs to education is being 

dumped back on to the taxpayer. 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

When you talked about fiscal responsibility of the previous 

administration, what would you term the person that is calling 

for more and more and more spending by that administration?  

I don't have your quote with me today, Madam Minister, but 

there are a significant number of quotes from you in Hansard, 

speaking in this House as the opposition critic for Education, 

calling for more and more and more spending. 

 

One quote that I do remember is you asked the current minister 

of Education at that time why he couldn't convince his cabinet 

colleagues to provide more money for Education, because a 

three and a half per cent increase was not enough money -- an 

increase of three and a half per cent.  And this year in your first 

opportunity to be the Minister of Education, you give 

Education a 4 per cent cut. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Announced last year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's right, Madam Minister, 

announced last year. 

 

But that all of a sudden makes it well and good.  Oh, well we 

told you last year we were going to cut your grant, so don't 

complain about it because we already told you.  Well, Madam 

Minister, you were the one who stood on this side of the House, 

telling the minister of Education on that day that a three and a 

half per cent increase was not enough. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, there might have been one or two 

people around this province who voted for you because they 

felt that you meant that -- that you indeed intended to provide 

for better education in this province.  So mentioning better 

education, I just wonder how you provide better education to 

the students in Saskatchewan Valley, in that division, when 

they cut 10 teachers in 1993 and again 10 teachers in 1994.  

And they talk about program cuts -- band, industrial arts, and 

home economics. 

 

Now when you were in opposition, would you have classified 

these happenings as an improvement to the education system, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well I want to just clarify one thing, 

one statement that you made.  P.A. pulp mill was not losing 

$90,000 a day; that was a figment of the PC Party's 

imagination.  It was Tory accounting, not unlike your 

accounting all the way through your administration where you 

are off by several hundred million dollars regularly.  So I do 

want to make that point. 

 

The point that you raise about my work in opposition, there's 

no doubt I was a hard-working critic and I was a pain in the 

neck, I'm sure, to many ministers of Education.  You haven't 

quite developed into a pain in the neck yet . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm not as vicious. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Oh, I don't think I was vicious, I was 

just hard nosed.  And I think I was doing my job 

as an opposition critic. 

 

I think the other thing that we have to remember is this, that I 

sat in here and I regularly saw grants, money, basically pouring 

out of this institution, out of the institution of government into 

things that I thought were totally nonsensical.  I do place a high 

value on education.  I do think it's important that all of our 

students, anyone who wants to go to a post-secondary 

institution, has access to a post-secondary institution.  Anybody 

who wants to get an education in this province should be able 

to have access to that education. 

 

(1630) 

 

I don't take great joy in being the Minister of Education that's 

involved in funding reductions because I do know that funding 

reductions do have an impact upon the education in our 

province.  I do know that.  But as you said, we're all the same 

taxpayers.  There is a fiscal reality that our government has 

faced; your government would have faced it if it were here.  

And that is that we have a $15 billion deficit; that is that we 

regularly have 2, $3 billion worth of outstanding debt coming 

due each year that we have to pay back.  And in order to do 

that, we don't have the money so we have to go and borrow that 

money in the international market-place. 

 

And lenders aren't that interested in lending money to a 

province that is considered a . . . has a huge per capita debt.  

And so they want to look at how you are handling your 

approach to that debt.  And what we've been able to do is 

convince the international lenders, the national lenders, that 

Saskatchewan has a fiscal plan, that we're on track, that we're 

hitting our targets. 

 

Now we couldn't have done that without the help of the people 

of this province.  We could not have done the kind of miracle 

work that has been accomplished in this province in the last 

three years without the help of school boards and universities 

and municipal governments and hospitals and health care 

facilities and the taxpayers of this province.  And you're right -- 

there's only one taxpayer. 

 

Lots of school boards have reserves; lots of municipalities have 

reserves.  Our province did not have a reserve.  The Minister of 

Finance did not have some fund that was put away for a rainy 

day.  There wasn't that there.  So we basically had one choice 

and that was to show the lenders that we could come in on our 

targets. 

 

We've done that.  We've done it with the help of our school 

board trustees, our counterparts in local government.  They are 

to be commended.  But this has not come without a price.  And 

that price is that there have been reductions in teachers, there 

have been reductions in support staff, there have been 

reductions in programs like band and home ec and industrial 

arts. 

 

But basically we still have a solid education system in this 

province.  Kids can still graduate with a grade 12 that will take 

them anywhere in this country.  Our kids 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

can still graduate from university and our other post-secondary 

institutions and have a certificate or a degree that means 

something in this country and around the world. 

 

Our education system has not gone to hell in a hand basket.  

We have some problems; there's no doubt about that.  We've 

had some reductions in programing, but fundamentally our 

educational system is solid.  We have well-educated people 

graduating from our institutions.  We have a well-educated 

population in this province. 

 

And we have not taken some of the measures that other 

provinces have where they've basically taken the machete to 

the institutions that have been developed.  We're done our 

reductions in a calm, rational, logical way, and I think we've 

done those reductions with the vast support of the people of our 

province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam, perhaps as you claim, you 

haven't used a machete, but I wonder at the end of the day 

whether the person who is being attacked really cares if you 

used one hack of a machete or you've slashed away at him 

continuously with a paring knife. 

 

Because that's what you've done.  While you didn't take one big 

slash at him in any particular year, you've kept slashing away 

year after year, cutting pieces off.  And the net result at the end 

of the day, Madam Minister, is they are facing a serious 

financial crisis. 

 

And the taxpayer from the property tax base is not prepared to 

pay any more, Madam Minister, and that's what you're asking 

them to do with your little paring knife slashing away at him.  

While you didn't take a big cut, you took a large number of 

small cuts and it ended up at the same place, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked about the reserves that are being 

held by the school divisions.  Well indeed, on the books I 

would suspect that most school divisions have reserves -- on 

the books.  But if you look at their bank account, there is no 

reserves.  Those reserves are taxes that are arrears, that have 

never been paid.  And they still show up on the books as being 

owed to the school division; they show up as an asset, but there 

is nothing there.  Those reserves do not exist, Madam Minister, 

in most cases.  There are simply tax arrears that have not, 

cannot, and never will be collected. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked about graduates from our 

post-secondary institutions, the universities.  If you look at the 

newspaper this past weekend, the students are saying that they 

are concerned as to the validity of those universities now with 

the cut-backs -- 127 staff going from the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon.  And that it's going to be difficult 

to convince students that they are going to receive the proper 

education at these institutions. 

 

They are expressing a concern that students will now start 

looking at other universities rather than coming 

to those in Saskatchewan because they have a concern as to the 

quality of education they will receive here, Madam Minister. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think that's something that you, as the 

representative for the Department of Education, are going to 

have to address and have to solve that problem and convince 

the students of Saskatchewan that the proper education still can 

be received here. 

 

You talk about fiscal planning.  Well, Madam Minister, I have 

to ask you, when it comes to projects within the Department of 

Education -- I'm thinking here of capital projects that you might 

fund -- is it not incumbent on the system to provide the 

lowest-cost quality that can be provided?  Your new union 

preference contracting does not necessarily provide that, 

Madam Minister.  The quality may be there, but it's not 

necessarily at the lowest cost, and after having viewed the 

Melfort pipeline situation, maybe even the quality isn't there. 

 

So, Madam Minister, will you address those, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- In terms of the capital project issue that 

you raise, we do not hire the contractor.  The local school 

division hires the contractor, so they are free to follow the 

procedure that they have established in their local school 

division office, or their school division board may have 

followed some process for hiring contractors.  The Department 

of Education, Training and Employment does not involve itself 

in that. 

 

Secondly, with regard to the question you raise about 

post-secondary institutions and students feeling as though our 

institutions are second rate, I can tell you that Saskatchewan 

institutions have not suffered the kinds of cut-backs that other 

institutions have suffered in this country.  And I'm thinking in 

particular Alberta.  Some of the Maritime provinces, Quebec, 

have seen reductions in funding to post-secondary institutions.  

So it doesn't really matter where you go in this country; all 

post-secondary institutions are facing the same kinds of 

pressures. 

 

I could also say this, that I am not embarrassed to be a graduate 

from the University of Saskatchewan.  In fact I think that the 

two degrees that I have from that institution are recognized 

anywhere in this country, and they're recognized 

internationally.  I would not be concerned if I was a student in 

this province looking at a post-secondary institution like the 

University of Saskatchewan, in attending the University of 

Saskatchewan or in attending the University of Regina. 

 

This province has done a remarkable job of graduating people 

from our institutions, our universities, who have gone on to 

become the president of the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation), to become the Governor General of Canada, to 

go on to Wall Street and Bay Street, to become international 

educators, lawyers, physicians, teachers.  We have done a 

tremendous job. 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

And I would just say this, that I think that by saying what 

you've just said, that students are concerned about attending the 

University of Saskatchewan because it's not as good as other 

institutions . . . and you continue to cast doubt in the minds of 

people that Saskatchewan is not first rate, and I think that you 

do a great disservice to the people of this province and to this 

province when you say that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you don't have to 

convince me.  I'm not the one who's concerned about it.  It's the 

students who are attending the universities today that are 

concerned about it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Look in the 

newspaper, Madam Minister; it's in there. 

 

Madam Minister, your example of the president of CBC I'm not 

sure about.  He may indeed be from Saskatchewan, but I'm not 

sure how high a recommendation that is.  But the others, I will 

agree with you on. 

 

Madam Minister, change tactics a little bit.  I have a newspaper 

clipping here that deals with the High School Review 

Committee.  And I'll quote from this clipping of March 9, 1994 

from the Leader-Post: 

 

The committee did propose fewer required credits for 

Grade 12 standing, which is something completely 

different. 

 

He's talking about the English credits.  And he goes on to say: 

 

I believe that Saskatchewan currently requires more 

English than any other province.  Still we hear that our 

graduates are weak in writing skills. 

 

He goes on further: 

 

You see, our present English curriculum does not 

concentrate on writing. It stresses literature.  In fact, it 

seems that our kids get more literature than anyone in 

Canada.  But that obviously does not teach them how to 

write! 

 

And this is from Christian Stuhr, Madam Minister.  Now I 

found that name to be kind of interesting, because it caught my 

eye and I thought, where have I seen that name before.  Then I 

looked down the list of the people who sat on the High School 

Review Advisory Committee and there I find Christian Stuhr, 

the CEO of the Cypress Hills Regional College in Swift 

Current, and Council of Chief Executive Officers of Regional 

Colleges. 

 

So this person, Madam Minister, does have some credibility.  

At least he had enough credibility to sit on the High School 

Review Advisory Committee. 

 

So, Madam Minister, how do you respond to his concerns that 

too much literature is being taught and not enough writing and 

communication skills? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I think one of the reasons for 

the high school review is that we've gone through a curriculum 

redevelopment in the province of Saskatchewan for basically K 

to 9.  We have not yet done the curriculum redevelopment, or 

development that needs to be done for grades 10, 11 and 12, 

and some of our curriculum in the province is 20 years old. 

 

The reason for the high school review was to ascertain the 

numbers of credits our students needed to graduate from grade 

12.  The numbers of credits that allowed them to go on to 

post-secondary institutions, if that's what they chose to do. 

 

I think Mr. Stuhr raises some interesting points, certainly points 

that I've heard from some people in the province of 

Saskatchewan that our English curriculum is literature-based.  

It's not based in composition, writing, grammar, those kinds of 

things.  And when I respond to the high school review, 

obviously I will be addressing the kinds of issues that Mr. Stuhr 

raises in the newspaper article. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder 

if you could tell me what percentage of the English credit 

system is literature-based as opposed to writing skills and 

communicating skills. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised that our curriculum 

basically is integrated, with compositional skills and literature, 

but we say that it is a literature-based curriculum. 

 

The thing that I would like to point out . . . I don't know if you 

had an opportunity to take a look at K to 12 schooling.  How 

are we doing?  It was the Saskatchewan school indicators 

program, and if you look at our 1992 Canadian achievement 

tests in language arts, you will note that Saskatchewan scores 

higher than any other province in the country for those students 

in grades 6, 9, and 12. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm glad 

you said that was 1992 because that study was indeed done in 

1990, '91, and '92 which was the era before the cuts were made.  

Madam Minister, even though . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Yes, and the study was done prior to that, Madam Minister. 

 

You talk about the . . . I'm losing my train of thought on this.  

I'll have to go on to something different and come back to this 

point. 

 

Madam Minister, we talked . . . I believe I mentioned to you 

about the tax structuring, or perhaps it was the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs I was discussing this with, but it's the 

equivalent of both of them because it was talking about 

education. 

 

A person can come in to pay their municipal taxes, their 

property taxes, and they can pay one portion of it and not pay 

another.  I'm told by the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) that if a person is in arrears, that they're late in 

making their tax payments.  So if your taxes are due from 1994, 

if you 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

don't pay your taxes until January 1, 1995 that you can then 

come in and pay a portion of your taxes and designate that as 

being the municipal portion.  Therefore boards of education do 

not receive their portion of the taxes. 

 

Madam Minister, do you have any information about this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised that it's supposed to be 

prorated between the municipality and education.  But I do 

understand that it is an issue and obviously we've been 

discussing that with our counterparts in Municipal Affairs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, when you go in 

to pay your taxes this year that are due for 1994, they are 

indeed prorated.  If you only pay 50 per cent of your taxes, 25 

per cent . . . say it's an equal load between municipal and 

education, 25 per cent would go to municipal, and 25 per cent 

of that would go to education. 

 

But the problem arises is when the taxes are in arrears.  Then 

the person can come in and say, I want to pay all my municipal 

taxes, and they can do so, but not pay any of the education side 

of it.  And, Madam Minister, there are boards of education right 

now that are being affected by this.  Because people are coming 

in and doing exactly that. 

 

I asked my municipal director, is it possible to do that?  And he 

said, yes it is.  So, Madam Minister, I think it's a serious 

problem that needs to be reviewed, investigated, and a solution 

found for. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Right.  I understand that when the 

taxpayer comes in to pay their arrears, the municipality is 

supposed to share the funds equally with the municipality and 

the school board.  I understand that there are some 

municipalities that aren't doing that and that's where the 

difference of opinion is. 

 

Obviously, as I said earlier, we are discussing this matter with 

our counterparts in Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

would hope that these discussions would carry on at a fairly 

rapid pace because some of the school boards are indeed facing 

a problem related to this. 

 

Madam Minister, what kind of changes were made to the 

foundation grants in this particular year to the formula, the 

computational mill rate formula. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We reduced the sparsity factor by 

$500,000 and we increased the computational mill rate by 1.8. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I missed what you 

said, the first part, the $500,000 -- what did you cut back there? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- It was the sparsity factor. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, the sparsity factor, you 

cut it back by $500,000.  What is the sparsity factor?  How do 

you figure that out?  How many people do you have in an area 

that would be classified as a sparse, compared to a normal or 

regular area? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We have a formula that calculates the 

numbers of students per square kilometre.  The fewer students 

you have, the more funds you receive in terms of sparsity 

factor.  I understand that there was $6 million in the sparsity 

factor pool and it was reduced to 5.5 million. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Earlier 

today we discussed the Crown foundations legislation and the 

implementation of a Crown foundation.  And I had a number of 

questions there dealing with what the universities would do 

with the money. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you could explain to me what the 

universities will use this money for.  I asked the Minister of 

Finance, and her explanation was that the monies would simply 

be funnelled into the university to be used in whatever manner 

the university desired. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I understand that in other parts of the 

country where we have these foundations, university 

foundations, that they used the money primarily for capital, 

scholarships, purchase of equipment that maybe normally 

wouldn't be purchased through normal grants from the 

province.  I'm told that in most circumstances universities do 

not use the Crown foundation for funding operating costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad you 

brought up the last part because that's the area that I have a 

concern with.  I don't believe that the people who will be 

contributing to this Crown foundations want it to be used 

specifically for operating funds of administration.  I believe 

that they would prefer to see these funds used for some specific 

purpose, and indeed some of them will designate those 

purposes and hopefully that will be carried through to the 

university. 

 

One of the questions I asked the Minister of Finance, and she 

recommended that I ask you about it, is patents at the 

university.  Can the university hold intellectual patents on their 

research projects? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We don't know the answer to that but 

we certainly will get back.  I noticed your quizzing of the 

Minister of Finance and she didn't know the answer and she 

taught there for many years.  I think they can, but we'll get back 

to you with the answer to that question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, perhaps it's an 

area that should be seriously investigated. 

 

I mentioned some of the U.S. universities to the 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Minister of Finance, and the benefits that foundations have 

been to them and what they have done with them.  And I think 

that this is an opportunity for the universities in Saskatchewan.  

But it has to be handled properly, and they have to be allowed 

to grow.  And I don't mean by grow by holding the money in 

the foundations and simply become a capital pool.  They have 

to be utilized, and they have to have the ability to have the 

patents in place so that they can develop. 

 

When I visited at the university a year or so ago, they were 

talking then about setting up a subsidiary of the universities 

which could take research results and apply it commercially.  

And I think this is one of the areas in which the foundations 

could indeed assist because that would provide a capital pool to 

develop a commercial enterprise that would return profits to the 

university to carry on with their programs. 

 

When you're looking at capital, scholarships, and equipment 

funded through the foundations, how would they determine . . . 

would the foundation and its board of directors have any 

determination on who receives scholarships, or would that be 

done by the universities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I suppose the foundation could make a 

judgement on that, but generally it would be handled by the 

university.  So I think that's the answer to your question. 

 

In terms of intellectual property, you raise a very good point.  I 

have long been concerned about the possibility of monies 

coming from the public to fund research at the university which 

then could be taken off the university and used to make some 

private individuals a great deal of money.  And I think that 

when you have public funding of research, I think that there 

should be some ability on the part of the university to own and 

control, basically, that research for the advantage of the 

institution, not some private individual. 

 

So I think you make a very good point when you talk about 

intellectual property and who should have ownership of that 

intellectual property, given that that intellectual property was 

developed with public funds or taxpayers' dollars. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  When 

you look at some of the American universities you can see that 

they have applied those foundations and intellectual property 

patents to good use.  I believe it's either Hewlett Packard or 

Hewitt Rand, one of those two large corporations, which is 

owned by one of the eastern universities because they have that 

ability, through a foundation, to funnel money into there that 

got them started initially. 

 

Madam Minister, Ross and Petria, the students that we were 

discussing at the beginning, have sent me a note in, saying that 

they have provided the information that you mentioned to the 

bureaucrat in question, and that they still haven't received any 

results from that.  So I thought I'd just pass that on to you so 

that you can review that situation. 

Madam Minister, the Crown foundations . . . you also 

mentioned capital funding.  If the foundation is going to 

provide capital funding, does that mean that the university or 

the public, through the Department of Education, would no 

longer be as responsible for providing capital construction at 

the university, capital equipment, the other items that would be 

necessary?  Is this an indirect method of taxation where -- 

voluntary taxation -- where people would provide funds for the 

universities for which they receive tax credits that could be 

directed to specific projects in the university which under 

normal circumstances without the foundations in place, would 

be paid for by the Department of Education? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As you may know, all institutions in the 

province that receive capital funding from the Department of 

Education, Training and Employment have to contribute some 

funds towards these projects.  Presently on the two campuses, if 

they want to go ahead with a capital project that involves 

province of Saskatchewan funding, then they have to contribute 

to those projects.  So I do not see the Crown foundation as a 

way for the province of Saskatchewan to avoid its commitment 

to fund capital projects on the two universities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move we report progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


