




















































Hansard: February 24, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  391
 February 24, 1994 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- The following petitions are hereby presented and 
laid on the Table: by Ms. Lorje on behalf of the Saskatoon 
Foundation of the city of Saskatoon; by Mr. Boyd on behalf 
of the Full Gospel Bible Institute of the town of Eston. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to present a 
petition we have received from approximately 180 residents 
of the RM (rural municipality) of Reno, mostly from the 
Consul area.  Mr. Speaker, the residents are deeply 
concerned with the government's decision to remove road 
signs indicating the location of Cypress Lake.  The petition 
reads: 
 

 We, the undersigned taxpayers of the RM of Reno No. 51, 
hereby petition the Saskatchewan government to replace 
the two Cypress Lake road signs that were removed from 
Highway 21.  These signs are of the utmost importance for 
major directions. 

 
I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure 
today and privilege to introduce to you and to members of 
the Assembly a special person, my sister from Alberta.  
Cheryl Chelle and her son are with us here today.  And I 
wonder if they would stand and be recognized, and all 
members would join in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Diseased Bulls on Provincial Pastures 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today we'll be 
asking several more questions we have received from 
Saskatchewan residents.  I just want to say that this initiative 
has been very well received by the public and since we asked 
the first question last week, many more have come in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question today is from Elgin Myketiak of 
Chaplin and it deals with an issue the Minister of Agriculture 
should be very familiar with.  Mr. Myketiak writes:  I want 
to know why the government used known diseased bulls in 
pastures in '92 and '93.  In '93 we had 50 per cent of our good 
young cows not bred.  Our loss was 23 out of 46.  This is too 
great a loss for anyone to bear by themselves because of 
someone's poor management.  When is the government 
going to announce some form of compensation for us? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I would thank the member 
opposite and his constituent for the question. 
 
In the first place, Mr. Speaker, we obviously did not use 
known diseased bulls.  Trichomoniasis has surfaced in a 
couple of breeding pastures, I think two or three of our 
pastures. And are still tracing it and may find more.  It's been 
found in several of the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) pastures.  We have taken steps to deal with 
that disease this spring.  We have been testing bulls that have 
been exposed. 
 
We are only taking, in those breeding pastures where we 
know we have a problem, only taking in cows with calves at 
foot so that we don't bring the disease back from the farms.  
And we are taking measures to deal with this as best we can. 
 
This is a problem that is fairly serious, and of course in a 
community pasture we bring a lot of cattle together and it 
creates a major problem.  We're taking all the steps that we 
can and working with patrons to deal with that problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Trade with Mexico 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 
question is from Peter Mesluk of Prince Albert.  Mr. 
Premier, I want to know what initiative has the government 
undertaken to ensure the province of Saskatchewan is well 
positioned to take advantage of the North American Free 
Trade Agreement with Mexico? 
 
Do we have a trade office in Mexico?  Are we actively 
soliciting business with them, and if so, how successful have 
been our endeavours?  And is there money available to 
entrepreneurs to assist them in the marketing of their 
products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
answer the question to the hon. member opposite.  Mexico 
obviously has been, and continues to be, a trading partner of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Recently when a number of business people attended and 
travelled to Mexico, there were a number of very interesting 
proposals put to the business people of Saskatchewan.  We 
are shipping a great deal, now, of fresh pork to Mexico.  A 
number of the specialty crops which Saskatchewan farmers 
have switched to -- peas, beans, lentils -- are being shipped 
into Mexico. 
 
And with the legislation that we now have on the order 
paper, as of today, the Trade Development Corporation of 
course will see Mexico as one of our growing trading 
partners. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is from 
Garnet Ball of Alida.  And he writes:  Mr. Premier, I want to 
know -- regarding firearms legislation coming into affect on 
April 1, 1994 -- is your government going to have the 
firearms acquisition certificate training program in place and 
running by April 1?  Or are we going to have to wait for your 
people to get their house in order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member and 
the member of the public who put forward that question, 
because it's a very important question and very timely. 
 
All of the applications that are made before March 31 will be 
received and dealt with under the old rules; the new rules 
don't come into effect until April 1.  So that I don't think 
we'll have any difficulty dealing with applications made up 
until the end of next month.  And the member of the public 
who asked that question should probably be advised of that 
fact. 
 
Applications received after that?  Well we're trying to take as 
reasonable and practical an approach as we can to this 
question, and we're working internally and with the federal 
government in order to smooth the transition to the new 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan.  We haven't yet 
determined to what extent we will . . . or just how the 
training program and that sort of thing will be put together, 
but we'll try and be as sympathetic as possible to the 
concerns of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Native Self-government 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier as well.  It is from Stuart Matheson 
of Regina, who phoned this question in a couple of days ago.  
Mr. Matheson wants to know: if our constitution says Indian 
affairs is a federal responsibility, why is the provincial 
Justice minister getting involved in the matter of native 
self-government?  And if the government turns over 550 
million in social spending to aboriginal people for 
self-government, will there be a corresponding cut-back in 
the provincial public sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, it is true that the 
constitution gives jurisdiction to the federal government with 
respect to Indians and Indian lands.  The federal government 
has been interpreting that in recent years as being restricted 
to Indians while they are on Indian lands, which means 
reservations, and they've clung tenaciously to that policy 
position in spite of all of our efforts to get them to see that 
the true meaning of those words includes Indians whether 
they're on reserve or off reserve. 
 
There are a large number of Indian people, of course, who 
live off reserve -- about 52 per cent in all.  There are also 
non-status Indians and Metis people who are 

 aboriginal people under the constitution and probably fall 
within the definition of Indians. 
 
I tell the member as I've told him before . . . told his 
colleague before that we're not turning over $550 million to 
aboriginal organizations.  We are though prepared, as every 
other province in Canada is, to enter into self-government 
discussions involving the federal government which will 
result in some programs that fall within provincial 
jurisdiction being turned over to aboriginal people. 
 
They will be in social services and justice and education and 
health and fields like that.  That involves us in these 
discussions and we can't help but participate in them.  And in 
the end, some portion of the money now being spent in 
respect of aboriginal people will be turned over to these 
aboriginal organizations for their administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Costs for Piper Aircraft Bid 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 
Minister, today we have learned that the price tag for your 
failed attempt to bring Piper Aircraft to Saskatchewan was 
$650,000.  Mr. Minister, would you provide details to the 
House this afternoon of where and how this money was 
spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in 
Crown Corporations Committee this morning to questions 
being put in the committee, that as a result of the due 
diligence that was being done on the Piper Aircraft deal, that 
is, studies of the product liability, due diligence being done 
by consulting companies, that in fact the price tag was 
$656,000. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that in doing deals of this 
magnitude, one should not be surprised if private or public 
sector people doing deals would spend a little bit of money 
doing due diligence.  For example, had the previous 
administration done some due diligence on Imp-Pak 
Packaging -- I say this to the former premier -- we would not 
have a bill of $21 million for a plant that sits empty in Swift 
Current.  We would not have a dam which cost us tens of 
millions of dollars to dig a hole where there was no water 
flowing through.  We would have known that we shouldn't 
have spent that money. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite that he should check 
with business people -- for example, our private sector 
partner, Paul Hill . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 
would tend to agree that the $650,000 spent would have been 
a good investment for Saskatchewan if Piper Aircraft would 
have actually wound up in Saskatchewan.  It would have 
been a good investment if the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
had actually brought the thousand jobs and millions of 
dollars of 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

economic activity to Saskatchewan as the minister 
announced in his big announcement at the news conference 
in the Hotel Saskatchewan back in January of 1992. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell us in your outline of costs of 
how much that was spent for the big announcement that you 
made at the Hotel Saskatchewan back in 1992?  How much 
did that cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the logic that when 
you do due diligence on a project then you should 
automatically finish the deal, tells us why we are billions of 
dollars in the hole.  They made up their mind that they were 
going to build a dam on the Rafferty.  And people told them 
that it didn't make any sense because there was no water 
flowing in that particular spot.  But because the premier of 
the day had made up his mind to dig that hole in the ground, 
he believed he would continue on spending close to several 
hundred million -- several hundred millions of dollars -- on 
that project. 
 
Now had he spent 100 thousand or 200 thousand and the 
results had been, you shouldn't build that dam, he would 
have saved the people of the province tens of millions of 
dollars. 
 
Now I want to be very clear to the member from Kindersley, 
that if you farm and you spend some money doing research 
on whether or not you should build a hog barn for example, 
and the results are that there's no economy, would you 
continue on, because you had spent some money, to build the 
hog barn?  Or would you say to yourself that it's a bad deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I'd 
remind you that Piper Aircraft is alive and well in Florida 
today and doing very, very well, Mr. Minister.  I also want to 
remind you that the opposition warned you not to make the 
announcement with such great fanfare and set yourself up to 
be outmanoeuvred by other interests. 
 
But you wouldn't listen to that, Mr. Minister.  After all it was 
January of '92 and those were pretty heady days for the NDP, 
Mr. Minister.  You'd just won an election, you just got a new 
haircut, a new suit, and you're starting to think that you are 
captains of industry, Mr. Minister. 
 
Well $656,000 later, and Piper Aircraft is still in Florida.  
The co-generation initiatives you promised are down the 
tubes.  You remember the famous 700 club, Mr. Minister? 
 
The Chairperson: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 
question?  I want the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, when 
are you going to start delivering on your 

 promise to bring companies like Piper to Saskatchewan? 
 
Or is it simply an indication of your economic development 
record, Mr. Minister, one of failure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say 
that after 10 years of GigaText and Rafferty and Supercart 
and all of the deals, it was interesting that one did feel like 
they knew something about business when we came to 
office.  I want to say as well, speaking of new suits, there 
was no one who wore better suits than the former premier.  
But it didn't lead to any good deals being made.  Mr. 
Speaker, we often use the term, all dressed up and nowhere 
to go, after 10 years of Grant Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- But no, seriously, Mr. Speaker, 
jobs are important to the province of Saskatchewan.  And if 
you look at the deals like Norquay, community-based 
economic development like Norquay, you will see what 
economic development is all about.  PGS (Plant Genetic 
Systems (Canada) Inc.) moving from Belgium to Saskatoon 
to do research on canola. 
 
There are many, many projects that have moved to 
Saskatchewan because it makes sense.  And I'm proud to say 
that we have finished doing deals like the previous 
administration where we lose hundreds of millions of dollars 
because of nonsensical decisions being made because the due 
diligence was not done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Revenues 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the minister in charge of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, we 
finally have some of your numbers on VLT (video lottery 
terminal) betting.  Mr. Minister, VLTs do not give people a 
sense that they are playing with real money, just credits.  
And I quote you from the 23rd in the Leader-Post: 
 

 While it's true more than $1 billion will be wagered, most 
of that will take the form of credits that are bet again 
instead of being cashed in. 

 
Is it true that VLT gamblers, often under the influence of 
alcohol, have to make a conscious decision to cash out, 
physically leave the machine, and go to the bar to get paid 
for their credits?  Do I understand the minister to say that 
most of the money bet as credits is not actually coming out 
of people's pockets and therefore it is not considered real 
money as far as the government is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I find the questions from the member from 
Greystone interesting.  I recall estimates last session, she was 
encouraging me to hurry up with the 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

installations of the video lottery terminals because we were 
losing in the neighbourhood of 50 to $60 million a year. 
 
Now this year she stands in the legislature and she indicates 
that she wants this government to balance the budgets.  But, 
on the other hand, she tells us that we shouldn't generate 
revenue from the video lottery terminals. 
 
And I say to the member from Greystone that in the study 
and in the figures that I've released, there is a full 12 per cent 
of the people of this province who leave Saskatchewan to 
gamble in Alberta and in Manitoba and in the United States. 
 
And I say to the member, Mr. Speaker, we are going to stop 
that outflow of capital.  We're going to inject it back into 
rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan through the 
Consolidated Fund.  We are well aware of the number of 
dollars that will go to the machines, we're well aware of the 
number of dollars that we'll generate in profits, and we're 
well aware that we'll put it back to the communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, either this money is real or 
it isn't.  You can't tell us the money is not real because 
people did not physically put it into the machine, and then 
turn around and tell us that it is real because you want 7 per 
cent of it, credits and all. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the credits aren't real money, then how do 
you explain the fact that $75 million is actually 7 per cent of 
this $1.2 billion in fictitious money that didn't come from 
anyone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, the figure that we 
release and the money that we talk about quite clearly is real 
money.  But I want to say to the member from Greystone, the 
issue is not how many coins go into the video lottery 
terminals; the issue is the fact that the member from 
Greystone can't make up her mind on which side of this issue 
she sits.  Last year she tells us to hurry up; install the video 
lottery terminals.  This year she says we aren't going to 
generate the kind of money that we suggest we will. 
 
I say to the people of this province that the member from 
Greystone is sitting on the fence on this issue.  And as I told 
her last week, the only thing you get from sitting on the 
fence is slivers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Minister of betting and booze can't seem 
to come up with the right answer here.  We'll try again. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you are doing is calculating your profits 
on those credits.  The result is that you're taking far more 
than 7 per cent of the cash bet in local communities.  You are 
taking that cash -- cash, not credits -- out of Saskatchewan 
communities to feed your government's addiction to 
revenues. 

And if you took 7 per cent of the cash -- now just figure this 
out, Mr. Minister, on your own numbers -- if you took 7 per 
cent of the cash, you'd be getting closer to $17 million.  But 
your greedy government is taking 7 per cent of $1.2 billion 
figure and that is $75 million in profits -- not credits -- cash 
profits. 
 
Is it true, Mr. Minister, that $75 million is closer to 25 per 
cent of the $297 million in actual cash bet?  Now is that not 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that it's 
dangerous to give a Liberal a calculator.  And that's quite 
clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we want to speak in this House about greed, 
let me talk about the federal budget.  And let me talk about 
the hypocrisy that the member from Greystone displays.  In 
this federal budget, members of parliament and the senators 
froze their salaries.  Now being consistent with the Liberals, 
and being consistent with the Liberal that she is, she takes a 
37 per cent increase and then she asks for a freeze. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the government put together a budget 
that indicated we're going to generate some $75 million of 
revenue from the video lottery terminal programs.  It's going 
to go to the Consolidated Fund and it'll be delivered back to 
the people of Saskatchewan in terms of health care and 
education and highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I don't know about 
members, but I can't hear the questions nor can I hear the 
answers.  I think the members . . . just tone it down a bit and 
let members ask their questions and the minister answer the 
questions. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, either this money is real or 
it isn't.  Either people are betting it or they aren't.  If it isn't 
real money then you can't have 7 per cent of it.  And if you're 
only taking 7 per cent of the actual money that is bet, then 
$75 million is not 7 per cent of 297.6 million.  Or perhaps 
the NDP don't know how to use a calculator. 
 
So are these credits real money being bet by real people, or 
are you getting 7 per cent of something that doesn't exist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say this to 
the member from Greystone.  The $15.6 million that we're 
going to be putting back to the hospitality industry, to the 
hotels and the restaurants in terms of their share of this 
revenue, is real. 
 
And I want to tell you as well, Mr. Speaker, that the $65.7 
million that we're putting back into the economy when we 
took the PST (provincial sales tax) off of restaurant food is 
real.  I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our commitment to the 
small-business community in this province is real. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

But what I want to say, that what is also real is the flip-flop 
of the member from Greystone who last year asks us to hurry 
up and get this money into the coffers, and this year tells us 
we shouldn't be doing it.  That's real as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crow Benefit 
 
Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I was wondering if the 
member from Rosthern has any objections, and I would wish 
that he would put it on a point of order.  The member can put 
it after question period on a point of order. 
 
Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the Minister of Agriculture.  It's not every day a 
government member gets up in this Assembly and asks a 
question.  But recently I was in my constituency, on Tuesday 
evening and Wednesday morning, and farm families are very 
concerned about the further cut to the Crow benefit 
announced on Tuesday by the federal government. 
 
Yet with such cuts, which have a devastating effect on rural 
Saskatchewan, the official opposition and the third party 
have deliberately failed to raise this issue.  And I think I 
know why.  And it's not because the farm families in their 
constituencies aren't concerned.  The official opposition and 
third party failed rural Saskatchewan, so I am raising . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Does the member have a question?  Would 
the member please put his question. 
 
Mr. Kluz: -- Yes I have, Mr. Speaker.  I'm raising this 
important issue on behalf of all farm families.  Quite frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, I consider myself doing their job. 
 
The Speaker: -- If the member doesn't question, I'll go to 
another member.  I asked the member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Kluz: -- Is this further erosion to the Crow benefit by 
the federal Liberal government maintaining the course which 
was set by Mazankowski and Mayer of the former Mulroney 
administration, and, Mr. Minister, what are you planning to 
do about this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad that 
the member raised that question.  I think the . . . certainly my 
constituents are concerned about that and I know there are 
many people in this province that are very concerned about 
agriculture, although the opposition parties seem to be very 
silent on it. 
 
Yes, the member is absolutely right.  We've had talk of the 
reforming of the Crow benefit, which is the single biggest 
program, agricultural program, for 

Saskatchewan.  Half the benefit of that program comes to 
this province, and we've had, back in the times of Otto Lang, 
talk of reforming it.  They made changes, but guess what?  
There was a whole lot less money in that program. 
 
We had Charlie Mayer talk about making changes to that 
program, and reforming was the word.  Guess what? -- 
another 10 per cent cut to it. 
 
We have now Mr. Goodale, who was in his career an 
assistant to Mr. Lang, saying we should reform this program; 
by the way, we're making another 5 per cent cut and we're 
taking a further amount of money out of Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as to what I've been doing about it . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 
Authority 

 
Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question was going to be to 
the Minister of Energy and Mines, but in his absence perhaps 
to the Premier or his designate, whoever he would like to 
answer this. 
 
In March 1992, the Premier of Saskatchewan announced two 
major initiatives that would be on the cutting edge of 
economic development and energy development.  In fact he 
even included them in major announcements in the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
The first was the advent of co-generation, which was 
scuttled, Mr. Speaker; in fact it was announced during the 
federal budget that that was over. 
 
The second was the establishment of the Saskatchewan 
Energy Conservation and Development Authority.  Now, Mr. 
Premier, next month marks the second anniversary of that 
Authority.  I'm wondering if you could report to this 
Assembly what actions the Authority has taken?  Could you 
tell us what tangible results, if any, and any benefits to the 
people of Saskatchewan that have been reaped as a result of 
you establishing this Authority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 
to answer that question for the member opposite.  The 
Energy Authority has been very busy working on exploring 
and examining the energy options for Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Energy Authority was formed, obviously it was 
formed because the previous administration had committed 
to a nuclear power plant in Saskatchewan and there were no 
studies done, and we decided that we had to have someone 
do a study on this project before we were to make any kind 
of moves on energy generation.  And the Authority has been 
very busy and 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

you can look forward to a report from this Authority in 
conjunction with the energy strategy report that will come 
out probably sometime in June of this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Partnerships 1994 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform the House that effective 
today, the Government of Saskatchewan will again fund a 
summer employment program for students called 
Partnerships 1994.  The program, Mr. Speaker, is expected to 
create 2,000 jobs in Saskatchewan between May 1 and 
September 30 for students who will be continuing their 
post-secondary education. 
 
The program will help students earn money to continue their 
studies and also will provide them with work experience and 
skills training.  The Department of Education, Training and 
Employment will provide a wage subsidy to employers who 
create a job for students in the summer.  Businesses, farms, 
municipal governments, non-profit organizations, will have 
the opportunity to apply under this program. 
 
This program will encourage employers to consider the 
hiring of students of aboriginal ancestry and students with 
disabilities.  Application forms will be available 
immediately.  And through the approval process, we will 
ensure that there is a fair distribution of student jobs across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to providing job 
opportunities for the young people of Saskatchewan.  
Together with employers and communities, we will be taking 
steps to ensure these students can make a social and 
economic contribution to our province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We would 
like to compliment the government on carrying on with the 
summer employment program for students.  It's been a 
program that has been in place for many years and has served 
many Saskatchewan students very well. 
 
Employment in the summer for students is very important for 
them to continue their education, Mr. Speaker, but other 
types of employment are also necessary.  Students should be 
able to be employed within their area that they are studying 
and such things as co-generation, Mr. Speaker, would have 
enhanced that possibility for students.  So while we 
compliment the government on carrying on this program, it's 
important that the government develop some economic 
initiatives that will give students real jobs, 

Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 
1987, be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act respecting Certified General 
Accountants 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I move 
that a Bill respecting Certified General Accountants be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- Before orders of the day to make a statement 
regarding the Prairie Ventures trade show in Saskatoon. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased that the 
House has given me leave to make this private member's 
statement, because there is a very important thing occurring 
in Saskatoon today, tomorrow, and Saturday.  I refer to the 
Prairie Ventures trade show, occurring at the Prairieland 
Exhibition, the Jubilee Building. 
 
The Prairieland Exhibit Corporation, together with 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food, Sask Water, and PFRA 
are major sponsors of this newest of trade shows, designed 
for economic development on the Prairies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we struggle with markets for our traditional 
commodities, new products with new markets are necessary 
to the Saskatchewan economy.  Events such as Prairie 
Ventures demonstrate in a very vivid way the drive that 
exists in Saskatchewan for a more diversified approach to 
business.  We are seeking new and successful ways to 
develop the 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

resources and opportunities around us. 
 
I am very proud to be part of a government that sponsors 
efforts such as Prairie Ventures.  Prairie Ventures will give 
people access to information and new ideas on how they can 
take their new venture from the idea stage to the consumer. 
 
Market information, financial advice, production tips, and 
answers to key questions are all available at this show.  
Prairie Ventures is an excellent example of how the 
agricultural and economic sectors of Saskatchewan have 
recognized the need and are focused on the opportunities for 
diversification. 
 
The drive to succeed is there, Mr. Speaker -- producers and 
others can tell you.  There are countless opportunities: elk, 
bison, llamas, exotic birds, fruits and vegetables, specialty 
crops, processing, and manufacturing.  The opportunities are 
there.  And Saskatchewan is taking advantage, good 
advantage, of those opportunities. 
 
Prairie Ventures, occurring this weekend in Saskatoon, 
shows that we are realizing success in our goals through 
partnerships of associations, private operators, and 
government.  That's the Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker.  
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House to make a 
statement on economic development. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, the budget document presented 
recently identified a major concern of Saskatchewan people, 
and that is jobs and economic development.  Mr. Speaker, I'd 
like to provide today to the House an example of the 
economic recovery that is happening in Saskatchewan, not 
only in Regina but right across the province. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, Saskem Manufacturing of 
Regina held the official opening of their new manufacturing 
facility at 1305 Halifax Street.  This new facility, which is 
bringing in $380,000 of new investment, is going to redouble 
the workforce from 10 to 20, and they expect to create five 
new jobs in the next two years. 
 
As well, Saskem is the largest manufacturer of specialty 
chemicals in Saskatchewan with markets across Canada and 
the Seattle area of United States. 
 
It is companies like these that benefit from the measures we 
have introduced such as reducing taxes on manufacturing 
inputs, and reducing the small business corporate income tax 
rate -- important stimuli, Mr. Speaker, to small business to 
expand and create jobs. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to bring this 
important news to the attention of the members.  And I ask 
all members to join me in congratulating 

Saskem's president and general manager, Mr. Don Punga, 
and all the management and staff of Saskem Manufacturing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it would relate to 
questions 32 and 33, I would table the responses. 
 
And as it relates to question no. 26, I would table an 
amended response. 
 
The Speaker: -- Answers to questions 32 and 33 have been 
tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. 
Speaker.  I rise again today to complete my remarks from 
yesterday. And speaking to this year's provincial budget I've 
already made two points.  Briefly, the first regarding public 
trust and accountability. 
 
In summary the legislature has a Provincial Auditor, two 
all-party committees, and a committee of the full legislature 
that provides for scrutiny of public spending.  The public, the 
media, all elected representatives can attend any or all of 
these sessions.  It's difficult to know how we could achieve 
more scrutiny and accountability, but as with any system it 
only works if we use it to its full and intended purpose. 
 
The second point I made had to do with concerns regarding 
the total impact of reductions and third-party payments to 
schools, universities, municipalities, and individuals such as 
farmers.  My main point was that these groups directly 
control and spend two-thirds of the entire provincial budget.  
So it's impossible to balance the budget without working in 
partnership. 
 
We've not asked them to do anything that we have not had to 
do, and as the minister of municipal services pointed out 
yesterday, many municipalities have substantial reserves 
which if put into use could be creating economic activity and 
renewal.  And many municipalities are fortunate in this 
regard. 
 
Which brings me to my final topic which I didn't have time 
for yesterday.  I'm going to speak to federal financial issues.  
As we know, federal efforts have a great ability to affect our 
provincial finances.  So, Mr. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

Speaker, where is the money, who has it, and how do we get 
it into circulation? 
 
A healthy economy is like a healthy body, Mr. Speaker, but 
instead of blood it has money pumping through its veins.  
And like a healthy body, the blood has to circulate through 
the entire system.  No part can be left out or it will become 
diseased and die. 
 
As we know, Chre pétien's first federal budget is filled with 
uncertainty and already his government is entering phase 2, 
planning for next year's budget.  He will have some 
significant social and economic choices to make. 
 
So here's some ideas that I contribute freely to Mr. 
Chre pétien and Paul Martin as they begin their hunt for 
money.  First of all, to find money you have to go where it 
lives, to seek it out in its natural habitat, so to speak. The 
banks might be a good place to start. 
 
 iThe Globe and Mail r, December '93 reported on the six 
best-paid bank bosses in Canada.  Salaries ranged from $1.8 
million, plus stock options, to some poor guy who only made 
$489,000.  And by the way -- it brought a tear to my eye -- 
and by the way, the article stated that these pay rates were 
not linked to performance.  These are our familiar banks, Mr. 
Speaker: Montreal, Toronto Dominion, Nova Scotia, Royal, 
and National Bank. 
 
And then I go back to The Globe and Mail, 1992 for 
illustration.  In the third quarter of that year, the six big 
banks made half of all the profits earned by the country's 153 
biggest corporations -- half -- six banks made half the profits.  
If we add this information to two years of research on federal 
tax data done by Gordon Ternowetsky of the University of 
Regina, many of these banks paid no tax and laid off large 
numbers of employees. 
 
There are two things wrong with this picture.  These major 
banks, many of whom paid no tax, are receiving major tax 
breaks while showing record profits and paying record 
salaries to upper management while laying off junior staff.  
Put another way, you and I pay taxes, people who make 
10,000 a year pay taxes, and your taxes subsidized many of 
these banks to increase their profits, while putting people out 
of work, foreclosing on businesses, mortgages and farms. 
 
So to go back to the statement that six banks earned half of 
all corporate profits of the largest 153 corporations, suggests 
the transfer of too much of society's wealth from productive 
sectors of the economy to banks.  This should be a concern 
to the public, to other corporations and small businesses, and 
to all of us here in the legislature as policy makers.  Because 
this is an illustration of where wealth really exists in our 
society. 
 
And I hope Mr. Martin will have the courage to take this on, 
even though his federal Liberal Party receives considerable 
election financing from these groups.  It isn't doing us any 
good as a country and it won't do banks any good if they help 
to kill the economy. 

As long as maximizing profits continues to be the only value 
driving financial markets, it's going to continue to distort all 
other priorities and relationships in our society. 
 
A friend phoned me last night, who had just read an article 
from an investment house that said, we don't have a spending 
problem in this country, we have a revenue problem. 
 
(1445) 
 
In their assessment, governments have been doing a pretty 
good job at cutting back.  But revenues have declined due to 
a 10 per cent reduction in taxes on wealthy individuals and 
wealthy corporations.  In other words, the burden on those 
with the ability to pay has been going down, not up. 
 
So before we accept a national exercise that may result in 
cuts to our valued social security network, let's urge the 
federal government to end subsidies and tax breaks that 
benefit a privileged few, that serve no national purpose, that 
are not tied directly to creating jobs nor to returning wealth 
to our economy. 
 
If those wealthy interests are concerned about their 
continuing ability to profit, they also have some tough 
decisions to make.  They must take some of the profits and 
tax breaks that have been sucked out of the economy into 
CEOs' (chief executive officer) and shareholders' hands, and 
let this money flow back where it can reduce prices, create 
jobs, and stimulate the economy. 
 
Yes, as the Premier likes to say, we're in this boat together, 
and I want to say that our oar is in the water.  We laid out a 
plan, we implemented the plan, and our plan is working.  We 
have taken a balanced approach and we're delivering on the 
promise.  The ball is now in the federal court.  And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget. 
 
Thanks very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 
my privilege to join today in debating the February 17 
budget address.  I'd like to begin with a thank you and 
congratulations to the Premier, the Finance minister, and my 
cabinet colleagues for the vision and commitment reflected 
in this budget.  And equally, a thank you to the people of my 
constituency, Rosetown-Elrose, and to the people across 
Saskatchewan who have directed and advised us on our 
strategies, and who have made the tough adjustments that 
allow us to say today that we have the lowest per capita 
deficit in Canada, excepting that we still have a very 
significant, might I say tragic, debt that will constrain us for 
years to come. 
 
This budget is the result of a long and careful planning 
process.  In 1991 when we took office, this province was 
burdened with a staggering debt.  Our 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

government set a course to return this province to its 
previous financial stability.  The balanced-budget plan 
introduced by this government on the advice of you, the 
people of Saskatchewan that we are elected to serve, will 
secure the future of this province. 
 
Compare this to the damaging, lacklustre, and directionless 
announcement of the federal Liberals on Tuesday . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask leave for the 
introduction of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all the members of the House, a couple of 
constituents of mine from Kamsack, Mr. and Mrs. Harry 
Shukin, who are seated up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  
Harry and Barb came in from Kamsack this morning, despite 
the storm.  They travelled their way down to Regina here to 
have some business with the government in regards to the 
Doukhobor heritage trust fund. 
 
And I hope they've had a good day here.  I'm sure they've 
had, and I'm looking forward to spending some time with 
them this afternoon.  And I'll ask all members to offer them a 
very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, as I 
was saying, compare our government's well-balanced plan to 
the damaging, lacklustre, and directionless announcement of 
the federal Liberals on Tuesday -- lowering taxes on 
cigarettes while raising taxes on seniors, professing to cut 
government expenditures by reducing employment insurance 
benefits to 80 per cent of recipients while increasing total 
government spending. 
 
Might I say that by comparison, we in Saskatchewan have 
reduced our spending by 3 per cent in each of the last two 
years. 
 
And for farmers, nothing.  No mention in the speech other 
than the threatened review of capital gains rules.  From 
McKnight to Mayer to Goodale, no change.  The Tory 
cut-backs on Crow benefits are continuing unchanged.  
Liberal or Tory, it's the same old story. 

Mr. Speaker, our government has created a climate where 
people can once again have a feeling of security, security that 
had been robbed by our mountainous debt, security robbed 
even more by the huge annual overexpenditures which the 
previous administration created -- 1 billion dollars per year 
of spending beyond our income, security robbed by 
unprecedented mismanagement. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are beginning to feel their 
security again.  They have accepted our responsible approach 
and together have made the sacrifices necessary to overcome 
the challenges and hardships created by this debt and deficit.  
The credit goes to them.  We are on the road to recovery but 
there is yet another challenge we must address. 
 
Now that we have our finances under control, nothing is 
more central to the long-term health of this province than 
sound environmental management.  Just as we have put our 
financial house in order, we must also recognize our 
environmental deficit and begin to deal with it with the same 
vigour, energy and commitment. 
 
We are confronted with a global challenge as humanity 
continues to use and misuse resources to such an extent that 
the earth is reaching its capacity to sustain life.  The 
by-products and wastes of our consumer lifestyle is 
excessively polluting our land, our water and air, threatening 
species and habitat and directly impacting on the web of life. 
 
Yesterday in The Globe and Mail, the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science identified the 
tragedy and challenge of facing the reality that tens of 
thousands of species of plants and animals become extinct 
each year before we have had a chance to define where they 
fit in the great framework of life on earth. 
 
In Canada, we must face the fact that we are part of the 25 
per cent of the world's population who use 80 per cent of the 
earth's resources.  Each of us consumes the output of 15 
acres of land while the earth has only four acres of land per 
person to offer, including forest lands.  It is easy to see every 
day on television that our consumption of resources has 
given us a high quality of life, but it is a quality of life that is 
stark and brutal in contrast to the impoverished lives of the 
great majority of the world's people who must live with 
much less than their four acres because we demand so much 
more than our four acres. 
 
The earth's resources and its capacity to accept our waste are 
quite literally running out.  We cannot close our eyes to the 
environmental impact of the social inequity which has 
allowed us to remain the favoured few while poorer nations 
ravage their own resources in a desperate attempt to survive 
in a world economic system dominated by developed 
nations. 
 
As we witness the degrading of our planet, we are coming to 
realize that our future no longer lies in exploitation but in 
stewardship.  Our stewardship of the globe begins with 
stewardship in our own backyard.  We cannot misuse and 
overuse the world's 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

resources and expect to avoid the consequences.  When 
forests disappear, or soil degenerates, or water is poisoned, 
when species are eliminated, or crops fail, or fish can no 
longer be found, all of us are at risk.  We must take practical 
actions which are compatible with the global reality. 
 
The economy and the environment are very closely linked 
with each other and with the health of our communities.  
And, Mr. Speaker, we as a government are challenged by the 
need to ensure that all three are maintained in balance.  On 
February 17, with the announcement of the 1994-1995 
budget, this government continued decisive steps to bring 
Saskatchewan back to the forefront of competitiveness and 
economic strength.  Just as February 17 was budget day, 
today is an equally important day for the future of our 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not on any calendar; it is not the date of a 
significant commemorative event; and it is not the day of an 
important gathering.  But today is a day of great importance 
nevertheless, because today is a day when each of us can 
make a renewed commitment to ensure the future of our 
environment. 
 
We are custodians, keepers of this land, protecting it for the 
future of our children and our children's children.  I am 
always encouraged by children who send me special 
messages.  For example, Mr. Speaker, one young person 
from Prince Albert, from the Queen Mary School, has 
written to me.  Let me read her letter: 
 

 Hi, my name is Jamie Fedrau.  I'm in grade six at Queen 
Mary School.  The first thing I want to say is "thank you"!  
I think the North American Waterfowl Management Plan 
(N.A.W.M.D.) is a good idea to save our wetlands.  
Wetlands work like a filter system.  Phosphorus, nitrogen, 
and metal are cleaned out of clean, healthy water everyday.  
My only request is that you help do more to save our 
wetlands.  I may be only a kid, but I want our Earth to stay 
healthy and clean just the same as everyone else.  
Sincerely. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- As we continue on our journey of 
economic and community renewal and restructuring, our 
concern for the environment will not be lost nor will it 
become an obstacle.  The environmental and resource 
policies we develop will complement social policy, trade, 
and development. 
 
Some of the most competitive nations, such as Germany and 
Japan, also have some of the strongest environmental 
regimes in the world.  Germany has the most stringent rules 
for stationary-source air pollution control -- rules that have 
challenged business and industry to find new solutions, 
which have resulted in new technology.  Germany currently 
holds the lead in patents in air pollution abatement 
technology.  Protection of the environment has created both 
economic growth and job opportunities. 

Mr. Speaker, globally, nationally, and locally, leaders are 
working together to address our environmental problems.  
The 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro was a tremendous 
opportunity for the world to join hands and work together to 
help solve our environmental challenges.  Since that time 
several countries, including Canada, have pledged to work 
toward a cleaner, healthier world. 
 
Here at home, the Canadian Council of Ministers of the 
Environment has played a key role in ensuring our country 
continues its momentum towards sustainable development.  
We have built a new sense of partnership by strengthening 
our relationship with ministers of forestry, economic 
development, and energy, and by opening the process of 
policy development to the public. 
 
We have laid the foundation for more integrated 
harmonization of environmental policies internationally and 
within Canada.  We are concentrating on implementing the 
two agreements from the Earth Summit, one on biological 
diversity and the other on climate change.  And we have set 
out an environmental action plan for the 21st century. 
 
We are working closely with other western provinces on 
harmonizing economic and environmental policies in 
western Canada to make our businesses stronger and more 
competitive here and internationally as well.  Energy and 
environment ministers from all parts of Canada are working 
together to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by the year 
2000 and achieve progress to reduce emissions by the year 
2005.  We have also pledged to reduce solid waste by 50 per 
cent by the year 2000. 
 
Western provinces are working together to develop regional 
strategies for managing hazardous waste, waste reduction, 
and recycling programs.  These national and regional actions 
are supported by provincial strategies and programs that 
when combined will make a significant difference in our 
environment. 
 
Saskatchewan's strategy has been outlined in a draft 
document entitled Securing a Sustainable Future.  This 
draft strategy has been released for public review and 
comment.  The purpose of this comprehensive strategy is to 
focus our efforts on integrating key environmental and 
resource management initiatives.  Our vision for this strategy 
is to provide a framework whereby we can achieve balance 
and harmony between human activity and the environment. 
 
This draft strategy will set the province's environmental 
agenda for years ahead.  The strategy has four main goals: 
environmental protection, the first, protecting 
Saskatchewan's environment and the well-being of our 
citizens; sustainable development, securing the 
environmental and economic future for our communities; 
national and global responsibility, meeting our obligations 
and opportunities as citizens of the world; and the fourth, 
improving the management tools, improving the decision 
making through partnership and public involvement. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

Some specific action items relating to these goals are 
identified in the strategy.  We will be developing a clear and 
concise compliance policy which emphasizes prevention 
over mitigation and implements the polluter-pay concept. 
 
The contaminated sites team will oversee the registry of sites 
and the preparation and implementation of remediation plans 
for sites which have been identified as presenting a risk to 
human and environmental health.  We will be implementing 
actions supporting the provincial conservation strategy, 
including integrated water management, sustainable 
agriculture, environmentally safe and sustainable mining, 
and a sustainable energy industry. 
 
(1500) 
 
We will be making use of economic instruments to reduce 
pollution, create jobs, and enhance economic 
competitiveness in our province.  Two main types of 
economic instruments will be considered: pollution charges 
on major sources aimed at reducing emissions, and levies 
that support waste reduction and recycling.  We will also be 
undertaking a reform of The Environmental Assessment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our environmental strategy is closely related to 
and interdependent with the major social and economic 
strategies of this government.  The environmental strategy is 
one of the series of complementary strategies including the 
Partnership for Renewal economic development strategy, 
the wellness model, and the Agriculture 2000 strategy. 
 
The Agriculture 2000 document -- the strategic direction for 
the future of Saskatchewan's agriculture and food industry -- 
outlines the need to promote the implementation of 
environmentally sustainable agriculture.  As a farmer and as 
a member representing one of the finest agricultural areas of 
Saskatchewan, I am particularly pleased with this initiative. 
 
The farmers, businessmen, and citizens of Rosetown-Elrose 
from communities in every corner, Kyle, Beechy, Dinsmore, 
Lucky Lake, Rosetown, Elrose, Milden, Macrorie, Birsay, 
Zealandia, Stranraer, and my home town of Herschel, have 
long been leaders not only in farming but in developing new 
technologies, as well as in health and economic 
development. 
 
Our wellness model recognizes that an expanded view of 
health considers factors such as housing, employment, 
education, and the environment.  And again the Midwest 
District in our area was the first in putting their imprint on 
history as leaders in development of this model. 
 
Similar connections have been made to the Partnership for 
Renewal strategy.  One of its three main goals is to secure 
and build on existing strengths based on sustainable 
development.  And again the regional economic development 
agency planning in my area is at the forefront of innovative 
economic development agency work in our province. 

In our area the economic development agency is working on 
projects that are visionary, including renewable energy 
resources, waste management initiatives, value added 
processing, and pursuit of new crops which will meet new, 
yet-unfound market opportunities. 
 
The challenge ahead of us is to turn these strategies into 
action.  And the way to do this is through a partnership 
approach.  And I say with pride that the people of 
Rosetown-Elrose are on this road, taking action innovatively 
in cooperation with each other and in partnership with the 
larger community of communities of which they are a part. 
 
We have taken many steps in this direction as a government 
as well.  In forestry the province is developing an integrated 
forest management plan with specific emphasis on 
biodiversity -- that is to say, the conservation of trees, 
wildlife, and all other resources which have been part of the 
forest but which have received far too little attention. 
 
This strategy is the result of a public participation process 
involving first nations and Metis groups, individuals, forest 
companies, as well as other stakeholders who have a keen 
interest and commitment to integrated forest management. 
 
To encourage community-level environmental stewardship, 
three pilot projects on sustainable community planning are 
under way in the areas surrounding Estevan, Davidson, and 
Creighton-Denare Beach.  There are many partnerships in 
place to jointly manage or co-manage our natural resources 
and the environment.  We have a partnership in place to 
work with James Smith First Nation with a goal to involving 
all stakeholders in the area in a process to co-manage natural 
resources in the Fort-a pà-la-Corne and Hudson Bay trapping 
block areas. 
 
The Sipanok management area development agreement has 
set in place a council of various stakeholders, again including 
first nations and other community representatives, who will 
work together to manage the forest, fur, fish, and wildlife 
resources over a 1,260 square-mile area north-west of 
Hudson Bay. 
 
Another clear indication of the government's commitment to 
co-management and the leadership of affected peoples is the 
Saskatchewan wildlife memorandum of understanding with 
the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, and this government.  
This memorandum formalizes first nation involvement in the 
management of our wildlife resources. 
 
We are working in partnership with NorSask Forest Products 
on co-management within its forest management licence 
agreement.  In turn, NorSask has established many local 
co-management boards.  This ensures that local communities 
and stakeholders play an integral role in determining how 
and where forest 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

harvesting is undertaken.  This process guarantees that local 
values, customs, and traditional practices are integrated into 
economic development decisions. 
 
In this way, the Wiggens Bay Road blockade, otherwise 
known as the Meadow Lake blockade dispute was amicably 
settled.  The legitimate grievances of the blockaders were 
answered by establishing a dialogue and a process where 
community needs are listened to and taken into account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that these initiatives, both with the 
first nations on wildlife management and the co-management 
exercises in the north-west, are world leading initiatives and 
initiatives that are getting the attention of governments, 
nationally and internationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to work with affected groups 
and individuals to identify and solve problems, make 
decisions, and plan for a sustainable future.  Through our 
various strategies, government and stakeholders can achieve 
balance and harmony between human activity, our economy, 
and the environment. 
 
In past years, many decisions were based solely on the 
economics surrounding an issue.  We have moved away from 
this.  In Saskatchewan we have many examples of business, 
industry, and government working together to ensure 
environmental stewardship is considered as a central part of 
corporate planning. 
 
In 1993, Weyerhaeuser Canada announced plans to address 
air emissions and landfill issues at the Prince Albert pulp and 
paper mill.  This $128 million program is funded entirely by 
Weyerhaeuser as an expression of their commitment to the 
future of our environmental well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the small-business sector is a 
major contributor to job creation and economic growth in 
Saskatchewan.  By working closely with business, we can 
ensure that economic growth continues to provide us with a 
healthy community while keeping pace or leading in 
technological innovation. 
 
This morning I had the opportunity to address the 
Saskatchewan Waste Reduction Council in Saskatoon, a 
group of community representatives and businessmen 
committed to waste reduction and new approaches to reuse 
resources through recycling.  It is increasingly obvious that 
there is good business in good environmental management, 
and Saskatchewan businesses are doing it. 
 
Innovation and creativity must come from both the private 
sector and the public sector in order to take advantage of new 
opportunities that are available to us because of our 
commitment to environmental responsibility. 
 
My friend and colleague, the member from  

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, introduced me to her constituents, Vic 
Ellis and Terry White, who are partners in Energy Concepts 
Incorporated, which is an excellent example of this.  This 
small business builds energy-efficient homes and they've 
taken an innovative approach which challenges the 
traditional approaches. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The wildlife damage task force and our 
consultation initiatives regarding hazardous wastes are 
examples where the business community is involved in 
developing solutions to existing problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently Canadians were surveyed regarding 
our natural resources.  It was confirmed that our natural 
resources are a source of strength and pride for Canadians.  
These natural resources represent a major source of 
recreation, relaxation, enjoyment, economic strength, and 
jobs for our nation.  Canadians understand the importance of 
natural resources as a source of economic prosperity.  But 
they are not willing to accept that economic growth and 
employment can only be achieved at the expense of our 
environment or without proper resource management. 
 
Our recent decisions regarding uranium mining demonstrate 
that economic development and all the benefits in terms of 
jobs and investment that flow from it can co-exist with sound 
environmental management practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can once again be optimistic about the 
future.  We as a province are on the road to renewal, and part 
of that road is our commitment to a sustainable future.  We 
have both the responsibility and the opportunity to right the 
wrongs of the past. 
 
The budget presented by my colleague the Minister of 
Finance is a reflection of strong government leadership and 
policy.  It will take us forward, building on our existing 
strengths, working together for a better tomorrow.  Working 
with business and special interest groups, we have the 
opportunity to involve Saskatchewan people in decisions that 
will have a significant impact on the future of this province. 
 
By making a commitment to this process and a commitment 
to sustain and protect our environment, we will provide a 
future that is bright and full of promise for our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I received many letters and 
visits from young people in this province.  Their energy and 
spirit demonstrates a concern for the future and the condition 
of the earth they are inheriting.  We as decision makers have 
their future in our hands.  What kind of legacy are we leaving 
them?  As the saying goes, we don't inherit the earth from 
our ancestors, we borrow it from our children.  Mr. Speaker, 
today we renew our commitment to a future that is bright and 
full of promise. 
 
Thank you. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's always a 
pleasure to enter into debate in this Assembly.  I've said that 
many times and I mean it even more today, especially when 
the member opposite was kind enough to let me go ahead so 
that I can get on with some of my other duties later.  We 
always appreciate chivalry, even when it works in reverse. 
 
There are several topics that need to be discussed, Mr. 
Speaker, even though the budget itself didn't really touch on 
them in the way that people in our province would have liked 
to have seen happen.  It is a shallow budget with a lot of 
innuendo and references that could possibly happen, but no 
real substance. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the problem that we face in our 
society today.  We have a lot of vague sort of promises that 
people might do something to help us, but nothing 
substantial, and therefore we live in a time of fear and 
anxiety. 
 
Fear for those people who have jobs because they don't know 
how long they'll have them; and anxiety for our young 
people who know very well that they don't have a future in 
this province.  No future, no expectations, only the 
possibility to go to school until you're old and grey and take 
one course after another because that's all we offer to our 
young people. 
 
More and more courses, more and more educational 
programs, go back to school, get higher training, but we don't 
have any jobs.  Nothing created, nothing provided for that 
end of the trail when we get out of school for our young 
people. 
 
It is nice, Mr. Speaker, to know that we have a democratic 
process still in our province, where we can stand up here and 
debate these issues.  Where the government members can put 
forward some of their ideas and the old principles of 
democracy still work. Where we have the opportunity to 
stand in our place and point out those things that could go 
wrong, and might go wrong, and hope for that moderation of 
government that can come, especially now that we are into 
the two and a half year part of the cycle and going downhill 
into the election. 
 
And now we will see a government hopefully that will start 
to listen to the people, because it certainly hasn't happened in 
the past.  Two and a half long years of no one listening and 
no one caring.  And that's the message that I get from the 
folks that I hear from, both by letter, telephone, and meeting 
them on the street. 
 
The budget, Mr. Speaker, was entitled Delivering the 
Promise.  Delivering the promise of what?  A promise of no 
hope, of no future; a promise of emptiness, a promise of no 
medicare any longer for our province, a medicare program 
that has been destroyed, literally bankrupted. 
 
A health care system that leaves rural people more inclined 
to have to leave rural Saskatchewan than ever before because 
they know now that their very 

 lives are on the line every time they go to work.  Because if 
they do encounter an injury, they'll be on their own and 
they'll face death alone because there's no help for them nor 
can there be any help, because it's all been taken away. 
 
Drug plans that have been destroyed, literally ripped apart -- 
a part of our health care system that we had become, as a 
people, used to and dependent upon for the security and 
safety of our lives for ourselves and our loved ones. And it's 
gone.  Gone with so many other things, like the dental plan 
for children, no longer there.  One program after another, Mr. 
Speaker, ripped up, torn away, and destroyed.  They ought to 
call this the government of absolute destruction. 
 
I watch people go past my constituency and through the 
middle of it on No. 1 Highway.  And they only have one lane 
highway on No. 1 going out of Saskatchewan, but it has two 
lanes at the Alberta border to accommodate all the traffic that 
wants to leave this province, and nobody coming back. 
 
(1515) 
 
And what do we offer for promise from this budget?  We 
offer for promise in this budget an agricultural program. Not 
GRIP 1 (gross revenue insurance program), not GRIP 2, but 
GRIP 3, the sequel, the replay.  Agriculture 2000, GRIP No. 
3.  Nobody liked the first one, everybody hated the second 
one, and absolutely no one is going to benefit with the third 
one because there's no money in it.  It is a travesty and a 
disaster beyond compare. 
 
It is so ironic, Mr. Speaker, that so many promises can be 
broken by a government who took office only two and a half 
years ago.  Two and a half years of a steady downhill fall, 
like a lead balloon dropping straight through the floor. 
 
And they talk about job creation, Mr. Speaker, job creation.  
The budget document once again indicates that the NDP 
priority for the 1994 program will be job creation.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I put it to you and to the people of Saskatchewan 
very simply this way.  How many people do you know that 
are looking for work?  How many people do you know that 
are on unemployment insurance and welfare?  Are there less 
now than you knew two years ago?  How many people do 
you know that are looking for work and can't find it? 
 
Tell me about job creation when you can point to people who 
have found work.  I want to see the proof through the actions 
of the reality that people actually get the jobs. 
 
The best job we've got for people right now in this province 
is to educate our young people so that they can leave.  And 
this is nothing new, Mr. Speaker, because it is a repeat of 
NDP policy and philosophy that goes back to before the '60s 
and through the '70s.  Nothing new under the sun for these 
people because they don't have any new ideas.  They're a 
bankrupt government, biding their time, hoping that their  



404 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

popularity of 50 per cent won't slide so far before the next 
election that they are totally, totally turned out to a man and 
to a woman. 
 
The NDP government's commitment to job creation can be 
found in every NDP throne speech delivered to this 
Assembly since forming government in 1991.  Let me give 
you a few examples, Mr. Speaker.  The 1992 throne speech, 
I'll quote a little bit of it: 
 

 In spite of Saskatchewan's financial problems, there is 
reason for hope and optimism . . . 

 
 In total, there are currently more than 700 companies 

which have expressed an interest in either relocating to 
Saskatchewan or expanding their operations here.  If these 
businesses proceed with their plans, they have the potential 
to create or maintain more than . . . (1,600) jobs. 

 
That was on page 3.  Can you believe that, Mr. Speaker?  
Show me where those 1,600 jobs are.  I want to see them.  
Show me those 700 companies that were coming to 
Saskatchewan to develop and relocate here.  I'll put it even 
easier: show me five.  Give me some examples of this great 
success story. 
 
Let me go on, Mr. Speaker, to the 1992 budget. 
 

 One of the most important priorities for Saskatchewan 
people (is) . . . stimulating economic opportunities and 
creating jobs. 

 
I guess the modern day follow-up would be, not.  That's the 
way kids put things nowadays when they tell you a story that 
isn't true.  They'll tell you one thing and then they follow it 
with the word, not, meaning that they reversed it all with the 
double negative. 
 
And that's what this government is all about.  Double 
negatives, cancel everything.  They say one thing today and 
they don't mean it tomorrow. 
 
The 1993 throne speech: 
 

 There is no more important dimension to the future than 
the creation of jobs, and no more important location for 
those jobs than Saskatchewan's smaller communities. 

 
 Of the hundreds of new, expanding and potential business 

projects in the province, more than half are outside Regina 
and Saskatoon.  Those outside our two larger cities have 
the potential to create or maintain almost 8,000 jobs. 

 
Well wouldn't it be nice if we could see even half of those 
having actually happened?  But here we are in 1994, and I 
ask you, show me where those jobs are.  Point them out to 
me.  I'd be glad to slap you on the back and brag you up all 
over; but it hasn't happened.  And it will never happen with a 
socialist government because they have no plan. 

The 1993 budget went on.  Jobs are our first priority -- page 
3.  Whose jobs?  Their ministerial assistants who get double 
wages while the rest get fired?  Is that what we call job 
creation in this province now? 
 
Now we get to the 1994 throne speech: 
 

 The economic development strategy which my government 
introduced in 1992 -- Partnership for Renewal, has three 
key goals: to create a positive climate for economic 
renewal, to build on existing strengths, and to seek full 
employment. 

 
 The partnership is working.  We continue to have the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country. 
 

Page 2.  I wonder if the unemployed people of Saskatchewan 
are making themselves feel good by listening to those 
figures?  I wonder if those on welfare are feeling great 
because we have a government that tells them that they're 
living in a province where things are better than the rest of 
the provinces.  Because you're not as bad as the worst, you 
should feel better even though you're unemployed or on 
welfare. 
 
The '94 budget goes on.  This budget shows that jobs are also 
our number one priority, on page 3.  And still I say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, where are the jobs?  Where is the proof of any 
success? 
 
I look forward to the day when I can stand in my place and 
eat crow, and say: I take it all back, you guys did good.  But 
I'm waiting.  And I'll wait for ever with a socialist 
government because they're devoid of any kind of plan or 
creation that could ever create a new job any place ever. 
 
Living off the backs of others and the ideas of others -- and 
we saw an example today, Mr. Speaker.  The Piper Aircraft 
-- $600,000 thrown in the wind, blowing all over 
Saskatchewan I presume, to do a study, a great study to find 
out how good a program would be that is now making 
millions of dollars and providing all kinds of jobs in 
California, not in Saskatchewan.  Is that what your study told 
you?  Ship it away? 
 
The commitment, Mr. Speaker, of this government to 
provide jobs, is without question, to put it mildly, a complete 
farce.  They never had any intentions of providing any jobs 
because they have no programs that will create jobs. 
 
Let me just make my point with the news release I picked up 
earlier today -- Department of Highways.  The Minister of 
Highways is bragging about his programs.  With all due 
respect to the minister, if I were he I would hang my head in 
shame. 
 
This program says here that he's got a new SHIP (strategic 
highway improvement program) program. 
 

 (It's) a 50/50 cost-sharing agreement between the province 
and the federal government. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

 "While this is a reduction from last year's budgeted level, 
(he goes on) this doesn't mean the amount spent on 
highways and bridges in the province this year will be 
reduced," . . . 

 
Now I kind of come from the old school where, if you reduce 
the budget and you don't spend as much money, you're not 
going to get as much service.  And how are you going to 
create jobs if you're spending less money?  I mean if this is 
some kind of new magic, I really would like to see it.  
Between this document, Mr. Speaker, and the budget, I kind 
of got to wonder if Houdini didn't come back to life -- seems 
to be the magical old rabbit trick. 
 
We all know, Mr. Speaker, that the magician pulls the rabbit 
out of the hat and then he sets the hat back down after he 
shows you the inside of it and he puts the rabbit in the hat 
and then he picks the hat up and the rabbit's gone, he 
disappears.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of budget 
we've got here -- the Harry Houdini budget.  The truth of the 
matter is that the people won't be fooled any more because 
they know very well that that rabbit didn't disappear, he went 
into a cage underneath the table. 
 
The people of this province are not fooled by the deception 
of this budget that says it creates jobs and won't charge 
higher taxes.  The people know better.  The sleight of hand 
doesn't work any more.  They know very well that when their 
utility bills come in and they're higher than they were last 
year and higher than they were last month that they're being 
taxed through the utilities. 
 
They know very well that a government slips in silent taxes 
throughout the year, that they're paying more.  They're not 
that tired and they're not that old and they're not that 
confused and they know, and they are going to put their 
finger on you in the next election. 
 
Remember, Mr. Speaker, when I said how the kids say, not, 
after they say something wrong.  I want to refer to this next 
line: 
 

 "A number of road projects are expected to be included in 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure . . . Program 
which will increase capital projects and employment 
opportunities in Saskatchewan." 

 
And a smart kid would add, not.  And why would they do 
that, Mr. Speaker?  Simply because it's a sleight-of-hand 
trick, because it goes right on to tell us how they would take 
the money from a reduced budget for Highways -- a reduced 
budget -- and they would create more work because they'd 
use an infrastructure program. 
 
And all they're doing is switching the money from one pile to 
the other that the federal government gave them, in all 
honesty, to be matched in matching programs with new 
money, not a shuffling of old money from one department to 
the other or from one pile to the other with even the same 
ministerial 

portfolio, the Department of Highways. 
 
The crying disaster of our province is our highway system, 
and the easiest of old, old ways to create work and to put 
people back on to a program of prosperity.  The old ways can 
work and they will work.  And the first way of the old ways 
is to start to do the work that needs to be done and I point to 
our highways. 
 
In the old days when we needed work to be done we started 
building roads.  In these days we've got roads that need work 
and we don't do it.  And we leave our contractors sitting 
unemployed with their machines shut down.  We leave our 
young people in the summertime, who are out of school, sit 
around doing nothing, twiddling their thumbs, playing 
computer games while the machines sit idle and no work gets 
done. 
 
And when the federal government comes with a good 
program of matching dollars, they don't match it.  They take 
dollars out of the budget, reduce the budget for the 
Department of Highways, and match the federal 
government's share with that and build roads some place else 
in a very minimal amount rather than the kind of work that 
needs to be done and should be done to create the work that 
we need to do in order to provide the jobs that we have to 
have for our young people. 
 
According to Statistics Canada there were fewer people 
working in Saskatchewan in January than any month since 
March of 1984.  Here's a fact, Mr. Speaker -- there are now 
12,000 fewer jobs in Saskatchewan than in January, 1991. 
 
I have another fact.  In December of 1991 there were 57,199 
people on welfare.  The number of individuals on welfare as 
of November 1993 totalled 76,799. 
 
Another fact according to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan's 
population has fallen to a new 10-year low.  And we have a 
government that promises us growth and prosperity.  
According to the Premier of Saskatchewan, the population is 
at an all-time high.  The population of what?  Canadian 
geese? 
 
Last summer I heard that the Canadian geese population was 
higher than it's ever been in a long time.  Maybe that's what 
he meant.  He surely couldn't have been talking about the 
people because I haven't seen them. 
 
The Premier made this claim in his address at the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce in January.  Must have been an off 
day for him because his speech claims, and I'll quote: We 
have 3,000 more people approximately working this year 
than last year and the unemployment rate is the lowest in 
Canada.  End of quote. 
 
Unfortunately, StatsCanada statistics revealed that the 
average number of people employed in 1993 was exactly the 
same as the number employed in 1992 -- straight from 
StatsCanada.  Even more unfortunate for 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

the Premier is that compared to 1991, there is actually 9,000 
fewer people working in Saskatchewan today.  Imagine the 
embarrassment, bragging about job creation, when in reality 
there's almost 10,000 fewer people working. 
 
(1530) 
 
I suspect some poor speech writer has probably gotten 
promoted to becoming a ministerial aide with a wage 
increase to get him away from writing speeches.  I suspect, 
Mr. Speaker, that that's an error that won't happen again, at 
least I hope not.  A man of integrity should not have to have 
people writing his speeches that are so outright wrong. 
 
And now let's talk a little bit about some of the plans that the 
budget has put forward, Mr. Speaker -- the labour legislation, 
for example.  It has become important to me as it is to the 
Minister of Labour, who I'm glad to have here to talk about 
this with, because it's important to our province. 
 
This session may have great impact, Mr. Speaker, on the jobs 
in Saskatchewan, being that the government will make 
changes to the Saskatchewan labour legislation, specifically 
The Trade Union Act, then The Labour Standards Act, as has 
been indicated by the members opposite. 
 
I can't comment specifically of course on what these Bills 
will contain because no one is really sure.  And that's 
obvious to the folks, I think, that the minister probably has 
done some work on it but he won't reveal his work to us until 
he tables the legislation. 
 
But I can say, Mr. Speaker, that there is an awful lot of 
concern and worry in our community about the loss of jobs 
that will result if we change our labour legislation in the 
direction that has been suggested. 
 
Once again, what I'll say to the minister is this: there's 
nothing wrong with treating people fair and right.  But at the 
same time, if you get out of synchronization with your 
neighbours -- namely Alberta, Manitoba, Montana, and 
North Dakota, whether that be with a 9 per cent tax or 
whether it be with labour legislation -- if you're out of sync 
with your neighbours and you get out very far, people are 
going to leave you and go to the other place. 
 
And even though what you plan to do might be arguable to 
be right and even fair, if it's not synchronized with our 
neighbours around us, it will destroy the very fabric of the 
job creation base in our province that you espouse in your 
budget to want to have happen.  And it can't happen when 
you get out of sync with the rest of the world. 
 
And you may say, well I want to blaze new trails.  I'm going 
to be a champion of labour revolutions, and fairness, and 
equality for people, and all those great and wonderful things.  
But the reality, my friend, is this.  If you achieve that 
distinction of having become the person who leads the way, 
you will also become the person who destroys the province 
of 

Saskatchewan's job base.  It cannot work both ways. 
 
Businesses simply will pull the pin and leave.  And others 
that are reconsidering their options in the world around us 
who might be considering coming to Saskatchewan will 
rethink their position and they'll probably decide to stay 
where they are or go elsewhere. 
 
You've got IPSCO, one of the biggest manufacturing plants 
of metal, reboiling down old iron into new iron.  And where 
are they relocating, Mr. Minister?  Are they relocating in 
Saskatchewan?  You know very well that the answer is that 
they are not. 
 
Where is the Bird construction company?  They're not in 
Saskatchewan.  We know that very well.  And what did they 
do when they left this province and went to Alberta?  They 
took the job base of Saskatchewan with them. 
 
I ask you, Minister, in this new approach of yours to redesign 
the labour legislation. 
 
Will we see a ban on replacement workers?  How will we get 
our grain to market if we have a massive strike in the grain 
handling industry without replacement workers to do the 
job?  I put it to you squarely.  Put it to you squarely.  If the 
police forces of Regina and Saskatoon go on strike, who will 
protect the people if you don't have replacement people 
that'll keep control and law and order. 
 
Suppose we have certification of a workplace made easier.  
What effect, Mr. Minister, will that have?  You're a man of 
the world and you've seen a lot of things and you've had a lot 
of experience, and you know very well what the answer is.  
You will force a lot of people into the unionized structure 
where you really need to have them and really want to have 
them, because this is time to pay a debt to union leaders and 
to nobody else. 
 
It's time to build a financial base for the NDP, because every 
union member pays his dues directly to the NDP in a small 
amount.  Everybody that is a union member automatically 
kicks into the coffers of the NDP.  It's in the structure.  That's 
the way it works. 
 
So we don't build a job base in this province, Mr. Speaker.  
We build an NDP war chest for the next election by giving 
power to the union leaders so that they can force all of the 
workers to pay dues straight to the NDP.  Talk about a neat 
little trick. 
 
And suppose, Mr. Speaker, we have decertification of a 
workplace made harder.  That would suit the union leaders 
just fine.  They'd love that because that's what they should 
ask for.  You can't fault people for asking for the moon if 
they think they can get it. 
 
But the reality is that you've got people like the Woolco 
workers in Moose Jaw who end up without a job when you 
do those kind of things.  And you hurt our province and you 
hurt our people.  And even if it isn't for a vested interest -- 
perhaps it's for some other 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

mythical reason -- the result is still the same.  People will be 
hurt. 
 
And what if we give full benefits for part-time workers.  
How is that going to affect our society?  Have you 
considered all of those options, Mr. Minister?  Suppose we 
include farm workers under The Labour Standards Act 
helping them to get their wages on time.  Good idea.  It 
would be hard to argue against that.  Helping them to get 
minimum wage these days -- that would be hard to argue 
against.  Who could live in our society on minimum wage 
any more?  No one. 
 
But unfortunately what we see coming here, Mr. Speaker, is 
another one of these sleight of hand conspiracies of our NDP 
friends who are simply using this as an opportunity to open 
the door, to have compulsory unionized workers in the farm 
sector so that they too can contribute to the NDP coffers for 
the next election. 
 
Perhaps we might ask the minister if we can hope to see 
some positive changes -- like making secret ballots 
mandatory, allowing a vote on whether or not people want to 
be unionized or not unionized.  How about if we allow the 
people of this province to truly experience the mood of the 
democratic process and have the right to vote on what they 
get?  And how about if we talk about some positive things 
like prorated benefits for part-time workers which might 
actually help somebody. 
 
But we haven't heard any of those kind of stories from the 
business community that worries so much about what's 
happening.  And perhaps it's time that this government set a 
mood, Mr. Speaker, of some confidence so that business 
people who provide the jobs in this province will feel 
comfortable about continuing to expand and to grow and to 
develop, to make some jobs, and to develop a job base in our 
province. 
 
It's hard to be optimistic after the changes made to our 
occupational health and safety and the workers' 
compensation legislation.  And that's what people are going 
by.  They saw the results of what happened last year and 
they're saying they just don't trust this government to be able 
to open up the legislation on The Labour Standards Act and 
do anything that's going to be helpful. 
 
We saw last year, for example, headlines like, "Chamber 
fights changes to legislation"; and quotes like: 
 

 The chamber quotes a government report that says costs to 
the board will increase 12 per cent . . . 

 
Remember those figures, Mr. Minister.  Workers' 
compensation was only going to cost 12 per cent.  Then we 
had: 
 

 . . . Peat Marwick estimate costs will increase up to 200 per 
cent, creating an unfunded compensation board deficit of 
about 300 

 million. 
 

And we talked to you about that direct contradiction that was 
made last year.  And the reality, Minister, is that you got up 
and said, they don't know what they're talking about, it'll 
only be 12 per cent. 
 
But the reality is that we've lived another year.  And now we 
look back and we talk to some of these people, and lo and 
behold, they tell me they did have 2 and 300 per cent 
increases.  Fact of life.  And now you tell those same people: 
trust me.  It sounds like the old used car salesman: trust me, 
this old car will run until it breaks down.  Trust me. 
 
So you've got everybody worried.  And when everybody in 
the business community is worried, there can be no new job 
creation and your so-called plan from this budget has to fail. 
 
We had people saying things like, in fact the powers of the 
occupational health and safety officers exceed those of peace 
officers, for search and seizure without warrants.  And you 
said: oh no, we'd never do anything like that.  But read the 
fine print in the legislation and there it is.  And then you 
wonder why people don't trust you any more?  Why nobody 
believes that you're going to create a job base? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many areas touched in this budget 
address.  And one of the things that I had hoped we could 
talk more about in this Assembly is education.  Education is 
very important not only to this province but to me as an 
individual.  I'm a firm believer that education is very 
important, if simply for the fact that it gives our children an 
opportunity to be able to compete against those that they 
have to get jobs from when they leave this province.  And 
they do pretty well. 
 
But what I see happening here, Mr. Speaker, is a 
downloading of educational costs that has got nothing but 
disaster written at the end of the trail.  Our educational 
system cannot continue to function at the level that we need 
for our children if we continually cut the programs and cut 
the finances from the provincial government and allow our 
school boards to fend for themselves in an ever desperate 
economy, especially in the rural areas. 
 
But it's not just in the rural areas that people are having 
financial problems.  The problem is getting just as big in the 
cities because it's spreading.  Like an uncontrolled cancer, 
this depression continues to grow.  And we have a 
government that tries to cover it up with rabbit tricks and 
Houdini waves of the hands. 
 
And the reality is that here we have our young people facing 
the possibility that they will no longer have an educational 
system that will be strong enough to put them up against the 
competitiveness of the people in other provinces and in other 
countries. 
 
The biggest export we've got and the best one we've got is 
our own kids.  And I challenge you to do something to bring 
them home.  Bring the children of 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

Saskatchewan home.  That should have been the theme of 
your budget -- bring the children home.  Provide them with a 
job with dignity and security.  Give them a chance -- a 
chance to survive with their families. 
 
But we see downloading, Mr. Speaker, in an unprecedented 
manner through the sleight of hand trick of writing it into last 
year's budget and leaving it out of this one, so you can claim 
it didn't happen while it slaps them square across the face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- And do you really believe, as you sit there 
in your seats, that the people of Saskatchewan won't catch 
on, that they won't see what you're doing?  Destroying health 
care, and sneaking in a 2 per cent tax on every municipality 
that never had it before through an old piece of legislation 
that should have been buried long ago.  The sleight of hand 
artists of all society tricking people with connivance and the 
Houdini approach. 
 
We go from one disaster to another.  We've no sooner 
destroyed health care in this province and now we're going to 
destroy education.  Every big item ticket that this province 
has been touted as having guaranteed within the structures 
that we lived in over these past years is being undermined 
and destroyed. 
 
(1545) 
 
And we have people standing in their places saying that 
we've got the deficit almost under control, and here we see 
that the provincial debt is higher than it ever was before.  
That's probably going to be the biggest Houdini trick of all to 
try and pull that one off, because you never allow one dime 
to be spent out of the budget to pay off the principal of your 
debt. 
 
And yet you go out to the people and you tell them, we're 
going to pay off this debt.  We've got to have some more 
money out of you to go towards that fund.  But not one dime 
mentioned in the budget to go towards paying off the 
principal of your debt.  How long do you think you'd own 
your home if you never, ever pay any of the principal on the 
debt? 
 
We've got downloading, Mr. Speaker, like I've never seen 
before, on municipalities, rural and urban.  SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention . . . SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) coming up.  I'll guarantee you that the 
message will be the same out of that convention as came out 
of the SUMA convention, and that is that the pain of the 
downloading is real and costly and destructive.  I guess about 
the only thing that we still agree on in Saskatchewan is that 
we're all still on the same time, and for awhile I didn't think 
that was even going to happen either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in this Assembly a group of people 
who wrote a budget.  And as they talk about that budget they 
tell us that they're not really socialists any more.  I'm not sure 
what they claim to be but 

they're not really socialists any more; they're better than that 
now.  At least I suspect that they're saying that they're better 
than that, otherwise why would they try to disclaim what 
they really are? 
 
With one exception of course -- the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who stands proudly in his place and 
tells the world that he's a socialist and he's proud of it.  And I 
applaud him for his honesty even though I don't agree with 
his philosophy.  But I wonder what he thinks when the rest 
of you tell him that we're really not socialists any more; 
we're just right-wing gone astray or left-wing gone 
backwards. 
 
So we see the flip-flops, Mr. Speaker.  A while ago they 
were against nuclear energy and co-energy was going to be 
in.  Now co-energy's out.  And I'll bet you the next plan will 
be a nuclear plant that they'll never build, but they'll certainly 
spend a few million dollars researching it.  I can guarantee 
you that because that is the legacy of this government.  We 
study and we study, and we appoint boards and commissions 
and more boards and commissions, and more studies and 
more studies. 
 
It's the NDP disease, Mr. Speaker, the NDP disease of 
Saskatchewan.  We study and we study and we study, and 
we never have any action.  We don't build, we don't create, 
we don't make jobs, we don't expand, we don't bring our 
children home. 
 
We study it, and we'll appoint some of our buddies out to be 
on our commission to figure it out.  And they'll figure it out 
all right.  They'll figure out how to increase their wages 
while they take everybody else's and put them on freeze or 
destroy the jobs altogether. 
 
A budget that says very little is usually not very 
controversial.  That's a good political plan, but it's also a plan 
to disaster for the province and a plan for disaster for our 
people.  It is a disgrace to our province that we don't have a 
budget with a genuine plan to do exactly the things that the 
government says that it wants to try to do and doesn't really 
do at all -- the superficial approach. 
 
And we say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this cannot be allowed 
to continue.  We have got to have job bases created and we 
are going to expect that of this government.  As they write 
budgets in the next two years, we expect better from you and 
we put you to that challenge.  We expect you to do much 
better than you have in the past. 
 
We expect to see changes to our laws that allow people to 
build and create and do not deceive the taxpayers and the 
voters of this province with Houdini-like actions and sleight 
of hand tricks; manipulating one pile of money from one 
Crown corporation to the other or throwing it in the air and 
watching it disappear on more studies and more 
commissions. 
 
I had thought, Mr. Speaker, that I would go into this in more 
depth at a later date but I think that there's more that needs to 
be said.  I just noticed on my desk, Mr. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

Speaker, the firearms laws.  Now the members are going to 
tell me that that's not a provincial issue, but lo and behold, 
some more sleight of hand. 
 
The reality is that it is a provincial issue and these members 
would try to deny the fact that they are in control of what 
happens in Saskatchewan.  You've got all kinds of subterfuge 
going on.  The trickery and the manipulation of our people 
has become the order of the day. 
 
They tell us that our gun control laws in Saskatchewan have 
to be interpreted to mean that we are going to have to spend 
3 or $400 to get a firearms acquisition certificate.  And the 
reality, Mr. Speaker, is that these are provincial decisions, 
not federal decisions.  The federal law may have opened the 
door for this abuse, but it's the interpretation of the provincial 
government that counts. 
 
I challenge them, Mr. Speaker, to set these kind of things 
straight for the people of Saskatchewan.  It is harmful to treat 
our people as though they are criminals when in fact they 
have a track record that proves exactly the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is all important that as we talk about 
budgetary processes and the programs that we are going to 
work under, that we convince the government that the job 
base needs to be expanded.  Without that, the tax base can't 
be expanded.  The poor souls that are still left in this 
province are taxed to death.  They can't afford any more.  
They're flat broke and they need some more jobs. 
 
So there's only one solution, and that's to broaden the tax 
base.  And I'll lay it squarely on the Minister of Highways, 
because he's the man who could start this.  Go back to some 
of the old ideas of creating work where you know you can do 
it.  Repair the roads, double-lane No. 1 Highway.  Do some 
real work and put some real money behind it, and stop 
blaming the federal government for all of your problems. 
 
Your problem lies at home.  The federal government is in 
Ottawa and they don't care if you have a road or not.  But we 
care, and we want that job base, and there's a place to start.  
Not all negative; I give you a solution. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 
rise in the House today and speak in support of the budget.  I 
want to enthusiastically support the priorities and principles 
expressed in the budget.  And in deference to my good friend 
from Maple Creek, I now understand why the RM of 
Happyland asked me to come and be their guest speaker in 
his constituency this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- I want to thank my colleagues -- the 

Premier, the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), 
and cabinet ministers alike -- in having the courage to make 
difficult decisions when they were necessary.  I also want to 
thank the wonderful people of Saskatchewan who have 
supported us in our deficit reduction plan.  And the success 
of our deficit reduction plan lies with the people of 
Saskatchewan who understood the need to make the difficult 
choices we had to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will remember -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
see -- you will remember that when we took office in 
November of 1991, we inherited a projected deficit of $265 
million, which we quickly discovered was actually 1.3 
billion.  It was that kind of deliberate miscalculation that led 
to the kind of public mistrust that we are aware of as a 
government. 
 
We are right on target.  We have delivered on our promise.  
We have clearly shown the people of Saskatchewan where 
we are headed and we have been right on target with every 
budget -- first, when the Deputy Premier was the Finance 
minister, and now with our present Finance minister. 
 
I'm a practical person and so are most of my constituents.  
We make clear our principles and plans, and then we stick to 
them.  People don't like surprises or uncertainty.  The federal 
Liberal budget yesterday gave us a message of uncertainty.  
It is uncertain whether the Moose Jaw air base remains, is 
downsized, or privatized.  Every program is going to be 
studied, and I've never heard of so many studies in my 
whole, entire life.  UI (unemployment insurance) benefits 
were reduced so we will have more people on social 
assistance, an offload to the province. 
 
Now could you just imagine, Mr. Speaker, the tremendous 
job creation plans in this budget.  They are going to reduce 
unemployment from 11.1 per cent to 10.8 per cent in 1995 -- 
a .3 per cent decrease; .3 per cent decrease in unemployment.  
And these were the people that during their election 
campaign ran on jobs.  If this is an example of how Liberals 
plan to create jobs, I can tell you that I'm not impressed.  Mr. 
Speaker, maybe the member from Greystone should send 
Mr. Paul Martin an idea a week on job creation. 
 
And what about agriculture -- agriculture, the very backbone 
of Saskatchewan.  Was agriculture mentioned in the budget?  
Tell me.  We heard from the member from Shaunavon time 
and time again, when he sat on that side of the House, on 
how he wanted the Crow benefit protected.  Was the Crow 
benefit protected in this budget? 
 
Yes, our Liberal colleagues have harsh criticisms of our 
government's expenditures.  Well what about Mr. Martin's 
budget.  In 1993-94 the Tory government spent $160 billion.  
In 1994-95, the Liberals say they are going to spend $163.9 
billion, an increase of $3.9 billion; this, in the face of 
massive debt accumulation.  And these are their own figures. 
 
There was no tax fairness in this budget.  And what did the 
member from Greystone do?  She complimented 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

Mr. Paul Martin because he did not criticize the former 
Tories.  Well to tell you the truth, it would be like the pot 
calling the kettle black.  We've got long memories.  We 
remember Mr. Trudeau and his budgets.  In fact the past 
Liberals were the basis of all of our economic problems now.  
My oil folks in Cut Knife-Lloydminster will tell you they 
remember the national energy program very, very distinctly. 
 
Now the hon. member from Kindersley said he was surprised 
that our members mention Tommy Douglas, one of our 
former leaders.  In fact I think he said he didn't know him 
and he didn't care.  Well we do mention Tommy Douglas and 
we mention Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney and we 
mention the present Premier, the member from Riversdale.  
That's because we're proud of our leaders. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- Our leaders and members live by a 
philosophy of compassion, caring, cooperation, community, 
social and economic justice.  I know that 50 years of 
consistency is difficult for populations . . . for politicians of 
opportunism to understand, but the people of Saskatchewan 
understand the stability and the consistency.  I want to repeat 
that again because it's so important to me.  I know 50 years 
of consistency is hard for politicians of opportunism to 
understand, but the people of Saskatchewan understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- The government is right on target with the 
four-year budget plan.  It was courageous and somewhat 
risky for us to publish a four-year financial plan.  After all, 
unforeseen circumstances could put things off course.  But 
this government wanted the public to have a yardstick to 
measure our progress, so they took the political risky but 
principled approach. 
 
Last year the four-year plan was presented to the public as a 
sign of commitment that the hard choices would one day be 
worthwhile.  With this budget this government has proven its 
commitment to restore honesty, trustworthiness, and 
responsible government to Saskatchewan. 
 
My constituency of Cut Knife-Lloyd borders on the province 
of Alberta. Comparisons are difficult because circumstances 
are different everywhere, but let's look at some bold, brave 
facts. 
 
We have a deficit reduction plan and we are following it, an 
open consultation with every affected group in the province.  
Every department has consulted with numerous stakeholders; 
they have all contributed to the plan. 
 
Alberta too has a deficit reduction plan, a plan hatched in the 
dark behind closed doors with no consultation, because 
here's some of what it involves:  a social services cut of 18 
per cent; a reduction in child care subsidies by 20 per cent; a 
cut in grants to 

 municipalities by 30 per cent.  But some large assistant 
grants for urban areas will be immediately eliminated.  As 
the Finance minister said the other day, soon Lloydminster 
will receive zero from Alberta. 
 
Perhaps the member from Morse should ask that council how 
it compares the two approaches to deficit reduction.  Health 
budget cuts by over 17 per cent, with some hospitals in 
Edmonton and Calgary cut by 30 per cent.  No modification 
or reform of the health system, no wellness model, just cuts. 
 
There are more cuts in services but there is no increase in 
cooperation.  Changes are made at the top.  School boards 
have had control of education taken away, and local property 
taxes now go straight to the province and cabinet will decide 
how it is to be spent.  Call that democratic reform?  It's 
reducing democracy. 
 
Just how free are things in wonderful, free-enterprise 
Alberta?  Who cares, says the member from Morse.  They 
have no sales tax.  Also they may not have any sales tax but 
the government has no heart either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the members of 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency.  They have 
encouraged me, supported me, and communicated their 
concerns to me.  A member can only reflect the views of his 
constituents if there is two-way communication.  Thank you 
for your supports, ideas, and your advice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I am proud to support 
the budget and I will be voting in favour of it.  In closing, I 
want to underline the philosophy of our NDP governments 
from which our policy and programs are drawn from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- To do this I use two quotes.  One from 
Tommy Douglas, a former leader that I am very proud of: 
 

 The philosophy of this government is "Humanity First."  
We believe that the measure of any community is the 
amount of social and economic security which it provides 
for even its humblest citizens. 

 
Written by Tommy Douglas in 1954. 
 
The other quote is from the present Premier of this province, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

 I am a New Democrat because I believe in economic and 
social justice --  in a society which seeks fairness, 
compassion and equity in all its affairs. 

 
Roy Romanow, 1993. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger: -- It always makes me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
smile when people say we have no plan.  We 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

have a philosophy; we draw our policies from this 
philosophy, and from the philosophy we draw the programs.  
That is consistency, that is a plan, and that's how it has 
always been.  That's why we have governed 34 years out of 
the last 50 in this province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for this time and I 
appreciate the debate in this House because I believe in this 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is 
my pleasure to respond to the NDP government's speech for 
the budget that they're calling Delivering the Promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago, one of the Mr. Premier, 
I-want-to-know questions from the pastor from Kindersley 
asked: why are politicians able to make promises that they 
don't keep? 
 
That question came as a result of such promises as the 
Premier stating the PST was gone as of midnight, October 
21, 1991; as a result of the NDP promising no new taxes 
while in opposition, Mr. Speaker.  And then they turned 
around and raised every tax, every utility fee possible -- 
every one of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Pastor Enns's question comes as a 
result of the NDP promising to spend more money on 
education and health care, and then turning around and doing 
the exact opposite.  Pastor Enns's question could be posed 
again to the government's budget, entitled Delivering the 
Promise.  It is hard to believe that the members opposite can 
claim their budget's title is accurate because there are no 
program cuts.  That's what they said.  There's no program 
cuts.  That's what their claim is -- none. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at the example in the budget 
dealing with education, with our province's K to 12 system.  
Mr. Speaker, that budget is being cut by 4 per cent -- 4 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, is what the Minister of Education is 
giving to educators across this province.  Now that's the 
claim -- 4 per cent. 
 
But when you look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the actual cuts 
that the divisions are receiving, you find a whole bunch of 
different numbers.  I have here the projected preliminary 
estimates for 1994 K to 12 operating grants.  And just deal 
with a few percentages. 
 
The Radville School Division, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on here 
is projected to receive a 35 per cent cut.  Now I'm told that 
some of these figures are not accurate because not all of the 
parts of the formula were taken into consideration when 
these figures were announced by the government.  But still, 
even it's half of that, if it's only 17 per cent, the minister is 
saying it's to be 4 per cent. 
 
The Weyburn Central School Division on this list, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, receives a cut of 91 per cent.  I'm told that 
their cuts are actually going to be higher than that  

and that once you work out the formula they turn around and 
owe the government money.  Now I think it's highly unlikely 
that the government is going to get any money back from a 
school division, but the way the formula works, Mr. Speaker, 
they're in a position of receiving no money -- a 100 per cent 
cut. 
 
And that's only two divisions.  My own school divisions -- 
Arcola, projected to receive almost a 6 per cent cut, and 
Oxbow, 17 per cent.  In discussions with the director of 
education for Arcola School Division, he says their cut is 
actually going to be a lot closer to 30 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, than 4. 
 
And this, the government is claiming you'll arrive at a point 
where there are no program cuts.  Mr. Speaker, I think that's 
going to be a big falsehood. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are claiming that it's a 4 per cent 
cut, but in most cases it adds up to a lot more than that.  And 
I'll go into that a little bit later, Mr. Speaker.  Well perhaps I 
can even talk about it now. 
 
The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) in 
their trustee magazine of February has a graph here that 
breaks down how much the cuts are by division.  What 
percentage of divisions are receiving what cut? -- 13.7 per 
cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, receive zero to a more than 8 per 
cent increase.  Yes, there are some divisions out there that 
are receiving increases.  Those increases are mainly in place 
because of increased enrolments in those divisions.  But 13.7 
per cent received an increase. 
 
How many received a zero to 4 per cent decrease, a real cut? 
-- 19.4 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Nineteen per cent of 
the school divisions received what the minister is claiming to 
be providing -- a 4 per cent cut. 
 
The other 67 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, receive a 
decrease in funding of greater than 4 per cent -- up to 100 per 
cent.  And that's the actual facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's 
not 4 per cent; it's a lot more than that for everyone. 
 
Another graph that the SSTA has in their magazine is quite 
interesting.  It shows the amount of grants and the 
percentages of change from the '89-90 budget.  In the 
1989-90 budget, there was a 3.9 per cent increase in 
spending on education, of grants to the boards of education. 
1991 was an increase of 3 per cent; '91-92, an increase of 
3.7; '91-92, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the year that the 
governments changed.  Then we go to '92-93, a 2 per cent 
cut; '93-94 a 2 per cent cut; and '94-95, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
a 4 per cent cut.  Cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since this 
government has taken power. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total of $14.3 million in operating 
grants has been taken out of the K to 12 educational system 
this year alone -- this year alone.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
some of those cuts for many divisions will be even greater 
than that because when those initial figures were figured out, 
they did not include the changes in transportation of students 
in 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

the rural areas.  As you lose students in the rural area, you 
lose a bigger portion of your transportation grants.  So that's 
one of the areas where there's going to be a major impact in 
rural school divisions. 
 
And it gets worse.  In addition to this loss of operating 
grants, boards will face additional costs of $3 million in 
teachers' salaries, new benefits for teachers estimated to cost 
an additional $250,000 -- a quarter of a million dollars.  
Salary increases for non-teaching school staff is estimated at 
some two and a half million dollars. 
 
Natural gas increases which came into effect at a nine and a 
half per cent increase on January 1 will mean an additional 
$390,000.  UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) and 
CPP (Canada Pension Plan) increases will exceed $1.5 
million.  And workers' compensation will mean an increased 
cost of 125,000.  And the list goes on. 
 
But there is one small bright spot at least that appeared on 
the horizon this week when the federal government dropped 
the UIC rates down to 3 per cent -- a small, little bit of 
saving for the school divisions.  But it is some assistance 
when the government opposite continues to cut and hack and 
slash at their budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the SSTA says that you cannot remove 
more than $20 million from an education system in a 
province the size of Saskatchewan, which is less than a 
million people, and expect that there will be no 
consequences.  They say that children in classrooms are 
going to feel the effects of funding cut-backs.  That's what 
the SSTA says.  School boards cannot take a hit like this and 
deliver the same services and opportunities to students as 
they have in the past. 
 
Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year's budget is 
jeopardizing the ability of communities to provide high 
quality education.  These are not our words, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker.  These are quotes from the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees' Association.  They say that program cuts are 
inevitable.  They say that education is in jeopardy.  They say 
that most school boards will have no choice except to make 
significant increases in their mill rates, and that means that 
local property taxes are going to go up.  This is what the 
members opposite call no program cuts and this is what the 
NDP government is calling delivering the promise. 
 
Maybe the members opposite have forgotten the kind of 
promises that they made regarding education when they were 
sitting on this side of the House.  The Premier said in the 
Yorkton This Week newspaper on October 16 of 1990, and 
I quote:  Increased education spending is a priority for the 
NDP.  All I can say is that we simply must find the money. 
 
That's what the current Premier said in 1990.  After a 3 per 
cent increase in operating grants to universities, the Premier 
said in this legislature that the government was, quote: 

 . . . cutting back on their own responsibilities for 
education and loading it up on the local property taxpayer 
and that's wrong. 

 
That is what the Premier, the member from Riversdale, said 
on April 19, 1990 in this Chamber. 
 
So when the NDP talk about delivering the promise, how 
about this one?  The Premier promised that the NDP were 
going to give education the top priority -- the top priority.  
What happened to those promises?  What happened to the 
Premier asking the Education minister: 
 

 . . . how could you allow education funding to deteriorate 
to this state of affairs such that your government's 
underfunding at the university has left people like Dr. 
Ivany in the position where he had to say that there is 
nothing . . . sacred, nothing . . . can be protected. 

 
And that's what was said on May 7, 1990 in this legislature.  
Why is it that Dr. Ivany can have nothing sacred at the 
University of Regina? 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, again this was after increases in operating 
grants that the NDP said was not enough.  They said they 
would do better.  But that wasn't enough, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier said even more.  He also said: 
 

 Don't let any government tell you (that) they don't have 
enough funds for education.  The money is there. 

 
I'll repeat that again: 
 

 Don't let any government tell you (that) they don't have 
enough funds for education.  The money is there. 

 
And that's what our current Premier said on February 19, 
1988, and it's quoted out of the Moose Jaw Times Herald. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, what of your promise now?  What is 
happening to Education's operating grants today under your 
government? 
 
Last year's budget cuts cut operating grants for universities, 
regional and federated colleges, and SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) by 2 per cent.  
And this years' budget, the budget of supposedly no program 
cuts and no tax increases, slashed operating grants, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by another 4 per cent -- 4 per cent cuts -- 
and that actually works out to a lot more than that when it 
comes down to the divisional level.  Promises were made by 
the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and those 
promises have been broken.  And this budget is no exception. 
 
The present Minister of Education was no different while in 
opposition, Mr. Speaker.  She also had plenty 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

to say.  Addressing the increase in operating grants she said: 
 

 . . . how on earth can you say to the public of this province 
that education is a priority of your government when we 
see massive school closures in rural Saskatchewan, 
massive teacher lay-off in rural Saskatchewan . . . 

 
That's what the current Minister of Education said on April 
25, 1991, in this House. 
 
Well let's take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the jobs.  Jobs 
was very important in this budget speech.  Well let's take a 
look a the jobs in education, particularly the jobs for 
teachers.  And I would think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
would be very important to a good number of members in 
this House because they, themselves, have teaching as their 
profession. 
 
The Minister of Education herself is a teacher; the member 
from Bengough-Milestone, the member from Cumberland, 
the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, the member for 
Regina Wascana Plains, the member for Saltcoats, the 
member for Prince Albert Carlton, the member for Saskatoon 
Westmount, the Minister of Finance, the member for 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, the member for Swift Current, the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana, and the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster.  Those last three, Mr. Speaker, are 
retired teachers so they, too, have an interest in what is 
happening in this education budget.  And the member for 
Regina Dewdney. 
 
We've had cuts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of almost 200 teachers 
because of the 1992-93 budget -- 200 teaching positions on 
that budget alone eliminated.  The 1993-94 budget reduced it 
by 250, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's already 450 teaching 
jobs across this province eliminated by the government 
opposite. 
 
Now that was on a 2 per cent cut in 1992-93 and a 2 per cent 
cut in '93-94.  This year we have a 4 per cent cut.  So how 
many more teaching positions are going to be eliminated?  
Significant number, I would suspect. 
 
I would think that the members opposite that hold the 
teaching profession should have some concern about that.  
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come time for the next 
election, there may be a good number of those members who 
are seeking to re-enter their profession as a teacher.  And I 
would suggest that they are going to have a great deal of 
difficulty finding new positions because of all the jobs that 
they eliminated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's not just teachers that are having a 
problem with the job cuts.  I have a newspaper clipping from 
the Star-Phoenix of February 8 of '94, and the headline 
reads: "Education budget cuts worry P.A. locals".  I'd like to 
quote: 
 

 With contract talks looming, union workers at area schools 
are concerned over cuts to education budgets, (said) Brian 
Brotzel, representative of the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees. 

Cuts to union jobs began a few years ago, Brotzel said.  
Last year the union lost . . . 10 full-time equivalents out of 
205 members. 

 
That's a 5 per cent reduction in the P.A. (Prince Albert) area 
alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is non-teaching staff.  
That's one area.  And there's a significant cut across the 
board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, around this province. 
 
And these people have a right to be concerned about their 
jobs because last year they lost 10 out of 200 on a 2 per cent 
cut.  How many are they going to lose this year on a 4 per 
cent cut and how many are they going to lose next year? 
 
I'd like to again quote the Minister of Education while she 
was in opposition: when you take all of the rhetoric out of 
the budget speech, we learn that the operating grants to 
universities, technical schools, and school systems have only 
increased by 2.9 per cent at a time when inflation is running 
at 4.8 per cent.  I would like you to explain to the young 
people of this province how you can justify your 
government's decision to cut educational funding.  From 
Hansard of April 2, 1990. 
 
The minister of today was complaining because the previous 
administration only provided a 2.9 per cent increase -- an 
increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a cut.  An increase.  And 
she was complaining about it.  Well it's interesting to take a 
look at this year. 
 
Inflation is running at about 4.8 per cent and the minister 
herself is claiming that the cuts are 4 per cent.  However 
they're much higher to divisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, much 
higher.  I would have to say what hypocrisy from the 
Minister of Education, that she would stand up and cry 
because the government previously had only provided a 2.9 
per cent increase and she is providing a 4 per cent cut. 
 
Now that same member is the minister responsible for 
Education and she is handing out the cuts -- 2 per cent, 2 per 
cent, and 4 per cent this year.  Mr. Mr. Speaker, that means 
that there will be quotas, that means schools will close, and 
that means more teachers will be laid off, programs will be 
cut.  And, Mr. Speaker, the minister knows this. 
 
Already, Mr. Speaker, we have seen headlines in the 
newspapers that read: trustees still scrambling; fees up, job 
cuts at the U of R (University of Regina); schools face 
reductions; quality of education threatened by cuts; school 
cuts will be felt; U of R prepares to make major cuts; school 
officials fret about previous cuts, and many more, Mr. 
Speaker, many more. 
 
The Finance minister and the Minister of Education both 
claim that our current fiscal situation is a result of waste by 
the previous administration.  That's what their claim is, Mr. 
Speaker, whenever any questions are asked of them. 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

I ask was this waste in the Department of Education?  Was 
that where the waste was that they are always claiming?  If it 
was, why was the current minister always asking that more 
money be spent on that department?  Two point nine per 
cent, she said, was not enough.  Why were they always so 
critical and always demanding more?  The minister was 
claiming that the government was abandoning Saskatchewan 
students and our future. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the minister's venom had nothing to do 
with education and its delivery; it had everything to do with 
partisan politics.  In this year's budget, the partisan politics is 
when the minister says that because these cuts were 
announced last year, to take effect in 1994, that they don't 
count.  That's pure partisan venom and nothing less, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dorothy Fortier of the SSTA says, and I quote: 
 

 . . . the fact that school boards were warned about the cut 
doesn't make it any easier. 

 
She says that: 
 

 Boards can't keep providing services they are now without 
an increase in education funding. 

 
From the Star-Phoenix of February 18, 1994. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, a Saskatoon trustee said in Friday's 
Star-Phoenix that: 
 

 . . .there's no way the board can escape cutting programs 
after sustaining a four-per-cent cut this year. 

 
Again on February 18, from the Star-Phoenix. 
 
No way the board can escape from cutting programs.  He 
said that in the city of Saskatoon, and I quote: 
 

 Previous cuts in funding resulted in two school closures, 
trimming 13 staff . . . and a cut in student transportation 
last year.  Material and equipment budgets have already 
been cut this year and the board won't be contributing as 
much to the capital budget. 

 
It's a quote from a school trustee in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, again on February 18, 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the members opposite claim this 
budget means no program cuts when you've looked at cuts of 
2 per cent in 1992, 2 per cent in 1993, and 4 per cent, or a 
grand total of 8 per cent in real actual cuts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget in 1991-92 allowed for $916 million for 
education; in '92-93, it allowed $920 million.  This is what 
the budget is. If you look back through the budget 
documents, this is what you'll see. 
 
In '92-93, $920 million; in '93-94 budget you end up with 
$871 million. But when you actually look at the 

 book for '94-95, which we just received, the allocation in 
'93-94 turns out to be $870 million. 
 
In '94-95, the current budget which we're debating, the figure 
for education is $888.654 million.  Now that's actually an 
increase over last year, of approximately $17 million.  But 
you have to take a look at where that increase is, Mr. 
Speaker.  Just what was increased in that budget? 
 
Well let's take a look.  Administration costs went up by 
$50,000.  Funding for SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 
Network Corporation) increased by 3 million.  And that's 
one, Mr. Speaker, that I was glad to see that the government 
retained in this budget, because I believe that the SCN 
system is important to Saskatchewan; it is very important to 
Saskatchewan education. Because it provides opportunities 
for people outside of Regina and Saskatoon, outside of the 
major centres which have regional colleges and SIAST, to 
receive education. 
 
Students who do not wish to have to travel into the two 
major centres to receive university courses can receive some 
first- and second-year classes within their home 
communities.  And that's very beneficial for the student 
because they don't have to uproot themselves immediately 
from home.  It saves them money, it saves their parents 
money, and it provides those young people within our 
communities the opportunity for some employment at home. 
 
Now there's an additional $3 million though provided for 
SCN.  And it's going to be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to find 
out just what that increase was for. 
 
(1630) 
 
We also have an increase of $4 million for student services.  
Again, a worthy increase.  Because when times are hard and 
everything is being cut, Mr. Speaker, students . . . people of 
the province generally look at their options. And one of their 
major options is to improve their education, to provide 
themselves with opportunities for better employment. 
 
Because of that great number of people trying to enter 
university and because of the hard times, they need the 
assistance from the government through student loans.  It 
seemed to be difficult to come by in the previous two 
budgets, Mr. Speaker, but at least even then when we 
questioned the Minister of Education, she said that she would 
do what she could to provide for the students. 
 
And there's one last item that has a major, major increase, 
Mr. Speaker, in the budget, and that's $25 million for 
teachers' pensions -- $25 million increase for teachers' 
pensions.  Now the teachers deserve their pensions, Mr. 
Speaker, but I find it somewhat ironic that the major increase 
in the Department of Education should be for teachers who 
are no longer teaching. 
 
What of the people that are teaching?  What of the people 
that are trying to be educated?  Surely they 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

should have some response from the government.  Because 
when you look at what has been cut, essential services are 
being cut by $l45,000, Mr. Speaker.  K to 12 system is being 
cut by $8 million.  And that's our young.  That's starting at 
age 5 up to age 18, and they are the ones that are being cut, 
Mr. Speaker.  They're cut by $8 million while retired 
teachers are receiving an increase to the pension plan of $25 
million. 
 
University and SIAST, a cut of six and a half million dollars 
-- again to the people that the Minister of Education, while 
she was in opposition, would have stated are the future of our 
province.  But now that she has her hands on the levers of 
power, we receive cuts of $8 million to K to 12, and six and 
a half million dollars to university and SIAST.  And I don't 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is a good record to have. 
 
I believe the minister should indeed, as she was suggesting to 
the previous minister of Education while she sat on this side 
of the House, that perhaps she should be talking to the 
Premier and the Minister of Finance as to why these major 
cuts are happening to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is claiming that this is a good 
news budget and that there won't be any adverse effects.  
Well, Mr. Speaker, every family in Saskatchewan is going to 
feel this budget, every family in this province. 
 
Just wait a couple of months, when schools and universities 
start announcing how many classes they're going to have to 
cut.  How many teaching positions are going to be lost?  
How much of an increase are students going to face when 
they attempt to go to university or to SIAST?  What are the 
tuition increases going to be? 
 
Because when this six and a half million dollars for 
universities and SIAST are cut, they're going to look some 
place to find a replacement.  Universities and SIAST can't 
turn around as the school divisions can and tax the local 
property tax base.  They only have one client that they can 
come to and that's to the students.  And those students, Mr. 
Speaker, are going to be asked to penny-up what the 
government has cut.  Either that or we're going to have a lot 
less programs in our universities. 
 
There's two options: the students pay more or the universities 
and SIAST provide less.  And there'll likely be a 
combination of both.  We will have less provided in 
education in this province and it's going to cost the people 
more to get it -- more for less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's just like health care.  Let's just wait a couple 
more months and see when the axe falls on health care 
throughout rural Saskatchewan and more rural hospitals are 
eliminated. 
 
And it's jobs, Mr. Speaker.  It's estimated that another 250 
nurses will lose their jobs.  And that's the promise that's 
being talked about.  Teachers losing their jobs; nurses losing 
their jobs.  We only have to wait a few 

 more months when the one-time money that the Minister of 
Finance says will come from the Crown Investments 
Corporation comes straight out of the increases in 
everybody's utility bill. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, that's where those will come from.  They'll 
come from the increases to the utility bills.  And those utility 
bills, Mr. Speaker, have a great impact on the education 
system also.  They have a great impact on the remaining 
health care system within rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We've seen it all happen over the last couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker, and 1994 won't be any different.  If it's not true, 
why would the Minister of Finance not commit to freeze 
utility rates?  If it's not true that's where the funding is going 
to come from, why wouldn't she stand up in here and say that 
there will be no further increases to utility rates? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they won't even support a Bill by the official 
opposition to establish an all-party committee -- an all-party 
committee to examine utility rate increases before they 
actually take place.  Rather than discussing it a year and a 
half or two years later in Crown Corporations Committee, 
discuss it before it actually happens; before the people have 
actually had their pockets picked by the Crown corporations. 
 
And this suggestion wouldn't cost the government any 
money because the committee would be made up of MLAs, 
although that's one of the excuses that the government has 
given, is that it's going to cost too much.  We can't afford 
that. 
 
All we have to do is wait, Mr. Speaker, wait until this budget 
takes effect and everyone will see that delivering the promise 
is increasing taxes.  That's the promise.  That is going to be 
the cause of program cuts. 
 
Just wait until we receive our property tax bills.  I met with 
the superintendent of our local school division.  And they're 
looking at between 2 and 4 per cent based on last year's 
budget, for cuts.  That's going to mean a significant amount 
more money. 
 
And in some areas, Mr. Speaker, the school divisions, the 
property tax base in the area, it can stand to pay more.  But in 
most areas, Mr. Speaker, they cannot afford to pay more.  
The higher you raise the mill rate to pick up that extra 
amount of money, the more you lose on the bottom end by 
people not being able to afford to pay their taxes.  And it's a 
major issue. 
 
In fact I saw in the paper the other day that the school boards 
wished to approach the RMs to discuss some manners in 
which they can receive that portion of funding which is being 
withheld by the taxpayers because people can no longer 
afford to pay those taxes.  And this budget, Mr. Speaker, is 
going to drive up the property tax rate.  The SSTA is 
estimating it's going to be between 3 and 4 mills across this 
province. 
 
That's a significant increase, Mr. Speaker, that cannot be paid 
by the people of Saskatchewan, when the 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

NDP have yet to come through with their promise to ease the 
property tax burden by finding alternative methods to 
funding education and health care. 
 
That's what the government is claiming, Mr. Speaker. That's 
why they have to retain one of the hospital Acts in place that 
can tax the property tax base at 2 per cent this year.  And 
there's nothing to say that it's not going to increase in the 
future.  The government is saying they have to look for 
alternate methods.  Well we haven't seen any of those 
methods yet and we need them for education and for health 
care. 
 
Instead of that, the members across the way continue to 
offload onto health care and onto the backs of local 
municipalities who will have no choice but to increase their 
property tax base. 
 
This government's tax increases over the past two years, 
before the effects of the 1994 budget, before our property 
taxes will be climbing this year, before the budget, our 
property taxes are already going up.  And this will mean that 
every family of four is paying an additional $2,300 more of 
taxes and utility rates across the board, Mr. Speaker -- 
$2,300 more before this year's increase to property taxes 
takes place, before utility rates increase further, and before 
the increases to labour legislation has been realized.  Because 
it's going to cost businesses more. 
 
And who knows what that figure will be next year at this 
time.  But there is one thing we know for sure, Mr. Speaker, 
it's certainly going to be more than $2,300. 
 
The Minister of Education in her speech yesterday made a 
number of comments that I found kind of interesting.  And 
one of those comments was, there has been some pain, but 
now we have the opportunity to gain. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that that pain continues 
in education.  A 4 per cent cut doesn't look like a gain of 
opportunity to most people in the education system.  If you 
talk to the people in the rural school divisions or any school 
division that is receiving the cuts of up to a hundred per cent 
in their operating grant, they don't see a lot of opportunities 
there -- at least not positive opportunities, Mr. Speaker.  
They see a lot of pain and hardship for themselves and their 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education was comparing 
Saskatchewan to Alberta, and she said, and I quote: 
 

 Well, Mr. Speaker, I think our neighbouring province of 
Alberta is a case in point. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some cases to point at in 
comparisons between Saskatchewan and Alberta.  The 
government just released a report dealing with the K to 12 
schooling and how we're doing, by the Saskatchewan 
indicators.  And one of the numbers that is tossed around 
quite often, Mr. Speaker, is the number of people that leave 
our school system, that enter the school system but don't 
make it through to the end to graduate.  In most of these 
indicators, Mr. 

 Speaker, if not all, Saskatchewan ranks behind Alberta -- not 
ahead, but behind Alberta. 
 
And yet the minister would seem to try to indicate that 
Alberta was doing something terrible, that they were doing 
worse than we are.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they're still ahead of 
us in the government's own studies. 
 
The drop-out rate in British Columbia was 16 per cent, and 
the minister compares Saskatchewan with 16 per cent.  She 
says we're right tied with them, right on.  And indeed the 
government's own study says that Saskatchewan is 16 per 
cent. 
 
But Alberta, Mr. Speaker, is at 14 per cent drop-out rate.  
And this study was done in 1991-92.  So these indicators are 
measuring before the government started cutting, before the 
government started cutting.  This is before the 2 per cent cut 
in '92-93; this was before the 2 per cent cut in '93-94; and 
this was before the 4 per cent cut in '94-95. 
 
The minister talked yesterday of school amalgamations.  And 
she said: 
 

 We have announced a limited number of voluntary school 
division amalgamation pilot projects for those ready school 
boards that choose to amalgamate. 

 
 Clear criteria for these voluntary amalgamations . . . 
 

And she goes on.  Well I'm glad that she set up criteria for 
the voluntary amalgamations, but I hope that doesn't mean 
that she has criteria for those who may have involuntary 
amalgamations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it would be terribly wrong and terribly 
destructive for rural Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan as a 
whole, but particularly rural Saskatchewan, if the 
government was to attempt to amalgamate school divisions 
without the agreement of those school divisions. 
 
School divisions in this province should be allowed to 
voluntarily amalgamate if that's their desire.  And I believe 
that a number of them are looking at doing so, and it's a 
worthwhile exercise to look at those amalgamations and see 
if there are benefits for those divisions. 
 
But there may well be divisions in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, who do not wish to amalgamate.  Or if they do wish 
to amalgamate, they may wish to amalgamate with a 
particular division and not another.  And I believe it would 
be terribly wrong if the Minister of Education and the 
government was to try and force amalgamations. 
 
I'd like to again quote from the Minister of Education. 
 

 These criteria would include such things as full community 
and staff involvement in the process, local control and 
decision making, and the need to integrate 
interdepartmental 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

 services to better serve our children and their families.  We 
have to find more out about whether or not amalgamations 
will affect the quality of education, especially the quality 
of education in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
(1645) 
 
Very good.  I agree with the minister on this issue that that is 
exactly how it should be done.  But isn't it a shame, Mr. 
Speaker -- isn't it a shame -- that that very criteria was not 
applied to health in this province when the government was 
changing health structure in this province?  Wouldn't it have 
been just excellent if that very criteria had been applied by 
the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is very important in this province and 
it's too important to play politics with it.  The best possible 
education must be given to our students.  And one of those 
items in providing that service must be greater parental input 
into school systems.  And as I've talked before, 
amalgamations must be done on a voluntary basis and not 
driven from above. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't see this budget providing that for 
education and for the province of Saskatchewan.  And as my 
colleague said, that this Harry Houdini budget hides the pain 
by bringing it in last year and saying it's not important any 
more because we told you last year we were going to 
increase your taxes this year and cut your programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of that I cannot support this budget and 
I will be voting against it.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is with a great degree of 
pleasure that I enter this budget debate today. 
 
I've been fortunate enough to represent the people of Prince 
Albert since 1986 and I want to say that the change that I 
have seen since 1991 when this government was sworn into 
power has been a very positive and a very dramatic change, 
and this budget certainly reflects the work that has been done 
by this administration since October of 1991.  And I think 
the people of Saskatchewan appreciate the efforts of this 
government and I think that will be reflected and has been 
reflected in their reaction to this budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my remarks I just want to 
say a few words in welcoming the new member, the member 
from Regina North West, to the legislature.  She was elected 
in the by-election, as you will know, just recently and I 
welcome her to the House, and I'm sure that she'll have a 
positive influence on the proceedings in the Saskatchewan 
legislature during the time that she will spend with us here. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this budget is going a  

long way to restoring the fiscal integrity of the province and 
I want to say as well that I'm proud to have been part of 
putting it together along with my colleagues on this side of 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the speeches that have 
gone on in the past few days and I've been watching very 
closely one member in particular, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party, the member from Greystone, and her comments and 
her support and her reaction to the federal budget and her 
reaction to the provincial budget.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
it clearly identified where this member sits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has brought forth a 
Liberal budget, which is what Liberals do.  We have brought 
forth a people's budget.  I say that this is a budget that 
supports the people of Saskatchewan, not only this fiscal 
year but into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a 
few moments to share my thoughts with respect to the 
differences between the provincial budget and our 
Saskatchewan budget.  And it's unfortunate that the Leader 
of the Liberal Party isn't here because I would really like to . 
. . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Unfortunately the member is 
also out of order and I think he knows full well he's not to 
refer to members either being present or absent from the 
House and I wish he'd refrain from doing so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me apologize for 
that.  I do know that that is not the rules and I apologize to 
the House for that. 
 
So let me continue, Mr. Speaker, by saying that what we see 
at a federal level . . . and the differences we see.  This is a 
government that supports small business.  Her federal 
cousins in Ottawa gave no tax relief for small business.  
They've eliminated the capital gains exemption and 
medium-sized businesses are seeing a higher tax rate. 
 
And what's happened in the provincial budget here that the 
member from Greystone won't support?  We've cut the 
small-business tax by 20 per cent.  When we were elected, 
we eliminated the provincial sales tax on meals and food, 
which put sixty-five and a half million dollars back into the 
economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we've been able to partner with the 
hospitality industry in putting together the video lottery 
terminal program that I think is going to do a lot for rural 
Saskatchewan, a lot for small business.  We'll be putting 
about $15.7 million directly into the hands of the hospitality 
industry.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think that's positive; I think 
that's good news. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that there really are some inconsistencies 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

with respect to the Leader of the Liberal Party, the member 
from Greystone's position.  She supports a federal budget, 
Mr. Speaker, a federal budget that froze the salaries of 
senators, that froze the salaries of members of parliament, 
and that's what she supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cabinet has taken a 5 per cent decrease in 
pay.  But the member from Greystone, only after taking her 
37 per cent increase, asks -- 37 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the 
only member of this legislature to have an increase in salary 
-- after she takes her increase of 37 per cent, she then says, 
would you freeze my salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say shame on her and I say shame on the 
inconsistencies that she displays on a regular basis in here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on June 1 of 1993 in Hansard, she is chastising 
this government for not introducing the video lottery 
terminal program and foregoing some 50 to $60 million in 
revenue.  And now, a few months later, on a daily basis she 
stands in here saying, oh, you shouldn't do that.  Now I say, 
Mr. Speaker, she can't be on both sides of this issue.  She 
can't be supporting a federal Liberal budget and the way 
Liberals do their budgets, and opposing this budget which is 
going to generate some $75 million of revenue that will go 
back into health, and education, and highways, and all of the 
programs that government delivers.  I say, Mr. Speaker, you 
have here the actions of an inconsistent person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day this budget displays fiscal integrity.  
We know -- through our polling and through the figures that 
are shown to us -- that people are leaving this province on a 
weekly and on a daily basis to spend entertainment dollars on 
gambling in other parts of the country, in Alberta and 
Manitoba, and in the States.  And one only has to look, Mr. 
Speaker, at headlines in today's Leader-Post: cheap Vegas 
flights all booked. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Speaker, this government stands behind the 
hospitality industry.  It stands behind the working men and 
women of this province.  And we're going to attempt to work 
with the aboriginal people to stem the outflow of those 
dollars from the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, short months ago the member from Greystone 
says: introduce this video lottery terminal program; you're 
losing millions of dollars of revenue.  Short weeks later she 
stands in here and says, don't partner with aboriginal people, 
don't partner with the hospitality industry, let this money 
flow out of the province but somehow still balance your 
budget.  Mr. Speaker, these are the actions of a Liberal, of a 
true Liberal politician that she refuses to admit she is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've got to give credit . . . at least credit to the 
members, the official opposition, who admit to being 
political and admit to being politicians.  But not the member 
from Greystone, Mr. Speaker, not the member who can sit on 
two sides of every issue.  A big wage increase -- 37 per cent 
-- oh, and then freeze 

 my salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is the new politics, I say that the people 
of Saskatchewan will have nothing of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as we put this 
program together, this video lottery terminal together -- 
which will generate some $75 million in next year's budget -- 
we were well aware that it's an issue that people sit on both 
sides of.  Some people support it, some oppose it, but there's 
very few that oppose and support it as the member from 
Greystone does. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget makes sense for the people of 
Saskatchewan because it delivers some hope for the future.  
And I say that we have consulted widely in putting this 
together.  We've talked with people from all over this 
province and we've gathered their ideas. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we were hoping that the 
Leader of the Liberal Party would come forth with some new 
ideas.  She's been elected for, I guess 100 and how many 
weeks now? -- 102, 103.  She indicated that she was going to 
offer an idea a week in terms of how we get this economy 
together.  Well I say, Mr. Speaker, she hasn't shared with us 
one thought.  And there might be a reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker, the fact that she doesn't have any ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can she support . . . or how can she oppose 
a budget that, when in these economic times, delivers $4 
million for northern economic development?  Mr. Speaker, 
how can she oppose a budget that delivers $6 million for 
Saskatchewan Opportunities, the new corporation?  How can 
she oppose a million four being put into the beef industry to 
fund agri-food equity? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- She didn't read it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, my colleague asks 
if perhaps she didn't read the budget, and I think that might 
be the case.  But there may be another reason, Mr. Speaker.  
She's opposing this budget for straight political reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Liberal Party is displaying 
what some would say is a hypocritical approach.  Now, Mr. 
Speaker, you can't have it both ways.  You can't ask the 
people of Saskatchewan to tighten their belt buckles when 
you're not willing to tighten your own.  And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, the people see through this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she opposes today the introduction of the video 
lottery terminal program.  One of her own candidates, a 
hotelier in this city, is quoted as saying that it will stop the 
outflow of gaming dollars from our province.  Mr. Speaker, 
even her own candidates are seeing through the position 
that's taken by the member from Greystone as being only one 
of politics. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, she hasn't even got control of her own 
caucus.  She says she supports balancing the 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

budgets in this province, but yet you've got the member from 
Shaunavon asking the Government of Saskatchewan to write 
down $167 million debt in the crop insurance program.  Well 
I say if you're going to write down this debt of 167 million 
and if you're going to forgo $75 million in VLT revenue, 
where do you get the money? 
 
Mr. Speaker, are they proponents of increases to the E&H 
(education and health) tax?  One percentage point in the 
E&H tax generates about $70 million.  Are they proponents 
of increasing that tax? 
 
And I ask the member from Shaunavon who chirps from his 
chair, where would we get the $167 million to write down 
this debt?  Where would it come from?  That member sat 
here and voted with us in last year's budget; he voted clause 
by clause.  He supported every initiative that this government 
took to putting our financial house in order, but ah, all of a 
sudden he stands in the opposition and says we should find 
$167 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they can't have it both ways.  They can't have it 
both ways because you can't spend and still balance a budget 
at the same time.  And, Mr. Speaker, we're going to be 
pointing out these inconsistencies of the Liberal members of 
this legislature.  Because the people of the province . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 
stands recessed until 7 o'clock this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


