




















































Hansard: May 18, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2397 

 May 18, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question.  I 

give notice that I shall, on day 76, ask the government the 

following question: 

 

Regarding SGI's policy on the sale of written-off vehicles: 

(1) when a written-off vehicle is sold to an auto-body shop 

for resale, what measures are taken to ensure the accuracy 

of the reported mileage of the vehicle and other 

information regarding the condition of the vehicle; (2) if 

the accuracy of mileage or other information about the 

vehicle given to the auto-body shop proves to be 

inaccurate, what means of redress do the auto-body shop 

or any subsequent purchaser of the vehicle have with SGI; 

(3) what legal obligation do automobile wholesalers and 

retailers have to provide accurate information about a 

vehicle to purchasers; (4) do the legal provisions which 

apply to automobile wholesalers and retailers regarding 

false information about vehicles apply to SGI when it acts 

essentially as a vehicle dealer; (5) if not, why not, and 

what legislation exempts SGI from these provisions; (6) 

what level of responsibility does SGI assume for the 

accuracy of information provided for vehicles which it 

sells; (7) how is this level of responsibility communicated 

to purchasers of the vehicle; (8) when the information 

regarding a vehicle sold by SGI proves to be false, can the 

purchaser return the vehicle and receive a full refund, 

given the false premiss under which the vehicle was sold; 

(9) if not, why not, and what is the legal rationale of this 

position? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have the 

honour today to introduce through you and to members of the 

Assembly 18 grade 7 students from Notre Dame School in 

North Battleford.  They're here today with their teacher, Mr. 

Perreault; chaperons, Marge Baillargeon and Colette Ahlstedt; 

and the bus driver, Marian Sayers. 

 

We'll be meeting out front sometime after 2 o'clock for 

pictures.  We're supposed to graciously accept the use of your 

boardroom, Mr. Speaker, but I'd ask that the students and the 

chaperons and the teacher and the bus driver actually meet me 

in room 315 which is my office. 

 

And I would ask that members of the Assembly welcome my 

guests here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly approximately 20 members of a group of golden 

immigrants over the age of 55.  They're accompanied today by 

the assistant director of Regina Open Door Society, Keith 

Karasin, and a volunteer worker, Maria Trabus.  They're 

members from several countries of origins including China, 

Vietnam, Iraq, Iran, Poland, India, Ethiopia, and I apologize to 

anyone that I may have missed in that. 

 

Today they have a trip to the legislature.  It's one of the many 

activities sponsored by the Open Door Society to help the 

group understand and familiarize themselves with institutions 

of their new country.  There are also language classes, job 

training, and so on that they'll be involved in. 

 

And I'd ask all members to give them a warm welcome to the 

Legislative Assembly today and give them a show of what it's 

like to see a question period in action and the behaviour, and 

the best behaviour, of the members of the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly 17 grade 6 students from the Watson Elementary 

School.  They're seated in the west gallery.  They're 

accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Bernice Gerspacher and 

Lori Sproule; chaperons Dick Schwartz, Kathy Fetter, Barb 

Gibb, and Rob Kavalench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be meeting with this group following their 

tour of the building and I ask all members to join with me to 

extend a warm welcome to the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 16 members 

and spouses of the Royal United Services Institute who are 

seated in your gallery -- maybe they want to stand and be 

recognized. 

 

I want to say that all members will want to welcome them here 

today and I look forward to meeting them at about 2:20 in the 

members' dining room.  Along with them is David Marshall, 

the coordinator of the group.  So welcome to the Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my privilege to introduce a dedicated group of 

senior citizens in the west gallery representing Senior Power of 

Regina.  I've had the opportunity to meet with this group as 

minister responsible for seniors' issues.  They've got many good 

ideas and they continue to work hard to make this a better 

community.  And I would ask all members to join in 

welcoming Senior Power of Regina to the 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce a group 

of people here today that come from the member from 

Moosomin's seat.  And they are Terry Shackleton who is the 

economic development officer for the Pipestone Valley RDC, 

also Neil McConnachie, Ron Hall, and Bill Haussecker, who 

are directors for the Pipestone Valley RDC.  And along with 

them today are representatives from Korea: Pastor Jacob Lee, 

who is the director of the K.C. Ethanol Corporation; T.K. Han, 

who is an interpreter; and Dong Han from Regina, who are also 

here and advising the Pipestone Valley RDC. 

 

I would like to ask members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my 

friend and colleague from Souris-Cannington in welcoming 

Reverend Jacob Lee and his group from Korea who are here 

with us today; Tong Han and Dong Han, who are here along 

with the RDC chairpersons from Pipestone Valley rural 

development cooperative.  I wonder if they too would stand and 

be recognized by the Assembly. 

 

I know they are working on an ethanol project.  And we 

welcome them here today because it's this kind of international 

investment that makes Saskatchewan grow. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to other members of the Assembly, I notice in 

the gallery today a group of people representing the 

Saskatchewan Real Estate Association.  I recognize some 

people from my home community of Moose Jaw, plus other 

familiar faces.  And I would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming these people from the Saskatchewan Real Estate 

Association to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd like to join with the Leader of 

the Opposition in welcoming the Saskatchewan Real Estate 

Association members who are here today.  I had the 

opportunity this morning, and I know a number of other 

members did, to meet with this group who are looking at ways 

and means of making the economy of Saskatchewan work 

better.  And I just want to say that our deliberations were 

fruitful and I'm sure all other members shared in that 

experience. 

 

So welcome here today, and we hope you enjoy question 

period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the Assembly a member of the 

Saskatchewan real estate board, Norm Thorpe.  We don't often 

have people here from Lloydminster because it is a long drive, 

so I think Norm should stand up and I'd like my colleagues to 

welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

Minister of Social Services in welcoming members of Senior 

Power.  Mr. Speaker, these are indeed the builders of the 

province of Saskatchewan and we are very, very pleased to 

welcome them in the House.  I will be meeting with them right 

after question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Museum Day 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we 

all have a history.  This province has a history and all of us are 

part of this culture -- the art, science, crafts, sport, and 

technology of our life.  We celebrate ourselves, our lives and 

our culture, in museums. 

 

It is my pleasure today to rise to take note of International 

Museum Day.  Saskatchewan is blessed with a wide range of 

museums which celebrate our lives and the lives of those who 

founded this province. 

 

In Regina alone, there is the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, the 

Saskatchewan Science Centre, the Regina Plains Museum, the 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) Museum, the 

MacKenzie Art Gallery, the SaskTel museum, Government 

House.  And I understand that there there will soon be a new 

Saskatchewan military museum at the Armouries on 

Elphinstone Street, and many other museums that members are 

naming for me. 

 

Museums make an incredible and indelible mark on our lives.  

They are no longer the dusty repository for old things.  They 

are fresh, exciting ways to understand, interpret, and celebrate 

ourselves and our lives. 

 

Please join me in recognizing International Museums Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cathedral Village Arts Festival 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

announce that the Cathedral Village Arts Festival, May 23 to 

28, is once again upon us.  People may have noted the banners 

on Albert Street. 

 

It's a time when all sorts of people within the 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

constituency, along with an open invitation to the rest of the 

city, get together for a week of fun and entertainment. 

 

This year's attractions are many and varied.  The Fringe 

Theatre will once again be at the festival with theatre 

companies performing plays, Promises, and Lies about Betty 

and the Truth About Zucchini. 

 

Stages will be set up at Cameron Street and the Royal Bank this 

year, and will feature a folk festival stage and an endless 

amount and variety of music, dance, and theatre. 

 

A family picnic will be held at Les Sherman Park on Monday, 

May 23, kicking off at 9 in the morning with a pancake 

breakfast and will last late into the night with games and music 

and fun. 

 

There will also be bike tours and races and a fantastic children's 

tent; arts and craft shows and sales; and lots of food. 

 

The major sponsors of the festival this year are SGI CANADA 

and Sask Lotteries.  But the Cathedral area merchants should 

also be recognized for their contributions to the festival and 

their determination to make this week a success. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to invite and urge all who are 

interested to come to the Cathedral Village Arts Festival from 

May 23 to 28.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina Open Door Society 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Tomorrow night 

there is to be a volunteer and host orientation and informational 

meeting sponsored by the Regina Open Door Society.  Next 

Thursday is volunteer appreciation night.  Both events will be 

held at the society's offices on Broad Street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge members and other citizens to become 

more familiar with the work of the people of the Open Door 

Society.  With the helpful dedication of a group of volunteers, 

the society provides a broad range of services to immigrants 

and refugees in Regina. 

 

The society literally takes them from bus station, train station, 

to the workplace and citizenship court.  And it does so in a 

friendly, courteous, and professional manner. 

 

Some of the services provided include language instruction, 

educational and employment services, community involvement, 

and life skills training. 

 

I've been to the Open Door Society with the member from 

Churchill Downs and on an occasion I've had the opportunity 

and the pleasure to be able to greet new Canadians.  And I'm 

always impressed with the caring, encouraging nature of 

volunteers and staff who serve as counsellors, instructors, 

extended family 

and friends, and so much more to our new Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is often the most dedicated and most effective 

volunteers in our community who go the least noticed.  The 

Open Door Society deserves our thanks and our applause for 

the help it gives to our new citizens. 

 

I'd ask members to join with me and give them appreciation 

and recognition for the hard work that they do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lloydminster Interval Home 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have some news 

from Lloydminster today concerning the Lloydminster Interval 

Home.  Later this month construction will begin on a 2,200 

square foot addition to the home.  The addition is a necessary 

step in order to make the facility wheelchair accessible and to 

help ease overcrowded living conditions. 

 

The Interval Home has been in operation for nearly 14 years in 

Lloydminster and has provided shelter to over 5,000 women 

and children throughout this time.  The facility also offers eight 

different informational support and therapy programs for men, 

women, and children.  The Interval house is a valuable and 

appreciated aid for women in need of shelter and 

understanding. 

 

This past Wednesday a sod-turning ceremony took place at the 

site of the addition to mark the occasion.  Four grade 6 students 

from Barr Colony School took place in the ceremony.  They 

were to help with the celebration because of their support of the 

Interval Home through fund-raising activities at the school.  

Students raised money by taking up silver collections at their 

musical concerts and also at their 1993 Christmas concert.  The 

students who were present were Khris Boyce, Troy Stewart, 

Brandy Leer, and Jennifer Griffith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this addition to the Lloydminster Interval Home 

will allow the people there to run an even better operation 

which is so important to women, children, and men in our 

community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Minister of Health Attends International Conferences 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 

Saskatchewan we're quite justifiably proud of our history of 

innovation in health care.  As the current member from 

Weyburn, I'm intimately aware of the contribution of 

individuals, such as one of my predecessors, to the creation of 

the finest health care system in the world -- a fact recognized 

by professionals everywhere. 

 

As further evidence of that universal recognition, our Minister 

of Health has been invited to participate in 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

two international health care conferences this week, both taking 

place in Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia).  Her 

registration fee at the first has been waived and all expenses for 

the second are to be reimbursed, meaning Saskatchewan gets 

international recognition at no expense. 

 

Sunday and Monday she was a delegate to a conference called 

Health Care Cost Control: Internal Market Mechanisms, a 

conference co-sponsored by the Institute for Research on 

Public Policy in Montreal, and the Brookings Institute of 

Washington, D.C. 

 

Today and tomorrow, the hon. minister will attend and speak at 

the Royal Society of Medicine Foundation's 

Anglo-American-Canadian meeting, entitled, policy issues and 

priorities in health care reform.  She was the unanimous choice 

of the steering committee to speak on public policy issues in 

the management of health care -- an honour befitting her and 

the government's leadership in health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An honour, Mr. Speaker, she rightfully deserves; one she 

shares with the health care pioneers of our . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

NorSask Success 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to relate to 

the Assembly the success story of NorSask Forest Products in 

Meadow Lake. 

 

It was only five years ago, Mr. Speaker, that NorSask's future 

looked very grim, basically because the operation was 

inefficient.  The management team at that time decided to 

establish a five-year plan which would turn things around. 

 

Modernization was the key component to the plan.  Old 

machinery has been replaced by new, computerized equipment 

and is now value-driven.  That is to say, that it maximizes the 

cut from every board and log based on the price on any given 

day.  NorSask has acquired a new chipper-canter to allow logs 

to be scanned again to maximize the cut; an edger optimizer for 

optimum board cuts; and currently NorSask is purchasing a 

slasher and debarker system which will allow the mill to use 

smaller logs with less waste. 

 

Through these changes the company has become more 

efficient.  In fact five years ago one cubic meter of log 

produced 200 board feet of lumber; today that same cubic 

meter produces 270 board feet of lumber.  Although these 

numbers are great and the turnaround from this 

employee-owned company has been unbelievable, the 

management at NorSask are constantly looking for 

improvements.  In fact a new five-year plan is being established 

to modernize the plant even further. 

Today forestry people from across Canada are coming to 

Meadow Lake to see how a small company like NorSask can be 

leaders in their industry.  Again a great reason to have 

designated Meadow Lake as the forestry capital of Canada for 

1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The galleries are full of 

guests today and it's my pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, a group of 30 

grade 4 and 5 students from Mayfair School in my constituency 

in Saskatoon, seated in the west gallery.  And they're 

accompanied by their teacher, Barb Gallo, and also by her 

husband -- also a teacher, but who I think is here as a volunteer 

today -- Donald Gallo; and chaperon Anne Fofonoff. 

 

And we'll be meeting for a photo and refreshments later on in 

room 218.  And I want all members to join with me in wishing 

the students from Mayfair School a warm welcome to the 

legislature and a very enjoyable day here in Regina.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- I want you to welcome today 25 students, 

grade 4 and 5 students from Davin School in Regina in the east 

gallery.  It's so full they've had to go to the east gallery.  And 

they're accompanied by their teacher, Bev Mazer; and Mrs. 

Schubach and Mrs. Ramsay are parents accompanying them. 

 

We'll be meeting at 2:15 for a photo.  And I just want to say 

that you're lucky because you get to get out for a field trip, but 

we can't.  So would you join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Labour.  It appears that each 

passing day more and more groups of people and organizations 

come out against your changes to the trade union and labour 

relations Act, Minister.  Today we have received a letter from 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians.  The letter, signed by 

Chief Roland Crowe, reads, and I quote: 

 

 We are concerned about the proposed changes that would 

increase the power of the trade unions in Saskatchewan.  To 

increase the trade union power at this time will further 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

disadvantage our people. 

 

Mr. Minister, Chief Crowe is asking you to amend your 

legislation, or at least he's asking, and I'll quote: 

 

 Postpone your proposed changes strengthening the union 

position until such time as other accommodations have been 

reached to deal with the systematic discrimination inherent in 

the union movement. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, this latest letter is proof positive that there is no 

one, no one in this province that supports your government 

other than the union movement.  Mr. Minister, will you do as 

Chief Roland Crowe has asked you to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I've also received Mr. Crowe's letter.  

I've had a brief opportunity to review it and will be doing so 

more extensively. 

 

On the surface I do not see that any of the amendments before 

the House aggravate the admitted problem that native people 

have in finding employment.  I do not think that any of these 

amendments materially affect that.  Every fair-minded person 

in the province would admit that natives face systemic 

discrimination.  We do not believe that these amendments 

materially affect that. 

 

Of course, we have to attack that kind of discrimination but 

there are other venues for doing that.  We don't think this 

legislation affects that at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Faulty Video Lottery Terminals 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On Monday, Mr. 

Speaker, the official opposition raised a very troubling issue 

with respect to government accountability as it relates to VLTs 

(video lottery terminal) and casino gambling.  So I say to the 

minister of gambling, it appears that there is very little, if any, 

public access to the goings on of your government and your 

Gaming Commission. 

 

Question period is obviously not good enough because we've 

asked you about problems with the computer system, and you 

say everything is hunky-dory, there are no glitches. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, when we forced the truth out of you, we 

have been told that these are not . . . we are told that not only 

are there problems with the computer system, there are also 

problems with the individual machines themselves.  We have 

been told that the machines from GTECH have problems with 

overheating chips, so that they stick the slot machine on a 

pay-out.  We've also been told that the Williams machines are 

also unreliable. 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly how 

many machines are affected, how are faulty machines detected, 

and how much money is involved by now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In answer 

to the member's question, let me say that, as I've indicated in 

this House, we're very satisfied with the way the central 

computer system that monitors each individual video lottery 

terminal is functioning. 

 

With hundreds of machines, Mr. Speaker, in the province, it is I 

think reasonable to expect that there will be some breakdown 

of some of the electronic equipment within these machines.  I 

would expect, Mr. Speaker, with hundreds of machines across 

the province, as there are in other jurisdictions -- GTECH has 

sold into many jurisdictions, as Williams gaming machines are 

-- they're in Alberta, Conservative Alberta; they're in 

Conservative Manitoba; they're in the Maritime provinces; 

they're in the American states; the Liberals have purchased 

them. 

 

So it's not a matter of whether or not we have purchased faulty 

technology.  We have purchased the best technology on the 

market, but I think it is not unreasonable to assume that there 

will be individual machines break down. 

 

In terms of giving you the exact number of machines that have 

been repaired, or the exact number of machines that have been 

replaced, I don't have those figures with me. 

 

But I can, for you, get a report from Western Canada Lottery 

Corporation, who does the service work and who does the 

central monitoring system -- the central computer monitoring 

system.  I can give you a breakdown of the number of machines 

of each make, the three makes that we have purchased that 

have been repaired, and I will get those to the member from 

Rosthern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, this issue speaks to the integrity of your gaming 

strategy and the credibility, Mr. Minister, of your government.  

If the central computer system can malfunction to pay out too 

much, if the machines can break down and stick on pay-out, 

which is what they have been doing, they can also malfunction 

to take out too much money.  And it would appear that the 

public would be none the wiser because it's being done behind 

the scenes. 

 

How, Mr. Minister, is the Gaming Commission being held 

accountable?  They're not a Crown corporation.  They don't 

appear in estimates.  And you have your commission so stacked 

with your NDP (New Democratic Party) partisans and 

government hacks that it looks like a meeting at the Tommy 

Douglas House. 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Mr. Minister, exactly how is the commission and your 

government open and accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

thank the member one more time for his question, but in his 

preamble it's quite clear that he doesn't understand how the 

system works. 

 

The machines are in many locations throughout the province -- 

individual machines.  They are all tied through the telephone 

system that we have in this province to a central computer 

system.  Each individual video lottery terminal is monitored 

and can be checked on an hourly and a daily basis. 

 

I say to the member from Rosthern that the central computer 

system is functioning very, very well, and we have had 

absolutely no problems with this technology.  I want to say to 

the member from Rosthern that following our lead, other 

jurisdictions have as well bought GTECH equipment, who are 

the suppliers of the central computer system. 

 

And I want to say to the member that if he's going to stand in 

this House and suggest to the people of this province that there 

will be no mechanical or electronic failure of any of the 

machines and if there have been, that we have been 

incompetent and haven't been diligent in our purchases, then I 

say to him that people will understand that he's spewing total 

folly. 

 

Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, all I can say, if other 

jurisdictions are following your lead, heaven help them.  The 

experience that we've had in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Now you're not answering my question.  How do we know the 

accountability? How many glitches have there been in spite of 

your denial, how much money has been involved, and how 

many of the operators, including hospitality rooms, have been 

paid out because of an excessive pay-out on your part? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let 

me say to the member from Rosthern that there isn't an industry 

nor is there a business that doesn't work without some measure 

of fault.  There are tractors that will run into dugouts through 

mechanical failure, there are hog barns that will burn because 

of electronic failure, and I'm telling the member from Rosthern 

that there are machines that are in this province -- the video 

lottery terminals -- that will experience electronic failure and 

will break down. 

 

And I want to say to the member that the central 

computer system is functioning very well, is monitoring each 

and every individual machine, and there will be some problems 

-- we know that -- with individual machines. 

 

I can tell the member the case he raised in North Battleford 

with respect to the Williams machines that were appearing to 

pay too much, the Western Canada Lottery Corporation, who 

monitored each of these machines, tell me that within an hour 

after the running and the starting up of the running of those 

machines that they knew that there was something that 

appeared to be irregular. 

 

So for the member to indicate or to suggest that this system is 

not functioning well, is not monitoring each and every 

machine, is inaccurate.  I say to the member he should sit down 

and rethink. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this is 

the selfsame minister that got up and said, working fine, no 

glitches, no glitches. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm going to repeat the words of the director for 

the study of gambling in Nevada.  He said that government-run 

gambling has a number of very real dangers, including, and I 

quote:  the potential for scandal because of the absence of 

checks and balances.  Unquote. 

 

We have no way of knowing, Mr. Minister, whether some 

machines have been malfunctioning and withholding too much 

money.  We have no way of verifying that 93 per cent figure 

other than taking your word for it, Mr. Minister, and that is not 

good enough. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor has told us today as a 

matter of fact, that this is not something that he would normally 

take a look at unless he was specifically requested to do so.  

Because of the great concern of this issue to the people of 

Saskatchewan and your unreliability as a minister and as a 

government, Mr. Minister, will you commit to ask the 

Provincial Auditor to review the records regarding VLT (video 

lottery terminal) pay-outs so that Saskatchewan people can 

regain some confidence in your machines, that indeed they are 

paying out at the proper rates.  Would you make that 

commitment, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, firstly let me 

re-explain to the member from Rosthern how the system works.  

I have said that the central computer system is working, 

functioning properly.  It is doing the purpose and it is put there 

. . . the central computer system, sir, is working properly.  And 

I defy you to bring forth any information that would suggest, 

either in this House or outside of this House, that what I say to 

you is otherwise.  And I know you can't do it because it's 

simply not the facts. 

 

I said the central computer system is functioning 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

properly.  I have indicated to you that we are well aware, as 

you will be well aware, that there can be individual breakdowns 

of video lottery terminals the same as there are with radios that 

break down or televisions that break down or cars or tractors 

that break down.  Those are natural occurrences. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the monitoring system is working 

very well in terms of the integrity of the video lottery terminal 

program.  We have absolutely no reason to believe otherwise. 

 

With respect to an audit, the practice of audits in this province 

with respect to the video lottery terminal program, will not 

divert one iota from any other arm of government.  There will 

be open and honest accounting which is a practice that I know 

is foreign to you after having been a member of the former 

administration, but things have changed now, sir.  We are open, 

accountable and the audits will take place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Elimination of Poverty 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I have a couple of 

Star-Phoenix articles.  One is from a few years ago.  And the 

headline reads "Romanow vows to end poverty."  Do you 

remember that, Mr. Premier? 

 

The other one is from today's paper.  And the headline in 

today's paper is: "One in 10 using food bank."  Something don't 

add up here, Mr. Premier.  And I would like to ask you -- you 

are the Premier that vowed to end poverty.  Saskatoon is the 

city that you represent.  And now fully 10 per cent of the 

people who live in the city are using the food bank -- why is 

that, Mr. Premier?  What happened to your vow to end poverty 

and why is it one in ten Saskatoon residents are forced to turn 

to the food bank for help?  Would you answer that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, let me say that we are still committed to eliminating 

poverty in this province.  We're still committed to creating 

employment.  We're trying to do that, I might add, without the 

support of the official opposition or the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we inherited their $15 billion debt.  You people 

didn't even admit until 1990 that poverty existed in 

Saskatchewan.  You didn't even admit that poverty existed.  

You have voted against every single initiative to support low 

income people.  You voted against the minimum wage 

increase.  You're going to vote against the labour legislation.  

You voted against the seniors' income increase.  You voted 

against the Family Income Plan increase.  And you didn't 

support day care during your term.  Give your head a shake. 

 

You didn't support low income people for 10 years and we're 

trying to play catch-up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting, very 

interesting.  Every time the members on the other side can't 

answer a question, they bring out the old blame thrower again.  

Well I suggest it's time you quit trying to blame other people 

and take responsibility for your own actions. 

 

Now let me tell you, you don't want to tell us why it happened, 

but the administrator of Saskatoon food bank knows why.  And 

here's what she says.  She says the poor economy is driving 

more and more people to the food bank.  That's what she says.  

The poor economy, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, you used to promise that once you were elected 

there would be no more food banks.  That's what you promised.  

You made a vow.  A vow is stronger than a promise. 

 

Now the need is greater than ever.  Demand on the food bank 

has increased by 15 per cent since 1991.  And about 150 new 

families a month are going there every month.  Mr. Premier, 

when is it going to stop?  When are we going to see the job 

numbers go up; the food bank numbers and the social welfare 

numbers start coming down?  Can you tell us when that's going 

to happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I know the member doesn't like to 

hear good news, Mr. Speaker, but the social assistance 

case-load actually went down in April of 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, where was that member 

when his federal counterparts offloaded lasted year in UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission), offloaded to the 

province, when they made the province responsible for treaty 

families off reserve right away?  Where were the Liberals when 

their federal government just took $40 million out of the 

economy and UIC cuts was going to increase our case-load by 

another 5 to $7 million? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are trying very hard, through Partnership for 

Renewal, to create a positive economic development climate in 

this province.  We're doing that despite the obstacles of their 

$15 billion debt.  We have increased the minimum wage.  We 

developed a child hunger and nutrition program.  We 

developed the child action plan for families and children in this 

province.  We added to the northern food allowance.  We took 

the cap off utilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member has never been in the food bank of 

Saskatoon.  I was there last week.  Where were you when we 

were planting potatoes last week in Davidson to support low 

income people who need food? 

 

We've got to deal with the emergency situation and we're 

dealing with long-term solutions at the same time, which is the 

approach that is required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to talk to that member about being poor.  I would 

like very well to talk to you about that, sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where were you, John . . . 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Where was I?  I planted more potatoes in my 

life than you've ever seen.  And I tell you, Mr. Minister, I'll tell 

you something else, it's about time you quit blaming other 

people.  Quit blaming other people for your own faults.  And I . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order!  I wish the members could hear 

themselves you know during question period.  I would ask the 

member from Pelly who has been interrupting a number of 

times today that he would please . . . I ask the member from 

Pelly to please abide by the rules. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You know, Mr. 

Speaker, as I mentioned, when they can't give us an intelligent 

answer, they always bring up the debt -- and the debt gets 

bigger and bigger every time -- never telling everybody that 8 

billion, 8 billion of that debt is theirs, and we proved it right 

here in the House. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'll address the rest of this to you, sir.  I will 

remind you of your record.  Out of the last 27 years, 23 of those 

years you have either been the Premier, or the Deputy Premier 

in the city of Saskatoon.  Okay?  And has the situation 

improved any since you were their member?  No.  It's got 

worse.  Has the situation improved for the poor people living in 

your city and your riding?  It's getting worse and worse, Mr. 

Premier. 

 

So let's look at your record.  There are more people on welfare.  

There are more people at the food bank.  In January, 30 houses 

in your constituency were shut down because it wasn't fit for 

people to live in.  After 23 years of you supposedly defending 

those people, looking after those people, that's your record. 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have a question?  Would the 

member ask his question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I apologize for getting off a bit.  Mr. Premier, 

they don't want to live in those conditions.  They're living there 

because they have no job, no money, and no hope under your 

administration.  When is it going to change?  Can you tell the 

people when you're to do something?  When are you going to 

start doing something to help those people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to that 

member that his $850 million debt a year doesn't help the cause 

any.  That is very difficult, to work under those circumstances.  

Then his federal counterparts and the current Liberals added to 

the case-loads.  The reality is, there is good news, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The real estate people are here.  Retail sales are up, Mr. 

Speaker.  We've got the Partnership for Renewal; the 

agricultural diversification; we've developed the 

Opportunities Corporation; we gave businesses, small 

businesses, a tax break to create jobs.  We have confidence in 

Saskatchewan communities and Saskatchewan business people 

to create employment. 

 

If he's really interested in supporting, let him support the child 

action plan as we vote on it later in the next week or two.  If 

he's really interested in families, he'll support us on the budget 

and support the child action plan and the labour standards 

benefits for part-time people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Court Action 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the Minister of Justice.  Earlier today in the Court 

of Queen's Bench judicial centre of Saskatoon, there was a 

statement of claim filed between the judges of the Provincial 

Court of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Justice for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Saskatchewan and Robert W. Mitchell, QC (Queen's Counsel) 

in his personal capacity, it says on the statement of claim, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, never before in the history of Saskatchewan and 

Canada has a minister of Justice been in conflict with and sued 

by the judiciary.  That is a very serious precedent to be part of, 

and I know you'll recognize that. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you not think it is in the best interests of the 

province for you to step down until this action has been settled? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Justice, I want to say to the member opposite that 

he and his leader may continue to argue for a 24 per cent 

increase for judges, but I want to say that, in light of the current 

economic situation that we are at as a result of the $15 billion 

debt built up by the previous administration, a 24 per cent 

increase for judges was not believed to be in the best interest of 

the taxpayers. 

 

One needs only to look to the west of us, to the province of 

Alberta, to see how they in fact are dealing with their judges.  

You say never before has there been a situation where judges 

receive a 2.5 per cent increase.  This government took a 

responsible action in dealing with an outrageous amount of 

increase of 24 per cent for judges.  And we said that it had to be 

something less than that, in line with the other . . . with the civil 

service in the province. 

 

In Alberta the Premier of the province decided to roll back 

salaries of judges arbitrarily 5 per cent, and when there was 

protest, threatened to fire one of the judges.  That's what they 

do in Tory Alberta. 

 

For you to say that the increase here is unreasonable . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I'm wondering who has the floor? 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

The Speaker: -- If the member could finish up his answer, then 

I'd recognize somebody else. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The question 

then, well I'll put the question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, the Minister of Justice holds a special place in your 

cabinet.  He is responsible for something quite apart from the 

responsibility of any other minister in this government.  The 

Minister of Justice is responsible to uphold the law and our 

constitution. 

 

The Speaker: -- If the Premier and the Government House 

Leader want to make a mockery of this place, that's their right 

to do so.  That's their right to do so. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll begin the 

question again so that the Premier could hear it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I want the member to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- The Minister of Justice is responsible to 

uphold the law and our constitution.  Mr. Premier, he's the 

spokesperson for the justice system which is taking action 

against him.  Will he now or will you not now have him do the 

difficult but honourable thing and have him step aside from this 

position in the face, in the face of this action, in the face of this 

action this morning? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member from Shaunavon that he is the last person in the world 

to talk about honour in this Assembly given the fact of what he 

has done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, that individual has 

voted against labour standards which would improve the 

working conditions of the poor in this province; he's voted for 

an increase of 24 per cent for judges, to say nothing of walking 

across the floor, mid-term, having been elected for one party 

and crossing the floor to the other, taking documents given to 

him in confidence from one caucus and using them in question 

period.  To talk about honour in this House in that respect is the 

height of hypocrisy and I think the member should be ashamed 

of himself for even using those words. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Before 

orders of the day, I would request leave for making a member's 

statement about another member. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Brittons' Golden Wedding Anniversary 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate and I want to thank the Government House Leader 

and my colleagues for giving me this opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're going to be talking about a rare event in this 

legislature, which is unity as we're experiencing it right now.  

And I want to talk a little bit about the town of Unity.  Because 

in the town of Unity there's a couple, Mr. Speaker, that is going 

to be celebrating their golden wedding anniversary, and this 

couple is none other than my colleague and his good wife, John 

and Amy Britton, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On behalf of my colleague, who cannot 

answer right now, I'd like to thank members.  This couple, who 

married in 1944, I understand, in Bonnyville, Alberta -- 

Bonnyville, Alberta, Mr. Speaker, is where they were married, 

not that they ever lived there.  But even in those days, I will 

inform members across the way as well, they went there 

because there was no marrying tax in Alberta in those days and 

so they took advantage of that. 

 

Then John became very engrossed in the oil business and he 

became an oil tycoon.  And his good wife Amy worked in the 

office back in those days, even prior to it being in vogue to do 

so. 

 

Their marriage has been blessed by three daughters and six 

grandchildren. 

 

And we all know what his nickname is.  And I've often 

wondered, Mr. Speaker, why he was known as Red, because 

taking a look at the snow on the roof -- and there's very little of 

that, most of that has blown off -- I never really could 

understand.  But as all members will know, he drove a red car, 

so I thought maybe that's why it said Red and Amy on the 

licence plate. 

 

But I understand in the good old days he actually did have quite 

a bit of hair that was red, and rightly so.  Because as members 

will know, and as question period demonstrated today, he's 

kind of a feisty little character and he can create a lot of 

excitement wherever he goes.  And as caucus chairman, I can 

assure you, I hesitate not to recognize him on the speaking 

order, because if I ever do that, colleagues of mine will attest to 

the fact that I regret that. 

 

So he is a valued member in our caucus.  I know that he is a 

joker; he likes to tell a lot of jokes, keeps us on our toes.  And I 

caution other members, don't ever ask John how poor he ever 

was.  You'll regret that, because we go through that quite a few 

times in our caucus. 

 

So Amy and John have opened their hearts to us, Alma and 

myself, on a couple of occasions.  We've gone on a CPA 

(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) trip together; 

we've got to know them real well.  Last summer they were not 

going to be home, but our daughter had a ball tournament, a 

provincial ball tournament, in Unity, and they said, come on, 

opened the doors, they opened their hearts, and we had just a 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

tremendous time while they were gone.  And he had a list of 

jobs for me to do while I was there, mind you, but really 

appreciate that. 

 

And John and Amy, I just want to say to you, as caucus 

chairman here, that as you pause and reflect upon the memories 

that you have created over the years for yourselves, I hope you 

enjoy that, and I know that you are both too feisty to actually 

sit still and live on memories, because you are still very, very 

busy creating memories of your own at this time. 

 

So I hope and I trust that God may continue to grant you many 

years of happiness as you go through life together and with 

your family.  Congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

House Leader of the official opposition, the member from 

Rosthern, and the members of his caucus, in congratulating the 

member from Wilkie and Mrs. Britton on this very important 

milestone -- 50 years. 

 

Fifty years of married life is an achievement which, as the 

member from Rosthern has pointed out, it seems in these days 

is becoming less frequent.  But it's encouraging to see that 

people of the character and the strength of the Brittons, if I may 

refer to them in this context, again restore our faith in the 

strength of family and the values that are associated with that. 

 

I decided not to take the questions today in question period 

from the member from Wilkie because it seemed to me just 

instinctively, intuitively, that he had something really raring to 

go and he had the bit in the teeth, and I'm lucky that I didn't 

take the questions, as demonstrated by his tenacity.  He exhibits 

principle, commitment, spirit in the debate.  It's a great 

testament to him. 

 

And one final word, a great testament to Amy, his wife, 

because 50 years putting up with the member from Wilkie must 

be quite an accomplishment.  But I know how tough it is in 

political life for spouses, and she deserves a large measure of 

the credit, too. 

 

So, John, on behalf of all of our side, best of everything, and 

another 50 to both of you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all 

colleagues in the House for allowing us this opportunity.  As 

my colleague, caucus chairman, has said, and the Premier, it is 

a very rare occurrence when you find a member of this House, 

particularly, in our case, our colleague, the member from 

Wilkie -- and I'd like to use the first person, Mr. Speaker -- our 

friend, John and Amy, have reached this magnificent milestone 

in their life. 

 

To think that at this stage in their life that they would both be 

contributing still to the public life of Saskatchewan is really 

remarkable because if you are 

so lucky in life to achieve this milestone, usually it is the bright 

lights of Phoenix or some warm location that draws you there 

together to enjoy the years that you have, instead of in the 

legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to say, on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan, John, that we really do appreciate the 

contribution that you make to our party and to our caucus and 

to our province as a couple. 

 

And this is a couple that started out with some very, very 

humble beginnings.  As much as John likes to make light of his 

experiences as a young person, and listening to Amy and John 

talk about life together at the beginning, you know that it was 

very humble; that it was filled with hard work; that their 

children were always given every opportunity no matter what 

the sacrifice that mom and dad made in order to make sure that 

that happened. 

 

And we're very proud of you to be here today to be our 

colleague, and 50 years is something that is truly a milestone, 

Mr. Speaker.  And we just want to say thanks for sticking 

around this long to be with us, John. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to add my congratulations on behalf of the Liberal 

Party and the Liberal caucus and as Leader of the Third Party 

to the member from Wilkie and his wife, whom I had the 

privilege of meeting by the way at a function in Saskatoon not 

that long ago that was being sponsored by the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association. 

 

We had a very lovely time, in fact she was sitting beside me, 

and I enjoyed her as much as I have enjoyed her husband.  One 

of the things that . . . I find the member from Wilkie most 

entertaining and not only has he been very thoughtful to me but 

I think he's someone who really does demonstrate commitment, 

not only from the numbers of years that he has spent in politics 

but it's very obvious that anyone who has been in a partnership, 

a marriage for 50 years, is someone who has made decisions 

about what is really important in life. 

 

So we would like to add our warm wishes for many, many 

good years together. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to join 

with my colleagues here in congratulating Red and Amy on 

their 50 years of marriage. 

 

I want to say to the members of the legislature that often you 

don't see that kind of commitment where somebody who is in a 

relationship for 50 years still serving in the legislature.  And as 

our leader said, it's quite inspirational to an awful lot of 

younger people who have been involved in public life and in 

politics, but to be around somebody like the member from 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

Wilkie, who encourages people to be involved and to 

participate, is inspirational. 

 

And I want to say on behalf of me and my family and again the 

Progressive Conservation Party and its larger family, we have 

been inspired by John and Amy and we certainly respect the 

fact that they would serve at a time when in many cases they 

should have been retiring.  So it's our pleasure and our benefit 

that they haven't retired and that they've brought all that 

experience to our caucus and indeed to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

And frankly I can't think of another jurisdiction where I've 

noted somebody actually still serving in the legislature, and has 

celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.  Now maybe others 

can think of some, but I can't.  And if that's the case, if this is 

unique to Saskatchewan, perhaps it's unique to Canada.  And if 

it is, all the more reason that we should acknowledge this very 

fine couple, because that kind of commitment to each other and 

to serving the public is indeed unique, and perhaps unique to 

Saskatchewan, but certainly to Red and Amy.  So, on behalf of 

all of us here, again, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to a very, 

very fine couple. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't know just 

how to begin.  First of all I want to say thank you.  I began to 

wonder who that guy is you were talking about there for a 

while, but the Premier was right when he mentioned that Amy 

had to be somebody special to put up with me and also help me 

-- and she did.  I always say that we've had about 25 years of 

happy married life, which is not too bad, that's 50/50. 

 

We did start out and we worked together and that's maybe part 

of it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, oh, here we go; how poor were we. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- No, I'm not going to tell you how poor we 

were.  I wish I'd have known this was going to happen, Mr. 

Speaker, because then I might have had time to put some words 

together that was appropriate to tell you how we feel about the 

good things that was said today, even if you didn't mean them, 

because they do listen good as the old cowboy used to say -- it 

listens kinda good. 

 

So thank you very much.  I appreciate what you've done and I 

just wish Amy could have been here to hear it.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it would 

relate to question no. 59 I hereby table the response. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson.  Sitting beside me is Arleen Hynd, the deputy 

minister for Education, Training and Employment, and directly 

behind me is Michael Littlewood, an official in the department; 

and joining us shortly will be Ken Horsman, the assistant 

deputy minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I do 

acknowledge, Madam Minister, that in many ways the 

amendments that are proposed are housekeeping amendments.  

And each package or group of changes appears to clean up the 

Act, in my view, and make operations much more effective in 

one way or another. 

 

But at the same time, I think, while these amendments 

themselves are acceptable, they point toward concerns for some 

of the parents and students in the province.  And I want to pose 

some questions to you a bit later just for some clarification. 

 

As I see it, there are three packages of adjustments to the Act, 

and they are as follows: first, some adjustments regarding the 

Book Bureau; secondly, adjustments to allow for the merger of 

rural and urban divisions; and thirdly, adjustments to allow for 

administrative cooperation. 

 

And in addition, we recognize there are amendments with 

regard to the liability protection of persons working with school 

safety, within those patrols, with which we don't have any 

concern or complaint at all. 

 

Now regarding the adjustments on the Book Bureau, I notice 

with interest that the Act now extends the powers of the 

minister to engage in contracts to acquire materials other than 

books for use in schools.  And also, there's another clause 

which enables the Book Bureau to acquire materials other than 

books. 

 

And I want you to know that this is something that I heartily 

endorse.  The learning process -- and the two of us would not 

have to have this conversation -- but obviously it's much 

enhanced by the use of audio-visual materials, by videos, by 

CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory), by productions, 

non-book resources such as posters and educational games. 

 

Having said that, I do want to express my sincere hope that you 

and the Book Bureau does indeed move forward to carry out 

those kinds of changes.  The province of Saskatchewan, I 

know, has adopted the concept of resource-based learning.  

And that means of course that students are taught by using a 

broad 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

variety of materials rather than the strict adherence to 

textbook-driven techniques. 

 

To put teeth in this amendment, it's incumbent upon the 

government then to commit itself and we need to have a 

commitment to purchasing the resources that students need to 

learn.  Being able to make these purchases is one thing, actually 

making the purchases is another. 

 

And with regards to this matter, I have three very simple 

questions for you.  The first is, how were purchases of 

non-book material handled in the past? The second is, is there a 

plan for purchase of video and non-book learning materials? 

And thirdly, is there a policy which favours Saskatchewan 

companies when purchasing learning materials? 

 

I will sit down and let you contemplate those. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Three questions.  How were the 

purchases made in the past?  I need to tell you that I understand 

from the officials that the Book Bureau has been purchasing 

audio-visual materials, CD-ROMs, that sort of thing, and this 

legislation is simply catching up with present practice. 

 

Is there a plan for future purchases?  We're in the process of 

ongoing curriculum development in the province.  We will 

soon be releasing our response to the high school review and 

we will start to develop grade 10, 11, and 12 curriculum in the 

core subject areas.  And obviously there will be a demand as 

curriculum is developed in the province. 

 

In terms of the policy and do we have a Saskatchewan-first 

policy, because of the resource-based learning, I understand 

that a lot of the resources are purchased from outside of the 

province because we do not have a very large book industry in 

the province.  But of course we do have some -- Fifth Street 

House in particular, along with Glen Sorestad's book agency. 

 

And so it is the preference of the department to have school 

divisions purchase books.  And as we particularly develop the 

high school curriculum, I think that there will be . . . and going 

to an emphasis for Saskatchewan and Canadian literature, there 

will be an opportunity for Saskatchewan authors, poets, and 

book agents to have the materials purchased in this province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  

I'm sure Glen and others, and Lorna Crozier who's no longer in 

the province, and all of these people will be delighted to know 

that they'll have more of their poetry books purchased. 

 

I want to move now to the merger of urban and rural divisions.  

Another set of amendments that seem to be sprinkled 

throughout the Act makes it possible for school divisions to 

merge.  And on the face of it, this of course would appear to be 

a most sensible thing. 

 

I think the provisions create a sense of choice as well 

for some people.  When an urban and rural division merge, 

they'll have the choice about how the districts are laid out, is 

my understanding.  And it gives people affected by such a 

merger an opportunity to select whether or not they will have a 

ward system or an at-large system, is what my understanding is 

from what was written. 

 

It is proper that people are able to make choices on matters of 

local concern, especially in choosing the structures of public 

authorities.  But on the other hand, this simple opportunity for 

choice and local autonomy is exactly how the health district 

board debate began. 

 

And I know that you have assured us, Madam Minister, and 

you have publicly stated this on several occasions, that these 

changes are not what you've termed the thin edge of the wedge; 

that they are not the beginning of radical changes in the 

educational system being forced upon an unsuspecting public 

without real input in prior consultation. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I know that you have indicated that 

division mergers are entirely in the realm of what's called 

voluntary, at this point, and that you've stated publicly, and I 

quote: that there is no pressure whatsoever to amalgamate. 

 

Recently we discovered that some matters for the district health 

boards may be voluntary, but that others are not voluntary.  

And like the people of Saskatchewan, I guess I'm raising these 

things with a kind of cautiousness because I'm cautious about 

what these amendments might signal for the future.  As a result 

of that cautiousness, I'm going to pose just a few questions to 

you about this particular area regarding rural-urban school 

division mergers. 

 

First of all, in clause 18 it provides for the merger of an 

urban-rural school division, and I'm wondering the following:  

are there any such mergers being contemplated at the present 

time of which you're aware; and secondly, are there any such 

mergers which have actually been impeded in the past, prior to 

these amendments coming forward? 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well just for the record, and to reiterate 

what I've said many times publicly about the pilot, the 

voluntary pilot projects, as someone who has studied a bit 

about the history of this province when it comes to school 

division amalgamation and mergers -- and I'm talking about the 

larger school units that came about in the early 1940s -- the 

history of Saskatchewan education reform has been voluntary 

and not enforced. 

 

We still have schools that have not joined the larger school unit 

boards in the province.  In fact the history of school 

consolidation or school division consolidation continues.  Last 

year we had four very small school divisions merge into I think 

it's called scenic valleyview, which is outside of the city of 

Regina. 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

We've said very clearly that the legislation is here for those 

who wish to voluntarily amalgamate.  The legislation previous 

to now would not have allowed for rural and small urban 

centres to amalgamate.  And what this legislation does is allow 

for those cities and rural areas that are interested in 

amalgamating, they can do so. 

 

And I'll give you a couple of examples of why we went forward 

with this legislation.  The P.A. (Prince Albert) School Division, 

along with P.A. Rural School Division, Carlton High School, 

and the city of Prince Albert, and the Kinistino School Division 

are presently in discussions about the possibility of 

amalgamation. 

 

They are sharing many of the same personnel.  They have gone 

through a community development process where they have 

engaged the community in the kind of discussion that we think 

that is important before these kind of voluntary amalgamations 

go forward.  As well, the city of Melfort and Tiger Lily School 

Division, which is the rural school division around Melfort, are 

also involved in the same process.  In fact I'm meeting with 

them tomorrow in Melfort to discuss this. 

 

Now what we have said, because there is interest that is coming 

and there are also some rural school divisions that are 

interested in amalgamating -- the Arcola area have an interest, 

as well there's an interest in the Canora-Kamsack-Timberline 

School Division area -- what we have said is we will agree to 

three to five pilot projects.  We want to have those pilot 

projects follow principles of understanding and certain criteria 

which I'm very prepared to share with you. 

 

And it's important that we have those pilot projects go forward 

in order that we can meaningfully evaluate whether in fact it 

means better education for students and whether in fact it 

means financial savings.  Because there are those who will 

argue that this will mean vast financial savings; there are those 

that say no; and there are those that will argue that this is not 

better education, this is . . . and those that will argue that this is 

better education. 

 

So we want to have a variety of pilots -- larger rural-urban, 

smaller rural-urban, and then rural -- so that at the end of the 

process we can do a proper evaluation that involves the 

community to determine, is this better education for kids and is 

. . . does this in fact mean reduced cost for administration. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  

And I appreciate your offer to share those criteria with me 

because I'd be most interested in seeing them. 

 

As you're likely aware, one of the things that I had wanted 

very, very much in the changing of health care in the province 

was to ensure that there would be pilot projects.  And I want 

you to know that I am very, very pleased with the way in which 

your department is undertaking this.  Because I think that we 

would have 

been much further ahead, not just in terms of being able to 

evaluate the cost benefits -- the benefits versus the detriments, 

if you will, of health care reform -- but also in terms of people's 

sense of real cooperation and input into the process. 

 

If we had had a pilot project in one of the urban centres and 

focused on that to get it right and to eke out what would work 

and what would not work, to have a larger urban-rural kind of 

split -- whether it be Prince Albert, I think would be a good 

example -- to have the North which is unique, and an area like 

the south-west of the province in health care which is equally 

unique, and I mean people, as you know, even get isolation 

kind of pay there for certain kinds of jobs that they have, and I 

think that this is a very thoughtful approach to this.  It allows 

you for an opportunity to gather information and to make 

decisions based on evidence.  And I think that's something that 

people want to see. 

 

And in particular, the most important thing is having an 

opportunity to truly evaluate whether or not you're going to end 

up with something better.  So, you know, not only do I want to 

give recognition to your department for following this process, 

but I want to as well acknowledge the parts of the province 

who have indicated that they're interested in this.  I think it's to 

their credit that they would like to partake in such an enterprise. 

 

All that having been said, and I am interested in whether or not 

there are mergers that have not taken place because of the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . There have not.  Okay, thank you. 

 

If boards amalgamate, rural and urban, what happens to smaller 

schools?  I mean not what happens to smaller schools, but I'm 

thinking in particular what we call the small school factors and 

all the provisions for example, that exist within these smaller 

schools.  And I'm wondering if you could comment if you will, 

on how you sort of examined such things as the transportation 

factor, the grant factor for small school size.  Will this in fact, 

these kinds of amalgamations, ultimately jeopardize the smaller 

schools? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Good question, and obviously that's 

certainly a question for those school divisions that have small 

schools, and have as a result of the formula, because we have a 

small schools factor . . . they're worried about what happens to 

our funding for small schools.  And what we have said is 

during the pilot process there would be no changes in the way 

we fund small schools.  So nothing will change there. 

 

Secondly, in terms of transportation, we fund, the province 

funds, 100 per cent of transportation costs or busing costs in the 

province. And there's a little bit of controversy around that 

issue.  Because there are school boards that will argue, we're 

efficient and we get paid for our efficiency, and those schools 

divisions that aren't efficient, they get paid for their 

inefficiency. 

 

So we're in the process of examining how we have fairness in 

the transportation system and how we fund 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

transportation because of the concerns that are coming from 

school boards that believe they're efficient and some others 

may not be. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  I think those assurances are 

what people would like to hear from you. 

 

In section 120, it's going to be amended to accommodate . . . 

this is the section that deals with accommodating mergers.  I'm 

wondering how local school advisory committees will be 

appointed.  And as an adjunct to that, will elections in the urban 

areas of merged divisions be eliminated as a result of this 

particular amendment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Because this is a pilot . . . our school 

board elections happen this fall, and obviously these pilots 

aren't going to be up and running by the fall.  We're 

anticipating the earliest may be January, but it may not come 

until 1995 because one of the things that the school divisions 

have to go through is a consultation process. 

 

As well, they have to, if you look at the criteria, they have to 

describe to us how they are going to approach local decision 

making that enhances the learning environment for all members 

of the school community.  So we will want to know how they 

are going to involve local people in decision making within a 

larger, amalgamated school division, because we think it's 

important that local people don't feel as though the school 

division has gotten larger and therefore they have less influence 

on the kind of decision making.  We want to look at how 

school divisions plan to involve people in the decision-making 

process when it comes to how we deliver education in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So how that will occur will be a community development 

process that school divisions are going to ascertain or 

determine.  And if they meet the criteria, that will be important 

for the pilot to go forward. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  The last area I 

want to talk about is administrative cooperation.  And I note the 

amendments will now make it possible for boards of education 

to make agreements for mutual benefit of both -- this is with 

other kinds of groups.  I recognize that . . . I think these 

amendments are less restrictive than the previous Act and I 

welcome that adjustment.  Cooperation in the provision of 

educational services I think is something that's most desirable. 

 

Having said that, I wish to point out that what may begin as an 

innovative pilot project alternative may eventually become 

expectation.  And it's clear that all social service programs, 

including education, I think require considerable reform.  The 

nature of that reform is properly a matter for public debate.  

And I'm sensitive to the potential for non-governmental 

agencies to be required to undertake more and more of the 

direct services delivery expectations of the public in the face of 

government retrenchment. 

Provisions such as this make it possible today for what I 

consider to be innovative joint projects and efforts, but my 

concern is that the government may come to rely more and 

more on those joint efforts to deliver basic services.  And I 

want your comment on that. 

 

I know of course that it's only time that will tell, but a lot of 

people are feeling that the trend is such that it's becoming the 

way of the world.  And I know that the way in which you spoke 

of education in the past is not in that context, that it would 

become less and less of the responsibility of government to do. 

 

I have then just a few questions regarding administrative 

arrangements that are being pointed out in these amendments.  

In section 92.1 it makes it possible for boards of education to 

enter into agreements with these other bodies. 

 

I'm wondering what types of agreements are anticipated; some 

of these might have come to your attention all ready.  And I'm 

wondering if these types of arrangements that you're now being 

faced with as a potential for occurring, what made it impossible 

for those to occur prior to this amendment coming forward?  

And if you have any examples, I'd be most interested in having 

you put forward some examples of successful joint ventures in 

service provision. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- What this section is dealing with is 

entering into agreements with other boards of education or 

Indian bands or conseils scolaires or francophone school 

governance.  It also will allow for coming together of various 

school divisions where they might be able to procure certain 

goods or services if they acted jointly. 

 

Not unlike the old hospital groupings, like Saskatoon before 

health reform where City Hospital, University Hospital, and St 

Paul's went together to look at the joint purchase of computer 

equipment.  So that's what that allows for.  Because I'm told 

that the current wording is far too restrictive and they're not 

able to do that. 

 

In terms of the issue you raise about health, education, social 

services involving the community, we have some successful 

examples in the West Flats in P.A. and Saskatoon Princess 

Alexandra School. And I'll give you an example. 

 

Princess Alexandra has entered into an arrangement with 

Radius Tutoring project to provide services for at-risk youth.  

As well, more and more community people are being involved 

in school activity through integrated school services where 

we're starting to have social workers actually located in 

schools, who may be from the Department of Social Services, 

or mental health workers who may be from MacNeill Clinic, or 

one of the other child and youth health agencies. 

 

We've got 20 pilots and we're just in the process of evaluating 

those pilots, but I expect that because of the response that has 

come from teachers who are actually in those schools enjoying 

the support of those 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

services that they didn't have access to in the past, and being 

able to deal with the crises situations that their students are 

dealing with without having to phone the Department of Social 

Services a hundred times to get a response, or Mental Health 

Services, I think we'll see more of that. 

 

(1500) 

 

And there are some issues of who's going to control that 

process.  But we're talking about a paradigm shift where it's not 

the principal that controls it, it's not the Department of Social 

Services, it's not the Department of Health.  It is coming 

together, all of these agencies and groups, to begin to 

rationalize the services we provide; and perhaps by preventing 

overlap and duplication, being able to redirect some resources 

into added services that weren't there in the past. 

 

I think this has lots of potential, and in fact the OECD 

(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) is 

in the process of coming to Saskatchewan to look at two of our 

pilot projects to see how they're working because they're seen 

as on the edge of new thinking for the way we deliver services 

to children and youth. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  

Rather than taking up time in committee, I will take you aside 

and ask you to tell me which ones they're coming to see. 

 

Well in conclusion, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister, I just 

want you to know that we're in general support of the theory 

and the apparent intent behind these amendments that you've 

put forward. 

 

I wish to thank you and I thank your officials as well.  Thank 

you for hearing my concerns and answering my questions.  I 

appreciate it very much. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I'd like to welcome your officials here today. 

 

As we look through this Bill, we see particularly three main 

issues in the Bill.  The first is dealing with materials used in the 

schools, the second is amalgamation, and the third part is the 

safety patrol. 

 

I'd like to start off dealing with the purchase of textbooks, 

documents, reports, materials, etc.  You mentioned CD-ROMs.  

I would assume then also other software for computers.  How 

are these purchases going to affect intellectual property rights 

in the copyright laws?  What considerations have been given to 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We have to comply with copyright law. 

We can't . . . we have to pay for things, we can't duplicate 

things.  And so they do comply with copyright law. 

 

The other point I should make is that with our expansion of 

distance learning -- we're in the process of creating a distance 

learning agency -- we will be 

able to, through interactive television, perhaps telephone 

hook-ups, computer link-ups, we will be able to provide 

distance learning opportunities for people living particularly in 

remote parts of rural Saskatchewan or remote parts of the North 

with educational opportunities.  And obviously the Book 

Bureau will be involved with the distance learning agency to 

ensure that we have the necessary technology, I guess, and 

equipment and, I suppose, transferring books onto CD 

(compact disk) disk in order for learning opportunities to take 

effect. 

 

So there's a linking here between the Book Bureau and what's 

coming in distance education. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I was 

concerned as to whether or not items would have been copied 

in some manner and then distributed because it's very important 

that the intellectual property rights be protected. 

 

Now I'm sure that there are items that are copied.  What 

happens in those circumstances?  Do you pay a copyright fee to 

the publisher if you copy an item for use some place -- say you 

copy some software or a document of some sort?  What 

happens in those cases? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay, we're in the process of 

negotiating an agreement with a group of publishers.  It's called 

the Can Copy agreement and what that would allow for is 

school divisions who get materials from the Book Bureau to 

copy that material, but that won't happen until that agreement is 

signed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On the 

issue of possible amalgamations, voluntary amalgamations -- 

and I think it's very important that it be voluntary and I know 

that I have stressed this with you before and talked to you about 

it. 

 

I was particularly interested in your comment that Arcola is one 

of those areas that may be interested in this, because it'll be the 

Arcola and Oxbow school divisions that would be involved in 

that and those both are in my constituency. 

 

And I know that they're already working together to a certain 

extent.  They're sharing the services of the secretary-treasurer.  

In most likelihood, they will share the services of the director 

of education, starting sometime this summer. 

 

So when this type of thing takes place it is indeed very 

important that it be done on the local level.  But even though 

it's going to be done on the local level, there are a number of 

issues around the subject that must be dealt with at the 

provincial levels, such as bargaining with the teachers' 

federation group, and how that may affect local . . . the teachers 

in the local area in the units that'll be affected. 

 

So what part will the government play in those type of 

situations where, while you're dealing with the local division 

boards, they also impact on the broader provincial scene 

through say the teachers' federation, etc., and other 

organizations? 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well as you probably know, we have 

two levels of bargaining in the province.  We have the 

provincial bargaining where the government trustee team 

negotiates a collective agreement with teachers on a provincial 

basis.  And we tend to deal with those issues like wages and 

benefits; working conditions -- prep time, those kinds of things, 

extra-curricular activity -- are dealt with at the local level. 

 

We think that the collective bargaining process in the province 

has worked well in the past 20 years.  We've never had a 

province-wide strike in the province in the past 20 years.  We 

don't anticipate that we're going to change the two levels of 

bargaining if school divisions go to larger school divisions. 

 

Now obviously there will be some issues.  I don't know if 

Arcola, for example, or Oxbow have unionized support staff.  

So I think there will be some issues that we need to address in 

those school divisions that come together that may have 

unionized people in three or four school divisions, support staff 

that may have different collective agreements.  Obviously those 

kinds of details will have to be worked out. 

 

As well, there may be two or three or four different collective 

local agreements with teacher associations at the local level that 

may provide for a different level of working conditions.  And 

obviously that will have to be worked out. 

 

I think from our point of view, and I've sent you a copy of the 

document, there are criteria that the various pilot projects will 

have to meet, and we will want to know how they intend to 

deal with a number of these issues as they move towards 

amalgamation. 

 

And the other point that I want to make is that we see this as a 

community development process.  The community will be 

involved in the process of having those discussions at the local 

level, because it's important that amalgamations go forward 

with a fairly large degree of community support. 

 

And the other issue that we will want to have school divisions 

address, is how local people are going to be involved in the 

decision-making process because there is some concern that 

local people, if they go to larger school divisions, won't have as 

much input into the school process as they do now. 

 

So we will want those school divisions that are going forward 

with the voluntary amalgamations to address that issue as well 

-- how they anticipate local people are going to participate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

one of the things that is a concern to me as it relates to 

amalgamation -- and I believe it can take place within the 

framework of voluntary -- where I see a real significant 

negative impact is how large urban centres can negotiate a 

system whereby if population is going to dictate the election of 

school board members with a rural school division that 

surrounds the large urban . . . and I'll use Swift Current as an 

example. 

 

The large urban centre, 15,000 people, and the rural school 

division of less than 4 or 5,000 -- no, it could be 10 or 12,000 

people -- that rural school division has serious problems.  And 

identifying how the tax base, which could even be similar in 

size, how that tax base could have representation from the city 

system and no representation from the rural area; how that is 

going to be addressed on the part of the department, and how it 

can be made so that there is some willingness to participate. 

 

Because I as a rural taxpayer do not want to have someone in 

urban recommending how much the mill rate should be and 

defining that for me, because I believe in the public system as a 

school board system.  But if you make it too difficult, what will 

transpire is the separate system will get a lot of that taxation 

because they can designate, and then they will be able to say, I 

don't want to be a part of that public system; if I don't have any 

children in the system, I'll take my land base and my tax base 

and apply it to that system which has the least amount of mill 

rate.  And they can do that in that area.   And you need to have 

some way of giving equity -- I guess that's the basic question -- 

you need some way of giving equity in the determination so 

that negotiations can take place.  And that's where the biggest 

problem exists. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I just want to assure you that Prairie 

West School Division has nothing to worry about.  They've 

already contacted me and I've had various discussions with 

people who live in the Prairie West School Division and they're 

concerned about the possibility of going with Swift Current.  

This is voluntary. They won't be going with Swift Current 

unless they choose to have the discussions with the Swift 

Current School Division. 

 

There are some parts of the province where they don't have the 

concerns that the people in Prairie West do. And I'm thinking in 

particular of the people who are around the city of P.A. and 

people who are just beginning to discuss things around the city 

of Melfort.  This is not forced amalgamation; this will be 

voluntary. 

 

We do obviously want to see three to five pilot projects, 

because we want to see how this is going to work.  Because 

we're talking about some changes in the way we have 

historically delivered education in the province -- and not the 

way so much, but the process, I think would be a better word to 

use.  So I don't think the people in Prairie West have anything 

to worry about, and I don't think you do either. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I wasn't worried about them specifically 

because I recognize that they have the capacity for 

self-determination.  My problem is in equity and taxation when 

representation is based on population and there is no equity in 

delivering the volume of tax dollars required to run the school 

division in the city of Swift Current or in Prairie West, and 

where will that equity come from?  Will it be 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

discussions between school divisions as to how that equity can 

be resolved? 

 

And I would go one step further, Madam Minister. Those 

school divisions around the Prairie West School Division have 

a great deal of apprehension about how Prairie West is going to 

handle that situation because they feel that that's a buffer zone 

and they will never be drawn into that discussion.  They will 

amalgamate among themselves, but not with Prairie West.  And 

they're afraid of that inclusion into the city because equity and 

taxation and mill rates causes them a great deal of concern. 

 

And it causes me a concern as an individual who lives in the 

rural area.  And that is what you're going to have to address in 

P.A., you're going to have to address that in Yorkton -- all of 

those divisions which have agencies supplying education on 

behalf of another school division -- and if they amalgamate, 

then how are you going to handle it?  And that's the discussion. 

 

Is there going to be a great deal of latitude in how you apply 

those mill rates, because if they're going to be setting at a 

variable rate, then it's going to have some significance.  And if 

not, then I'm not sure they'd want to start to talk about 

negotiating how to amalgamate. 

 

The school divisions in the south-west have talked a lot about 

amalgamation. In fact they have done a lot of those kinds of 

things in preliminary work, but they have always come to the 

roadblock on equity in paying the taxes.  And that causes them 

all kinds of concerns.  Can it be handled through a tuition fee 

structure, like it is in the comprehensive schools, or should it be 

handled in other ways?  And that is a real serious concern to 

those rural school divisions around any large or . . . well 

medium-sized urban centre. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I did share the criteria that school 

divisions will have to meet with your colleague, the Education 

critic.  And one of the criteria is that no school board can be 

surrounded by school divisions that want to get together; you 

can't leave someone out.  Because then what you have is maybe 

wealthier school divisions going together and leaving the less 

wealthy school division out.  That's number one. 

 

Number two, what they have done in the P.A. area is put 

together what I consider to be an absolutely exemplary strategic 

plan where these issues are being addressed.  How do they deal 

with the issue of equity, fairness, and accessibility?  And 

obviously those issues have to be dealt with in order for this to 

go forward. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The other point that I'd like to make is that 

there has to be some recognition about the population bases 

being the only criteria for membership on the board of 

directors.  That has also some relevance to this, because it's the 

tax dollars that pay. It's not people that pay, it's property tax 

that pays. And so there has to be some equity in relation to that 

as it relates to the discussion on representation on 

these school division boards. 

 

And the reason I say that is if four rural school divisions went 

together with a large urban centre, the urban centre still would 

have more population than those rural school divisions, and 

then they could, if they went on a basis of dividing the area to 

have the wards within the city . . . within the framework of the 

city as to having greater representation than the rural school 

division or than the rural part of it, then they can dictate the 

taxes to be paid in property taxes.  And that's the problem that 

this creates. 

 

And I'm saying that there has to be some balance between 

representation by population and representation by those people 

who are required to pay the taxes.  And that's where the 

difficulty comes in. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Just an observation.  If you look at the 

history of how we've gone about creating subdivisions, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan,  subdivisions have never 

been based solely on wealth.  Because you could have the 

possibility of a subdivision that may have a lot of oil with very 

small population having a larger number of trustees relative to 

more populated areas. 

 

So what we've tried to do historically under all of the 

administrations that have governed this province, is try to 

accommodate various issues that emerge and have impacts 

upon how subdivisions are created. 

 

But I don't anticipate that we will ever go to a time when we 

base representation solely on wealth.  I think it has to be an 

accommodation of population as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I agree with you to some extent, but 

your argument can go just as much on the people part as it can 

on the wealth part.  So you have to have a balance between the 

two.  And measuring that and its relationship is what I'm 

talking about. 

 

In an urban tax setting, the taxation on property provides 

services.  In rural taxing, and the fundamental principle there is 

it provides benefits back to the land.  You don't have that in the 

urban centres as much you do in rural, and that is the reason 

why rural municipalities get all in a snit about this.  And that's 

why, because they don't have garbage collection, they don't 

have police work -- they don't have all of those things in 

dealing with their taxes and their property taxes.  And that's the 

distinction.  And so there has to be a balance between those 

two. 

 

And I agree with you that wealth isn't the only criteria, but 

population should also not be the only criteria in delivering the 

service. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- For someone who knows a little bit 

about rural Saskatchewan, having been born and raised there 

and having family there, I know that rural people are very 

sensitive about having representation in all kinds of 

institutions, because they think that they have some issues that 

need to be addressed. 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

And I don't disagree with you.  And this is going to be a fine 

balancing act, how we do this because there are sensitivities.  I 

think my brother would certainly argue that he pays more than 

his fair share of school taxes and property taxes, and he wants 

to be represented.  So I understand the point you're making. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, the discussion that's been going on is quite relevant 

because we've already had that kind of a situation develop in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Eston is the example, that the board eliminated the director 

from the Eston area to provide another director from 

Kindersley, the city of Kindersley, and so it does create some 

major problems because Eston now feels that they do not have 

someone on their division board who represents them.  So it is 

a very sensitive issue in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact when it comes down to the discussion of amalgamating 

with other school divisions, the Gull Lake School Division put 

out a little pamphlet, a little information-discussion guide for 

their ratepayers because they had lost their director of 

education and looked at the situation of contracting that service 

with another school division.  And they looked at all the school 

divisions around them.  And their decision was not to proceed 

because they felt that it was not the proper time to do so.  And 

I'll just read the one sentence from it:  The main two reasons 

were that the timing may not be right and there needs to be 

local discussion. 

 

So they were very concerned that the people throughout the 

whole division have the opportunity to discuss the issue before 

they proceeded in any particular direction.  And I think that's 

very important because it needs to be done at the local . . . In 

rural areas we have local school districts which are 

amalgamated into a larger division; you don't have that in the 

urban areas.  But each one of those local school districts feels 

that it has some level of autonomy even though in actual fact, 

under the Act, it may not have that.  But they still feel they 

represent a particular area and a particular jurisdiction, and they 

wish to be consulted. 

 

When it comes to providing for directors on an expanded 

division, as my colleague was talking about, I agree with him 

that there needs to be consideration not just for population but 

for the geographic areas that are represented.  And in the case 

of Eston and Kindersley, Eston felt that they were losing out 

geographically.  They did not have perhaps the population to 

warrant having a director just representing Eston, but 

nevertheless they felt they lost because of geography. 

 

This issue of amalgamation was brought up by the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) at their 

convention last year, and they passed a resolution endorsing it.  

And in fact, I'm hoping you took a lot of your ideas from their 

recommendations on this. 

One of the items they brought up was, once you went to a 

larger division, that in rural Saskatchewan because we have the 

local school districts already in place and they look after one 

particular school, they have input into the operation of that 

particular school.  In urban Saskatchewan you don't have that. 

 

With this piece of legislation, will you be providing for the 

opportunities for each individual school within an urban school 

division to have some sort of representation on the board?  The 

SSTA was recommending a move along that line.  They didn't 

spell out as to exactly how that should be done, but that some 

form of representation from each individual school, a parent 

group or something that would be elected at large, provide for 

that school as an advice-giving body to the school division. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- This legislation does not change the 

present situation in urban Saskatchewan where there are local 

school advisory committees.  We are in the process of doing 

consultations about The Education Act, and these consultations 

are always ongoing.  And I don't know if you're suggesting that 

we look at that one, but we didn't for the purposes of these 

amendments. 

 

Basically there were a few housekeeping amendments and they 

were to facilitate the process that some school boards want to 

go to voluntary amalgamations.  So this is not a major rewrite 

of the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well because things are operated 

somewhat different between rural and urban, if in the case that 

my colleague was bringing up where there could be an 

amalgamation between rural and urban, the rural schools have 

an organized body, an organized group of school trustees which 

make representations to the division board, where in urban 

Saskatchewan you don't have that.  You may have your 

parent-teacher association, but that is a body the executive of 

which are elected only by those members who attend the 

meeting of the parent-teacher association. 

 

Whereas the rural school district trustees are elected at large.  

Their elections are similar to the elections of people to the 

school division board or to the RM (rural municipality) council 

or however . . . whichever bodies you wish to discuss.  But they 

have a legitimate and legal entity, whereas the PTA, 

parent-teacher associations, while they have a function, are not 

a jurisdictional body to make representations to the division 

board. 

 

And I think it would be very important and a benefit to urban 

schools to have that kind of a body in place, that the entire 

boundary area, the property owners, the parents within an urban 

school area would have a body which would represent their 

interests to the division board.  Because if you look around, and 

particularly in Regina here, I've had a number of calls where 

schools were closed but there was no organized body prior to 

that closure that was speaking on behalf of that school other 

than the parent-teacher 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

association.  And I think it would be beneficial to have an 

organized body that could represent that school.  And perhaps, 

Madam Minister, that's something you could look at. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Just briefly, as someone who represents 

an urban constituency, the kids in my constituency go to 

schools all over the city of Saskatoon.  While we have a 

neighbourhood school, the students in that neighbourhood don't 

necessarily go to that neighbourhood school.  And so it 

becomes somewhat difficult to look at what you're talking 

about.  But certainly we have to figure out a way so that parents 

and taxpayers feel as though they have more influence or more 

involvement in what happens in our schools. 

 

And obviously, if you look at the criteria, we are cognizant of 

that and we are asking those school divisions that are interested 

in voluntarily amalgamating in addressing the issue of local 

involvement and local input should they decide to proceed to 

larger school divisions through voluntary amalgamation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  More and 

more parents are becoming interested in having a direct input.  

And while again the parent-teacher associations provide one 

avenue, having a local board of trustees I think would be a 

much more positive step.  And you clearly identify that in the 

urban settings you don't have a particular school.  You have a 

neighbourhood school but it may not serve your children. 

 

And one of the other areas that will be a problem, and it's a 

problem in rural Saskatchewan also, is how much responsibility 

or how much authority does the local school board trustees 

have.  It seems to be that the authority they have, the 

responsibilities they have are those delegated to them by the 

division board. And it varies from whether the division board 

wants to accept the responsibilities for some decisions or pass 

them down to the trustees to take the blame for whatever 

happens. 

 

So I think it would be important that when this is done, that a 

clear set of authorities and responsibilities be set out. 

 

The third item that I identified with this Act was the school 

safety patrols.  And, Madam Minister, up until now, who has 

held the responsibility for liability and protection for the 

decisions made by the school safety patrols? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- At present school boards have liability 

insurance for teachers, employees, students.  And for those 

people who are volunteers -- who might be volunteer helpers 

with the school board patrol -- it has not been clear who has a 

liability, and now this legislation makes it very clear. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So the 

province will be paying any insurance premiums on this 

liability, or will the school boards be paying 

the insurance on the liability that may be associated with the 

school patrol? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- School divisions will be paying. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think the 

school safety patrol is a very worthwhile program and that it 

should be encouraged in all those urban settings that do have a 

large number of children moving through, particularly areas 

where there's a large amount of traffic.  I think it's very 

important. 

 

I would encourage you to take a serious look at the idea of the 

concept of having local school board trustees in the urban 

areas.  I think it's very important and also that amalgamations 

of school divisions must proceed on a voluntary basis after a 

large amount of consultation within the areas affected. 

 

Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- To say that . . . I have said voluntary, 

voluntary, voluntary, voluntary, wherever I've gone in the 

province.  If you look at the history of this province when it 

comes to larger school divisions or consolidated schools that 

were started by Woodrow Lloyd, an NDP or a CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) education  minister, 

it has always been voluntary, and I don't anticipate that that will 

change in the near future. 

 

(1530) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedules 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

thank you, Madam Minister, and for your officials coming in 

today, and for your cooperation. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- And Act 

to Create, Encourage and Facilitate Business Opportunities 

in Saskatchewan through the 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Establishment of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

concept of government being involved in financing business 

opportunities is a questionable one at best, and other than 

allowing for a great deal of political manipulation and the 

steering of funds towards projects and people who have the ear 

of the government of the day, I see no conclusive evidence to 

suggest that a government lending institution is a good vehicle 

through which to finance private enterprise. 

 

The main problem, which government appears to be ignoring, 

is how to bring lenders and borrowers to the table with a view 

to making a deal that is conducive to new business start-up and 

expansion of existing firms with potential, even during tough, 

very difficult economic times. 

 

The fact is that banks are in a position of power and as part of 

their responsibility to their shareholders they make decisions to 

expand or to reduce the size of their portfolios in various 

sectors, depending upon market conditions. 

 

During times of strong economic activity, businesses are 

welcomed with open arms by lending institution managers 

wearing their lending hats.  Then when a downturn in the 

economy is experienced, entrepreneurs face lending institution 

managers who then put on their collector's hat, which creates a 

vacuum in capital for the business community as lending 

institutions tighten up criteria, call loans, and even in some 

cases refuse to renew mortgages or loan arrangements. 

 

That is truly the serious problem faced by business.  It is a lack 

of stability, a lack of consistency in the lending criteria between 

strong and weak economic cycles, which makes it difficult to 

establish and maintain long-range plans for investment. 

 

When a decision is made by government at the provincial level 

to attempt to stimulate business investment through its own 

lending institution, we have not only established another 

expensive bureaucracy which lends itself to political 

interference, we enter the realm of financiering which, based on 

the track record of governments in general, would not appear to 

be something that governments are very good at. 

 

The historical picture of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) in Saskatchewan is not a pretty one.  

Established with very good intentions, the cumulative losses of 

SEDCO since its inception has been quite overwhelming.  The 

projects invested in encompass some success stories -- and no 

one would argue with that -- but the list of losers is far longer 

and far more expensive. 

 

There has been sufficient time spent in the legislature talking 

about the failures but perhaps not enough time spent on a 

detailed analysis of why SEDCO failed, 

apart from the obvious reasons of financing patronage deals 

and perhaps government trying to pick winners. 

 

I contend that it is not going to make much difference to 

change the name from SEDCO to SOC Co or Sask Op, or what 

ever acronym it is to be known by.  It could simply mean 

changing the name under which bad processes are administered 

and questionable deals can be made.  Therefore it is critical that 

the new corporation being established will operate in a 

substantively different way. 

 

The legislation that we are discussing is designed to, and I 

quote: create, encourage, and facilitate business opportunities.  

Although I believe that to be an admirable objective, I have no 

greater confidence in SOP Co that it will be any more efficient 

or effective at meeting all of these different kinds of goals and 

objectives than SEDCO was. 

 

The other objectives of SOP Co are to provided financial 

assistance, to provide management services to client 

companies, to provide counselling and training, and to provide 

information and advice.  And I believe that the government 

may be missing the point, missing the point about what the true 

deficiencies are in the world of business today.  Most business 

people are not suffering from a shortage of access to 

management services.  They aren't suffering from access to 

counselling, to training, or particularly government information 

and advice. 

 

One common thread that has run through my discussions with 

people in the investment community and the business 

community is that the one thing lacking is access to capital 

from major lending institutions.  The Bill indicates an intention 

to have SOP Co work with conventional lenders.  The question 

we must ask is this, Mr. Speaker: how much of the other 

services I mentioned above are really necessary for the 

government to be providing at all; or, does the government 

have any particular expertise in these areas, based on its 

previous track record?  Do we want to repeat or prevent a 

fiasco?  Does that possibility exist? 

 

I believe that in its haste to eliminate SEDCO from the minds 

and memories of Saskatchewan people, the government has 

spent time planning what it wants SOP Co to do but has given 

very little detailed consideration as to how it can accomplish 

those ends. 

 

In examining the legislation, we find that it continues to allow 

for equity investments in companies, loans to companies, and 

guarantees debt replacement by business to conventional 

lenders.  The legislation, similar to what was undertaken by 

SEDCO, allows for the Opportunities Corporation to engage in 

joint ventures, to form and manage investment pools, and 

borrow money to buy property. 

 

We believe that there is something missing in all of this.  We 

believe that what is missing from the goals and objectives is 

some tie -- a tie between the financing and the actual creation 

of new jobs. 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

To date, the government's economic strategy has targeted some 

subsectors, some subsectors that it says should be the focus of 

economic development.  But the limited capitalization of SOC 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) or SOP Co, 

whatever it will be called, which is only 25 per cent of what 

was available to SEDCO, does not seem to be targeted at 

development of any specific sectors of the economy. 

 

One has to question, Mr. Speaker, how the government intends 

to ensure that money is not simply just spread around on a 

broad-scale basis, but that it is applied according to concise 

criteria which will target growth sectors and channel resources 

into them. 

 

Saskatchewan people have watched hundreds of millions of tax 

dollars being literally vacuumed out of the economic drain, 

through an economic drain of SEDCO.  It is critical that there 

be tangible goals identified, specifically outlined, and 

discussed, to ensure that this new corporation is identifiably 

different from SEDCO, with improved project selection criteria 

and obviously far better control. 

 

There are some aspects of the Bill that I think are very 

interesting.  The legislation fixes an upper limit of 

capitalization at $100 million while SEDCO was set at $400 

million.  I fully concur that SEDCO was empowered to lose too 

much money.  Are we saying by capitalizing SOP Co at $6 

million initially with an upper limit of $100 million, that the 

government is not prepared to lose as much?  Or is there reason 

to believe that this will not be a losing venture at all? 

 

I believe there is some opportunity here, an opportunity for 

change, given that the annual budget allocation will be debated 

and approved in this House.  I hope this will include an 

assessment of the targeted sectors and the plans to concentrate 

specific envelopes of funding to specific growth sectors. 

 

The time is past when we can have bureaucrats giving money 

to the people with the most pull or the shiniest presentation.  

Government does not belong in the banking business, and it is 

time that we developed a process by which we can direct what 

money is available for economic development and put it in the 

hands of the professionals. 

 

I'm concerned about the broadness of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, at a time when we have to be specific.  I'm concerned 

about the fact that this Bill, like the Partnership for Renewal 

document, fails to provide any specific analysis of what will be 

accomplished, how it will be accomplished, and how those 

accomplishments, or lack thereof, will be measured. 

 

I am not certain that we should be creating another potential, 

almost guaranteed liability for Saskatchewan taxpayers if the 

government is either unwilling or, worse yet, unable to define 

where the money will go and why it is going there.  For 

instance, will the objectives of SOP Co be to create jobs?  Or is 

it designed to invest in the jobless recovery?  Are there tangible 

levels of profit or rates of return that SOP Co 

plans to make?  Why wouldn't this Bill be tabled with a 

proposed budget? 

 

The government should never permit -- at least I would hope it 

would never permit -- SEDCO or SOP Co to lend money to a 

business person without a financial projection, without a 

specific business plan, without a marketing strategy, and a 

summary of the track record as well as the qualifications of that 

particular individual or the principals in the proposed deal. 

 

But unfortunately, what we're seeing is we're seeing that this 

government sits, and it sits holding onto the public purse 

possessively, resentful of suggestions that maybe they should 

put forward a grown-up plan of how SOP Co will operate, what 

it plans to achieve -- and I mean exactly what it plans to 

achieve -- and in what sectors it sees the need for greater 

investment support. 

 

(1545) 

 

For my money, some of which is in that public purse, I don't 

know why we would approve of this Bill until the government 

has clearly laid out an investment strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan, put forward project selection criteria, and 

indicated that there will be better control on this pet project 

than there was on SEDCO, who was indeed its parent. 

 

The promotional literature provided by the Minister of 

Economic Development indicates that the mandate of SOP Co 

will be to assume, and I quote directly, Mr. Speaker:  to assume 

a proactive role in attracting new businesses to Saskatchewan 

where financing would help to facilitate the transaction.  End of 

quote. 

 

I think that the time has come to move away from simply 

stating a mandate and assuming the goals will be met.  What 

has become painfully obvious is that governments across the 

country and including our own, can talk a great deal about what 

ought to happen, what they would like to see happen, but they 

haven't had much success at making it happen. 

 

I would be very interested indeed in knowing just how the 

minister can explain what it is about SOP Co or Sask Op -- I 

keep wondering what the acronym will be -- that will ensure 

that results will be different.  There seems to be in the proposed 

budget a fair amount of money targeted at write-offs and 

write-downs for losing investments. 

 

The question begs is why the corporation would be 

experiencing these levels of losses if there have been 

significant changes to the way that Sask Op will operate. 

 

On balance, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see SEDCO being 

wound down, but I'm not particularly inspired for the plans of 

Sask Op, that it will make a very meaningful contribution to 

economic growth and development in our province.  There 

doesn't seem to be much contained in the proposal which 

inspires people in the business and investment communities in 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

Saskatchewan with whom I've spoken. 

 

I do hope indeed for the sake of our province and the need that 

we have for significant economic growth in the province that if 

this comes forward it will be successful.  What I would like to 

see however is greater specificity put forward by the Minister 

of Economic Development, particularly with the things that 

they're trying to achieve and some built-in measurability to 

ensure that it will happen. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

comments are going to be very brief this afternoon on this 

particular Bill, and once I've concluded my remarks it's my 

intention that this Bill should proceed to the committee stage. 

 

There's a number of questions I think that are best answered in 

committee, Mr. Speaker, but I am a little perplexed in preparing 

myself today for this discussion on this Bill.  The minister has 

said, you know, SEDCO has to be changed because -- and I 

look at some of the words that he uses here -- is that it's lost its 

credibility; it's ripe with political influence; it's loan criteria are 

too loose; too risky; too extravagant; corporation needs to be 

reformed from top to bottom.  In other words the entire format 

of the institution has to be changed. 

 

I've heard these things about SEDCO, Mr. Speaker.  Being a 

former minister you always hear criticism, and I don't doubt for 

a minute that you can always do things better, but it's 

interesting to look at other members of the government.  And 

they tell us yesterday in debate, private members' Bills here, 

that the best place to get consensus is in caucus, and then after 

you get caucus consensus you come into the House. 

 

And in reviewing verbatim on this particular issue in this 

session, I'm wondering if the Minister of Economic 

Development has been attending caucus meetings.  And I'd just 

like to quote a couple of excerpts from speeches made by other 

members of the NDP government.  And I would refer you, Mr. 

Speaker, to the member from Kinistino who was talking in 

regards to this Bill and he says, and I quote: 

 

 I want to say that the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker . . . in the past . . . has brought 

tremendous benefits to the Saskatchewan economy and has 

expanded the economic base of this province immensely.  

Yes, there was some problems with the institution. But I 

would suggest to the members of the legislature and to the 

business people in Saskatchewan that the benefits far 

outweigh the downside. 

 

And the same member, the member from Kinistino, goes on to 

say: 

 

 We are putting the priority on small and medium-sized 

businesses in Saskatchewan, 

and this corporation is going to deliver on that promise . . . 

 

Interesting comments, Mr. Speaker, when you understand the 

minister's desire to change this corporation entirely. 

 

And the member went on to say: 

 

 . . . this corporation will also take an active role in promoting 

economic development by seeking loan and investment 

syndication with private sector financial institutions and 

venture capital funds to share the risks . . . 

 

So obviously the member from Kinistino is envisioning quite a 

wide mandate for this particular entity. 

 

The member from Athabasca, during the same debate, said: 

 

 The key industry areas are agriculture, value added 

production in forestry, minerals, energy, tourism and 

information processing and communications. 

 

The only thing that I miss here, Mr. Speaker, was the kitchen 

sink.  And I think the member from Athabasca appreciates that 

over time, SEDCO has indeed participated in all of these areas 

and done so with a fair degree of success. 

 

The member went on to say: 

 

 All projects will be subject to commercial viability analysis 

before economic development benefits are considered. 

 

Well I think that member recognized, Mr. Speaker, that 

SEDCO has always had very competent people in its employ, 

and that they've always put the test as best to their ability that 

they could to any of these projects which were anticipated. 

 

And also, the member from Prince Albert Carlton, in the same 

debate to the Assembly, expects a lot out of this institution 

because he says: 

 

 I believe that this Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

which is formed by this Act will form a very important part 

of the Saskatchewan government economic policy because 

what it will do is it will be able to provide money to those 

businesses or corporations or enterprises which are 

developing which are unable to get money otherwise . . . 

 

Well one of the criticisms that the minister brings to the House 

of the old SEDCO was that it should no longer be the lender of 

last resort in the province of Saskatchewan.  Obviously the 

member from Saskatoon Carlton has a different view of that 

because he said that in this session of the House and debate in 

this Bill. 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

So I've got three members of the government caucus, three 

back-benchers, Mr. Speaker, all talking about their vision of 

what son of SEDCO will look like. And what son of SEDCO 

looks like, according to the member from Athabasca and the 

member from Kinistino and the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton, is much what it looks like today -- a corporation that 

has tried to be the lender of last resort, which has helped 

small-business people all over the province of Saskatchewan.  

And I've had reams of statistics here, Mr. Speaker, to show that 

in most cases it has been pretty successful. 

 

Now when you stack that up against what the minister has to 

say, it really makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, about this 

consultative process that they do in the NDP caucus.  And it 

makes me wonder why the opposition members should agree 

with the Bill being brought forward.  And obviously, a great 

number of the government's own back-benchers don't agree 

with it being brought forward.  It's very difficult for me to 

make these things square themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway, we'll get into third reading, and we'll get some of 

these answers, we hope, from the minister and his officials.  

And in particular, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that we 

talk about the employees of the current Crown corporation and 

what the future entails for those employees -- how they're going 

to be treated, and are those people that currently work for 

SEDCO going to work for the new entity? 

 

Or if they are not, are they going to work somewhere else?  

What provisions are going to be in place for those employees?  

Will there be early retirement.  Will there be severance 

packages?  What are the prospects of the people that currently 

are employed there? 

 

And the best place to answer those questions, Mr. Speaker, is in 

committee.  So at this time I have no further comment and 

would expect this Bill to move to third reading stage. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 20 -- An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again my 

comments will be very brief, and at the conclusion I fully 

expect this Bill to move into the committee stage. 

 

There's a number of technical matters dealing with RMs in this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker.  The main areas dealt with are parking 

enforcement, changes to how petitions are dealt with, and of 

course property assessment.  These have come forward at the 

request of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), and rightly so.  The government has 

attempted to respond to the Bills. 

 

The most contentious area is obviously the area of property 

assessment.  The Bill temporarily limits the use of 

income-based assessment, i.e., assessing taxes on the basis of 

the income-generating potential of the property instead of the 

land's market value. 

 

Now commercial property owners, Mr. Speaker, are anxious 

that income-based assessment begin immediately, and have 

expressed dissatisfaction to the opposition over this, the fact 

that it isn't covered in the Bill. 

 

It's our understanding that SUMA does not necessarily oppose 

income-based assessment but simply wants to implement it 

properly.  And given the dramatic change, Mr. Speaker, this 

system would have on municipalities' ability to tax, this is 

probably reasonable.  But property owners, Mr. Speaker, view 

it as a delaying tactic that will have a negative impact on the 

economy. 

 

There are obviously arguments, Mr. Speaker, on both sides of 

this issue.  Income assessment would essentially amount to a 

blanket tax concession for all commercial property owners, 

which probably would benefit the economy; however it is 

questionable whether the municipalities can afford tax 

concessions of this scope at this time. 

 

The important thing that this Bill would achieve is a balance of 

those two views.  And we will want to examine the Bill more 

closely in committee, Mr. Speaker, in Committee of the Whole, 

to make sure that that balance is achieved. 

 

There is the question of petitioning, Mr. Speaker, which also 

needs to be addressed.  Does the new petitioning structure 

inhibit municipalities in the way that their democratic process 

is presently conducted?  As you know, petitioning is something 

that's done on almost a weekly basis in many of our urban 

settings particularly in the province, and those questions are 

best dealt with in Committee of the Whole. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I conclude my remarks and have 

the Bill move forward. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

introduce to the Assembly this afternoon and ask members to 

join with me in welcoming a very good friend, Homer Beach.  

He's from the co-op farm at Ernfold.  He was a companion of 

mine on a trip to 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

China in 1980 on the first Canada-Chinese farmers exchange, 

and is today, this year again, hosting friends from China. 

 

Ren Zhi Hua is with him on the farm for the next six weeks.  

And with them is He Kong Fang who is in the Whitewood area 

right now.  They both come from the Dong Xing state farm 

near Lian Yun Gang city in Ziang Su province. 

 

I want to say that the relationships between Canada and China 

have been much enhanced by the regular exchange of farm 

people from China, from the People's Republic of China to 

Saskatchewan, and the experience that many of us have had 

visiting your country.  Welcome to the legislature.  Welcome to 

Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 67 -- An Act to 

amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to 

allow this Bill to move to committee.  I'm just going to make 

some observations, however. 

 

The Bill deals basically with changing and adding on some 

opportunities to be made available to Crown Investments 

Corporation so that they can use indemnities as an additional 

tool for negotiating with some acquisitions in Crown 

corporations, I assume. 

 

The minister made an observation about a definition of 

indemnity as: a person or entity providing the indemnity 

commits to make good on the losses that might be suffered by 

another person or entity as a result of participating in a business 

deal or transaction.  And he also makes an indication that this is 

a technical amendment. 

 

And we will be asking a number of questions in relation to that, 

Mr. Minister, and it deals with two specific items.  I guess one 

question that I would have is the definition of indemnity has a 

number of definitions, Mr. Speaker, and so I'm going to be 

asking questions about the specifics of the definition of the 

word "indemnity" because it means, not conflicting things, but 

it has different meanings.  And I'm going to be asking the 

minister those questions. 

 

With that, we will allow this to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- As the last time that this department's estimates 

was before the committee was March 28, I will ask that the 

minister reintroduce her officials to the members of the 

committee and then we'll proceed from there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Beside me is our deputy minister, 

Arleen Hynd; directly behind me is the assistant deputy 

minister, Ken Horsman; beside Mr. Horsman is Michael 

Littlewood; and beside Michael Littlewood is Gerry Sing Chin. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  

Madam Minister, and officials, welcome today.  Madam 

Minister, in the Estimates book it shows that teachers' pensions 

and benefits increased from 119 million in '93-94 to a projected 

145 million in 1994-95.  Would you mind explaining why such 

a dramatic increase?  It was one of the few areas in the 

Education budget that did receive an increase. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The major reason for that increase is 

because the new collective agreement requires that all interest 

earnings remain in the fund as of July 1 of last year.  And as 

you may know, past administrations had the habit of taking 

interest out of the fund and using it in general revenues, and we 

put an end to that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  One of the 

other ministers was wanting to take credit for that increase, in 

claiming that his teachers' pension had gone up by that amount. 

 

Madam Minister, when you say that other administrations had 

not provided that interest to remain in the pension plan, I think 

if you look back over the history of the teachers' pension plan 

that governments, from it's inception in about 1935, have not 

placed the money at all in the teachers' pension plan, but rather 

it went into the Consolidated Fund and then money was 

allocated again from taxes at a later date to pay those pension 

plans. 

 

And it was the previous administration that changed that so that 

the funds from the teachers' pension plan did indeed stay in the 

teachers' pension plan.  So the major change in this actually 

occurred in the previous administration's time in office rather 

than simply in your time of office, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, in the Estimates under item no. 2, it shows 

accommodation and central services will be allocated $3.7 

million.  Could you explain what those are for?  It simply 

seems here that it's a transfer of funds from the Education 

department to other departments in government.  It's simply a 

paper transfer of money from one pile in government to another 

pile in 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

government and, at the end of the day, government still has the 

same amount of money but Education is billed for it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- This provides for payments to SPMC, 

or Sask Property Management Corporation. 

 

You're accurate.  Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation is a Crown corporation that was set up under your 

administration.  They charged back accommodations and 

repairs, maintenance, those kinds of things to various 

government departments.  There's no change there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So while 

it shows up as an expense to Education, it's simply a transfer, 

an internal transfer within government and therefore it doesn't 

necessarily give an accurate account of the expenses to 

Education. 

 

We see that also happening in another area of the budget where 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology is 

paying Sask Property Management Corporation $14 

million-plus.  What are those for, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- It's the same thing.  It's for 

accommodation.  It's space rental. It also would include mail 

services, that kind of thing.  This is not new. 

 

In terms of . . . just going back to your first question on SPMC, 

the accommodation is provided to the department for the 

department, including the Book Bureau, the correspondence 

school, the Teachers' Superannuation Commission, NORTEP 

(northern teacher education program), northern division, and all 

regional offices.  There are mail services provided. There is a 

records management services provided. 

 

So I guess the point I'm trying to make is that SPMC provides 

accommodation or space rental as well as services to various 

agencies like SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) and to the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. I notice in 

this particular item that the cost to the Department of Education 

has gone up by better than $800,000.  Is there any particular 

reason why that has increased, or is that simply funnelling 

Department of Education money over to SPMC so that SPMC 

can make a better profit and then turn around and provide that 

back to the government to make the government's balance sheet 

look slightly better at the expense of education? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Our acting executive director of finance 

is on leave right now and we don't have that particular answer 

to that question in our book.  And I assure you, member, we 

will get the rationale and reason for your question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It's a 

concern of ours that SPMC is one of the avenues by which the 

government can take monies out of 

departments, turn around and put it into CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation) into the Crown corporations through 

dividends paid by SPMC, and then turn around and that money 

is funnelled back into the government as a dividend to try and 

make the government's books look better. 

 

But all it is is taking, as an example was given to us, grain out 

of one bin and put it into another to make one bin look full.  

You end up at the end of the day with the same amount of 

grain, but it makes it look like you've done a good job in one 

particular area because your bin is full, but the grain has just 

been simply transferred from one bin to another. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think it's very important that the public 

sees that they're actually receiving a value for their dollars 

when funds are transferred from one government department to 

another government department, and it's simply not a matter of 

shuffling money to make CIC look like it's making a profit that 

can then in turn pay a dividend to the province. 

 

Madam Minister, capital operations, capital grants to the 

schools, school spending on construction, we talked about 

earlier, and you gave me a sheet that explained the criteria of 

this.  But when a capital project is developed, when a capital 

project is approved in a school division, do the other school 

divisions that may have applied for a capital grant receive an 

indication as to why school A received approval and school B 

did not? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- No.  We have a priorized list, which I 

understand people would have access to.  And it would be 

based on the factors that I gave you.  We have changed the 

process so that it is seen, and is, a fair process, and it's not 

subject to some MLA wanting to get a repair or capital 

construction done in their constituency when there may be 

pressing needs elsewhere.  So we'll continue to follow that 

procedure. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Could you 

provide us with that priorized list? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I can't provide it to you yet because 

they're still working on it, but I will provide it to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Since I 

have never seen one of these priorized lists, I'm not sure what 

to expect on it.  Now will it have the name of the school, etc.?  

And because you're priorizing it and  because you have a set of 

criteria set out here, how do you measure that?  Do you give it 

a rating, a score of one to ten in certain areas, so that you can 

add it up at the end of the day and say, this school has a higher 

priority than the other school has?  Is there a rating system such 

as that, and will it be on this list? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The way the process works is that each 

year, after cabinet finalization and after the budget is presented 

in the legislature, there's so many dollars that are given to, 

quote, capital construction. 

 

There are two schools that are being built in this 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

province, one in Saskatoon and one in Regina; two high 

schools, St. Joseph's in Saskatoon and the north-west high 

school in Regina.  There aren't plans for, quote, new school 

construction.  And because we have very little money because 

of our deficit reduction plan, in the area of capital, really the 

only projects that are going to be funded are those that have 

occupational health and safety issues associated with them, and 

they will be funded on a priority basis.  I've given you the 

criteria and I will give you the list once we have completed that 

list. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You see, 

the problem that arises here and your examples of the two high 

schools that are about to be built are Regina and Saskatoon, the 

two major cities of which most of the MLAs from those two 

areas come from are all in the government side, other than one 

MLA.  And so people in the rest of the province say, well how 

come Regina and Saskatoon got their school capital projects 

approved and nobody else did? 

 

I think it's very important that the public, that the people at 

large have the opportunity to see this list and to understand how 

the priorization is made.  Why did school A have, say, 89 

points, and school B only had 70; and therefore school B is 

lower on the list than school A? 

 

Is there an appeal mechanism in place that schools can find out, 

well we didn't get our capital project approved because of this 

reason?  And perhaps the people who are judging this -- 

because it says department officials will review -- perhaps there 

is some particular reason that the department officials may not 

have known about or may not have placed enough priority on, 

that their school did not receive approval. 

 

So people need to know how that approval mechanism works 

and how the points, if there is a point system, how they're 

awarded to a particular item as opposed to not being awarded. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- You may know that Saskatoon and 

Regina school populations are growing, whereas in other areas 

school populations are declining. So that's one issue.  Secondly, 

those schools were given their approval last year.  The 

department has developed new criteria for this year. 

 

And in terms of the appeal process, obviously if the department 

isn't aware of certain factors, then those school divisions need 

to have those factors let known to the people in the facilities 

branch of the Department of Education, and certainly we would 

look into any errors we might have made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

also notice that there's capital construction programs available 

for the regional colleges and post-secondary education.  Do 

they have to meet the same sort of criteria as the K to 12 

system? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Once again those, the capital projects 

that are being funded are for health and safety 

issues.  We're not talking about a new College of Agriculture.  

We're not doing that.  We're just talking about repairing 

buildings that are ageing and that are having difficulty meeting 

health and safety standards. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister.  As 

you're aware, there's concern in the Kindersley School Division 

with respect to the changes in the school division boundaries 

there.  And I'm wondering if you could provide me with some 

update from your department with respect to that.  There's a lot 

of concern about the representation of the rural areas compared 

to the town of Kindersley, and I wonder if you have some 

information on it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We've had the regional director in the 

area talking to people.  The concerns have been noted and there 

will be a decision, I understand, made shortly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, at the annual meeting held on 

March 28 in Marengo, a chairman was appointed from the 

floor, however a recording secretary was not appointed.  The 

secretary-treasurer of the Kindersley School Division 

volunteered to take notes of the meeting.  Throughout the 

course of the evening . . . throughout the course of the meeting 

several motions were put forth and passed.  The day after the 

meeting, however, the people in the area out there were 

informed that the motions made were not valid because there 

was no recording secretary and no minutes. 

 

The taxpayers feel that they were not informed properly of 

governmental procedures.  And why, if this was the case, were 

they not allowed to carry on and make resolutions?  It 

obviously will have no bearing on future decisions made by the 

division board.  In the eyes of the Department of Education, did 

they indeed conduct an annual meeting, or didn't they? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The Education Act doesn't set out in 

legislation how local school divisions run their meetings.  So 

I'm not in a position to I suppose respond in any kind of 

authoritative way to your question.  But certainly our regional 

director has been out to the Kindersley School Division.  We 

are aware of the circumstances surrounding that meeting and 

obviously we will be weighing all of the factors in arriving at 

what will eventually be my decision. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  At what point does 

the financial information within a school division become 

unavailable to the public?  They have recently had two 

inquiries to the unit office requesting a salary breakdown for 

the director of Education -- one request from a taxpayer, the 

second from a local school board, of which both were refused.  

Is there a reason why this information should be withheld from 

the public?  And if so, what is that reason? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- School divisions are required to report 

their minutes of meetings.  They're required to issue annually a 

public account of how they spend their funds.  And once their 

budget is set, they're required to have that available to the 

public as well. 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does that include a breakdown of salaries of all 

people, or just a global figure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Presently they're not required to 

provide a breakdown of individual salaries.  But that will 

happen under the local authority freedom of information Act.  

And we anticipate that that Act will be proclaimed later this 

year, and all school divisions will have to make public the same 

kind of information that our legislature requires be made public 

when it comes to public accounts. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would it be 

considered ethical for certain members of the division board to 

meet with individuals or a group of people regarding school 

division issues without notifying some of the board members of 

the meeting? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Once again I'm not in a position in any 

authoritative way to have an opinion on this, because it's up to 

local decision makers how they choose to organize their 

meetings and conduct their meetings. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, I remind you, you are the 

final authority in these things.  You're the Minister of 

Education for the province of Saskatchewan, at least for the 

time being.  And for that reason, it seems to me that you should 

be able to address these people's concerns. 

 

To just say that you're not in an authoritative position I don't 

think is good enough.  Because I think they believe you are in 

an authoritative position to make the decision and so does the 

member from Rosthern -- agrees with me when I say that -- that 

he thinks you're in that position to make those kinds of 

decisions, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the process to be followed in 

revealing to the Minister of Education that the school division 

is operating with a dysfunctional board and that we no longer 

have any confidence in our director of education and are 

requesting that the minister appoint a person or persons to carry 

out an internal inquiry into the operations and decisions made 

within this unit at the board level? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Just for clarification, what I mean by 

any authoritative way is I don't have the legislative authority 

that you want me to have; The Education Act does not give me 

that authority.  The Education Act certainly gives me authority 

to deal with the issue of subdivisions and of trustees coming 

from a particular subdivision.  I do have authority there, but I 

don't have any legislative authority to address the issue that you 

previously referred to. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, what advice then would you 

give to these people that seem to have an obvious concern with 

respect to changes in the division board boundaries out there? 

 

I've attended a couple of meetings out there.  There's great 

concern about it, Madam Minister.  I'm sure you 

and your department officials are aware of it.  What advice 

would you give these people to deal with this situation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I think you're reading from the contents 

of a letter that I received as well.  When people are unhappy 

with their local trustees, they will have an opportunity in 

October of this fall, or October 1994, to change the division 

board.  I mean that is the democratic process. 

 

And obviously the people in the Eatonia area have a difference 

of opinion with some members on the Kindersley School 

Division board.  The issue is now in my office, or is coming to 

my office, and I will have ultimately the authority to make a 

decision based on the weighing of all of the factors.  And I've 

had a number of letters from people living in the Eatonia area.  

As well, I've had many letters from people living in the 

Kindersley town, town of Kindersley, who have a different 

view on the issue. 

 

So it's a matter of in the most logical, fair, and rational way that 

I can muster, I have to make a decision.  And while I know it's 

important to you, sir, there are some things that have gone on 

that I have no authority in legislation to even respond to.  The 

issue of how many people will represent . . . how many trustees 

will be represented in the area of Eatonia I do have some 

authority to respond to, and I will be responding in due course. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well what criteria will you be using in your 

decision making, Madam Minister?  You know, I don't know 

what the proposal is.  I guess there's some indication of how 

they wanted . . . the Kindersley school board wants to change 

it.  Are you going to be using strictly taxpayer numbers, voters, 

general population, or what kind of criteria will you use to 

make that decision with? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well your colleague and I had an earlier 

discussion about . . . we were talking about amalgamation of 

school divisions, the voluntary amalgamation, and how we 

arrive at the number of trustees that would represent a rural 

area and an urban area.  And he was concerned about the 

possibility of school divisions being heavily weighted when it 

comes to elections, in terms of urban Saskatchewan and not 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As someone who comes from rural Saskatchewan, I understand 

what the people in Eatonia are struggling with.  On the other 

hand, historically we have not had in this province, 

representation based on wealth.  We have tried to do a 

balancing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . wealth.  What we've 

tried to do is have a balancing act so that we recognize that 

there are population shifts, but we also recognize that there are 

people who pay a great deal of taxes that need to be represented 

as well. 

 

(1630) 

 

So I'm going to try, in the fairest way I can muster, to balance 

the need to be represented, not necessarily 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

based on wealth, but based on the need to be represented and 

some of the issues, you know, that the people in Kindersley 

have about population.  So I'm going to try and balance those 

two competing factors in the fairest way that I know how. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think they have more, though.  Mr. 

Chairman, I move the Committee of Finance move to 

consideration of the estimates for Highways. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: -- The last time that the Department of Highways 

and Transportation was before the committee was March 21, 

and I'll ask the Minister of Highways and Transportation to 

reintroduce his officials to members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Sitting to my 

immediate left is Mr. Clare Kirkland, deputy minister of 

Highways; Mr. Don Metz, assistant deputy minister of 

Highways; and Mr. Don Zerr, director of human resources, 

sitting back here; and Mr. Brian Woods, also of the Department 

of Highways. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before we get 

into the process of allowing all of this money to be spent for the 

Department of Highways, we have a few questions.  And I 

want to welcome you, Minister, and your assistants and helpers 

there.  Good to see you all again in the process of discussing 

our provincial highways. 

 

Since we've met last, we've had some happenings in the 

province that I think we need to talk about.  No question, 

Minister, you are aware of the fact that the mayor of Regina has 

joined with his colleagues along No. 1 Highway in a call to you 

and your government and anybody else that needs to be called 

upon, to do something about improving the conditions of No. 1 

Highway through our province. 

 

There are of course vested economic interests that are at stake 

for these folks, but we're happy to have them onside with those 

of us who have been asking for these things to be done for a 

long time. 

 

I want to just refresh your memory and reiterate for the folks 

back home that we have been calling for the double-laning and 

fixing up of No. 1 Highway for a very long time.  There are a 

lot of really good reasons why the highway should be 

double-laned and improved.  We've got a terrible accident rate 

on some of those roads.  We now have bumps on the roads so 

bad that in fact when the trucks drive down the roads, if things 

aren't tied down they bounce off. 

 

I can attest to this having happened to myself here just two 

weeks ago, coming into the city.  A piece of iron laying on the 

highway had jumped off of a truck on a 

very bumpy stretch of road.  I was unable to miss it, hit it with 

my car; blew the front tire off my car.  I could very easily 

probably have been killed, but the guy behind was kind enough 

to slow down and not run over me.  It's not the fault of the 

drivers though and I don't really blame the truckers that are 

losing this stuff on the road.  We just simply have got too many 

bumps on our roads and we've got to start improving some of 

them. 

 

So we want you to know that we join with the mayors who are 

asking for these improvements along our No. 1 Highway.  We 

definitely need to have some concentrated effort in that area.  

Some of us staked our political careers on getting some 

improvements to our highway system, at least in some small 

measure, because one of the things that I campaigned on when 

I was elected was the fact that I would work very hard and very 

diligently -- in fact I made the statement to some people that I 

would not rest until we got some improvements to No. 1 

Highway and got some double-laning done. 

 

Now we have Alberta having finished the road up to the border, 

and we certainly need now to continue that program.  I am not 

getting very much rest, having made that statement almost 

three years ago now that I wouldn't rest until you folks or the 

government in power at least improved the highway. 

 

So we want you to know how dedicated and committed we are 

to this process and to this program.  So, Minister, having said 

those things and reminded you about the problems, have you 

any consideration now to spend some money and to start 

working on No. 1 Highway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, through Mr. Chairman to the 

member from Maple Creek.  No. 1 Highway of course -- and 

I've told you this before -- is a priority with this government.  

We understand the concerns you have and we understand the 

concerns that the mayors along No. l have. 

 

And it's good to see that the mayors have joined together 

because I think now they will join with us in talking to the 

federal government about the need for a national highways 

program.  The reason of course No. 16 or the Yellowhead has 

preceded No. 1 in twinning is, of course you will realize, it has 

more traffic at this point in time.  No. 16 has an average daily 

traffic count of over 3,500 vehicles per day while No. 1 has an 

average daily traffic count of 2,400. 

 

There have been 12 fatalities, 1988 to 1991, on that section that 

we're twinning on No. 16, and there were 4 fatalities on No. 1.  

The cost of this twinning program, as you will realize, is $32 

million for the 108 kilometres that remain from Gull Lake to 

the Alberta border.  So it's a considerable amount of money and 

we would certainly enjoy to have federal support under a 

national highways program. 

 

In Canada, as you might be aware, the federal government 

contributes only approximately 6 per cent to the national 

highway system or network. 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

That's the lowest in all the industrial countries.  The United 

States is next lowest at 38 per cent.  So I welcome the news of 

the mayors getting together and forming an association or 

group.  They will be able to help us in talking with the federal 

government and lobbying the federal government for more help 

on our national highways network. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I too 

would like to welcome you here with your officials.  I have the 

pleasure of knowing one of your officials on a quite long-term 

basis. 

 

Mr. Minister, I talked about these problems with your 

predecessor and what I'm talking about is Highway 31, which 

runs between Kerrobert and Macklin.  What has happened 

there, your people have started that highway and your 

predecessor, who is now the Minister of Agriculture, told us 

that they weren't going to do anything on that highway. 

 

Now that highway has got a lot of the surface exposed -- there's 

some of it not even finished -- and the program that we had in 

place when you took over, when your government took over, 

was to do a portion each year until it was finished.  And that 

was acceptable to the people in the area and it was acceptable 

to my government because we understand that you can't do 

everything for everyone all at once. 

 

What I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, is if you don't fix that, 

finish that portion of the highway that is exposed, you will run 

the risk of doing exactly what you did, or one of your 

governments did, on Highway 14.  When the Liberal 

government was in power, they built about 18 miles of highway 

out west of Unity on Highway 14.  When your government 

came to power, they wouldn't finish it.  When the PCs 

(Progressive Conservatives) came back in power, they finished 

that, but they had to do the whole subgrade again because it 

was destroyed never having been finished. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, with all respect that you are 

making a mistake if you don't finish that road.  Not because it's 

in my constituency so much as it don't make good economic 

sense to let that road that you've partially built go to ruin. 

 

I also suggest that you should talk to your deputy minister, who 

is familiar with that area, and he will tell you that that road is a 

very, very necessary piece of highway.  It opens up some area 

that if you was to drive through that, Mr. Minister, for the same 

reason that I'm asking you to take a look at 317, which runs 

south from Highway 31 and it goes down to Highway 51.  That 

goes through an area, Mr. Minister, that if you haven't been 

through it you would not believe the conditions that those roads 

are in.  Highway 317 is not even as good a road as the grid 

roads that are in the area.  And your deputy minister was on it 

on a trip with the previous minister, and he will attest to that. 

 

When we asked for some help, your predecessor said there was 

no money, which is, I believe, becoming your battle cry.  But 

not too long after, there was a fuss up around Prince Albert 

about some bus routes and  

you found a whole bunch of money to do a bunch of gravelling 

up there after telling us there was no money.  So I think your 

argument rings hollow sometimes. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you today if you and your 

deputy minister, if nothing else, send someone out to view the 

conditions that I'm speaking about and verify for yourself that 

317 is a disgrace and No. 31 is going to cost you a lot more 

money or some government a lot more money to fix it up if you 

allow that to disintegrate.  And I ask you in all sincerity, sir, 

please go and do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  I'm sure the member from Wilkie, if he'd just talk to 

his colleagues, knows that this same problem exists in many 

areas of the province.  This year, or last fall we had a lot of 

moisture, unusual amounts of moisture.  We had a very cold 

winter, and we have some highway problems this year on roads 

that never had a problem before. 

 

So there are highways all over the province that have similar 

situations, and we're well aware of them, to the member from 

Wilkie. 

 

I guess the member also must realize that in this year's budget 

we have $62 million in reconstruction for highways.  This is 

probably less than has been there in other years primarily 

because we have to pay interest on the debt.  And it would have 

been nice if your government, the previous administration, 

would have thought of that when they were spending a lot of 

money, more money than what they were taking in, in fact.  

Now we have an $855 million interest bill each year.  I could 

twin the highways from Gull Lake to the Alberta border 25 

times if I had that $855 million.  So it certainly would be 

handy, especially on a year like this, where we could put more 

money into reconstruction. 

 

But it's no use to cry over spilled milk, Mr. Member from 

Wilkie.  So we carry on.  We do little by little, as much as we 

can, and we primarily concern . . . concentrate on repairing of 

the roads.  And so this will take time, and we will do the best 

we can with the resources that we have. 

 

And so I guess I just ask all members to be patient.  I want to 

commend the department staff for the excellent job they have 

been doing in repairing the highways of Saskatchewan.  

Because of the conditions, we've also hired private contractors 

to help us in this area, and we will continue to do that as much 

as we can, with the resources that we have. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

can't say that I'm surprised when you talk about the debt. Now 

in the first place you don't recognize the fact that you had $8 

billion -- your government had $8 billion when we took over.  

And that is easy to show; I showed you that many times.  The 

debt now is 22 billion according to the auditor, 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 1994 

and so you tell us that you took over 14 from us. 

 

And you talk about wasting the money.  Well you ask those 

farmers that we help if they feel that that was badly spent.  You 

ask those young people; ask those many young people that 

would have lost their houses if we hadn't have brought the 

twenty-two and a half per cent interest down to thirteen and a 

half per cent.  You talk to them and ask them if they aren't 

prepared to pay the interest on the debt. 

 

Mr. Minister, you accuse us of wasting money, of spending 

money badly.  Well I'm suggesting to you, sir, that if you don't 

finish Highway 31, the portion that is partially done, at least put 

a surface on it, you're doing the same thing.  You're going to 

come back and it's going to cost much more money.  It won't be 

your government, I don't suppose, but the next government will 

have to spend much more money to do it again. 

 

So your own argument I think is in favour of what I'm 

suggesting to you.  I'm not asking you for new highway and 

more highway.  I'm not even asking you for a percentage share 

of the $61 million. 

 

I know what happened two years ago.  You threw a bunch of 

money into repairing Highway 14.  You let the contract stagger 

out until the following year.  And then you went and you fixed 

the road.  And you tried to leave the impression with the people 

out there that you had put in some new money.  And all you did 

was put the money in that should have been spent the year 

before.  So we know the kind of games you can play.  And 

you're not fooling anyone.  But we're not getting the roads 

built. 

 

And I sincerely suggest, sir, that you look at that Highway 31 

or you're going to lose a bunch of money, and the next time 

somebody has to come along and fix it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, through the Chairman to the 

member from Wilkie.  Certainly as I said earlier, we have a lot 

of roads; some of your colleagues will have roads in the same 

situation.  And we are aware of the problem and we will 

continue to repair and to reconstruct as monies are available.  It 

certainly would be nice to do more, but we will do the best we 

can with the resources that we have available. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, there's a saying -- it's either my way or the highway.  

And a couple of your previous ministers have taken the 

highway, and I'm now finding myself taking a look at a third 

minister. 

 

Now I'm going to be talking for the next few moments 

precisely in my constituency and the highway situation in my 

constituency.  And a lot of the questions that I will be asking 

you will be more or less a reaffirmation that you are still on the 

same track as the previous ministers indicated to me in 

previous estimates. 

 

So the first set of questions are going to be relevant to Highway 

No. 11, north of Saskatoon, and specifically 

to the town of Rosthern -- that stretch of road.  Now I know 

that even when we were in government, that stretch of road to 

the people seemed to be an inherently dangerous road with a 

fair number of accidents happening. 

 

And there were town hall meetings where the various 

authorities within those villages and towns along that stretch of 

highway met to discuss the situation.  And certain 

commitments were made by your previous ministers in terms of 

making sure that the highway was indeed as safe as possible. 

 

So I would like you to comment on the current situation, what 

actions have been taken pursuant to those meetings, and what 

you are contemplating in the near future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 

member from Rosthern, I do agree that No. 11, the highway 

from Saskatoon through Rosthern, has had a lot of accidents 

and is a very busy piece of road.  And we are certainly looking 

at that piece of road and it's under consideration. And that's 

about all I can tell you at this time. But it's certainly under 

consideration for improvements. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well that kind of leaves it wide open with no 

time element attached to it and no indication what those 

improvements are that you're contemplating.  Let's take it then 

from the bare bone necessity that you may be contemplating.  

I'd like you to be a little bit more specific -- which area, what 

you're planning on.  And I recognize that that stretch is a very 

busy stretch. 

 

And I know that the Cadillac operation, the ultimate solution 

would be to twin the entire highway, and that probably will not 

be in the cards.  I know that it has been contemplated and 

there's been a lot of surveying done, and in fact a number of 

businesses have been bought up as long as about eight or nine 

years ago; the businesses were purchased already in 

anticipation of twinning of the highway. 

 

So could you bring us up to date, what you and your 

department have in mind in so far as the twinning of the 

highway, and then we'll discuss some of the other measures 

that may be a possibility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

member from Rosthern, I think the colleague from Wilkie put it 

best, is that we can't expect to do everything at once, and I'm 

sure you're aware of that.  So we're contemplating a beginning, 

I guess.  We do realize the concerns there, and hopefully within 

the next year or two that beginning will begin.  And certainly 

No. 11 is under consideration.  And I guess little by little, is 

what I'm telling you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're saying is that the beginning 

will begin in a couple of years.  I know, Mr. Minister, 

everything cannot be done all at one fell swoop, but this 

twinning of that highway has been in the department's 

drawing-board or on the department's drawing-board, I would 

say, for the last 



May 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2427 

10 years minimum.  So it's not doing everything in one fell 

swoop or doing it without having a good, rational approach to it 

that's well planned and well thought out. 

 

So with that comment, I'd like you to be a little bit more 

specific.  Because, Mr. Minister, part of that stretch that we 

have been talking about is already being twinned.  So the 

beginning has begun, in spite of what you just said that it's still 

two years down the road.  And we'll be talking about that in a 

few moments. 

 

First of all, I would like to concentrate on that stretch of road 

north of Warman to Rosthern where the various authorities 

within the towns and RMs wanted to get some kind of response 

and some kind of commitment from the Department of 

Highways that in fact and indeed, they would do these little 

things that would make it safer, like acceleration lanes and 

these types of things.  Not that I'm advocating more caution 

lights and going down to 80 kilometres an hour -- I don't think 

that's necessarily the solution -- but a combination of things. 

 

So what are you prepared to do in the short haul from that point 

of view? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you.  Through the chairman to the 

member from Rosthern, I guess if you listen to the member 

from Wilkie, he has some concerns with highways.  If you ask 

the rest of your colleagues, they have some concerns with 

highways within their constituency.  If you ask every member 

of our caucus, they have some concerns with highways; of the 

Liberal caucus, they have some concerns with highways. 

 

We have only so much money, so we only can do what we can 

do.  We try and priorize it as best we can, based on traffic 

counts, based on fatalities, based on accident rates, looking at 

the economic development, looking at grain movements, 

looking at tourism.  So we have to take all these things into 

consideration.  So I guess what I'm telling you, sir, is that we 

will do the best we can with the resources that we have. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So because of all of these other priorities and 

all of these other commitments and all of these other concerns 

by your colleagues across the way, what you're telling me is 

that there will be nothing happening north of Warman to 

Rosthern over the next two years. 

 

Now your answer is the worst answer I've received from any 

minister of Highways, and some of the others weren't all that 

good.  They made specific commitments and they said, this is 

what we propose to do.  And of course it wasn't enough, and 

I'm not blaming you for that.  I don't expect that highway to be 

twinned. 

 

But I do expect you to have a handle on the situation where you 

can tell me precisely what your plans in your department are; 

and not this wishy-washy, well by golly, we'll see what the 

finances are like and then 

we'll kind of spread it around on a piecemeal basis. 

 

Surely you have a game plan. And that's all I'm asking you; on 

behalf of the citizens in that area, what are your plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question.  Mr. 

Chairman, to the member from Rosthern, again I want to say 

we have considerable amount of highways.  We have 25 per 

cent of all the highways in Canada located right here in 

Saskatchewan, and we only have so many dollars to work with.  

And so we continue to do the best we can, priorizing the roads 

based on average daily traffic counts, based on accident rates, 

based on fatalities, based on economic development activities. 

And certainly No. 11 is part of our consideration, as all 

highways are. 

 

And we know that you're concerned very well.  We are looking 

. . . right now in fact we have a study on intersections along that 

highway between Warman and Rosthern, for safety reasons.  

Now once that study is completed we will be able to determine 

what improvements should take place.  And then we have to 

look at whether we can afford, and when we can afford those 

changes. 

 

So we continue to work with all the highways in the province 

based on that set of rules.  And that's all I can say to you at this 

time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well now you're starting to get me upset -- I 

thought we were doing quite well here -- because you're 

playing wishy-washy with me.  And that's not good enough. 

 

Of course there's a finite budget, I know that.  And I know that 

you can only do so, so, and so much in a certain area, and the 

citizens of that area know that.  What they're asking is what are 

your plans?  And don't talk to me about a study that might be 

completed some time in the future.  That study is finished and 

you've got that information in front of you.  And I know you've 

got a limited amount of money. 

 

Now show me that you've got a grip of your department and 

tell me what your plans are.  What are you going to be doing 

with that limited amount of money . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . I know that.  So that the people know what to anticipate, so 

they know where they're at -- that's all I'm asking.  So don't 

give me a bunch of hogwash here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


