




















































Hansard: April 08, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1411 

 April 8, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm happy to 

introduce to you and through you today a group of people from 

the Regina Open Door Society who are in the English as a 

second language program. 

 

I'm going to be meeting with them at 11 a.m. for pictures and 

I'd like the Assembly to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, three individuals that are seated in your gallery.  

They are Lisa Lavallee and Christine Watson from Chili for 

Children and Christine Smith from Aids Regina.  These 

representatives are here this morning to receive a special 

presentation from the media and also from the MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) hockey team. 

 

We have over the past three weeks or so, raised some money 

for their benefits and we're going to make that presentation 

following question period, so please welcome these people to 

our Assembly this morning.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly a friend and constituent from Regina North West, 

Marjorie Wiens. 

 

Marjorie is a retired teacher.  She's a member of the 

philharmonic choir and many other community organizations, 

and a very strong volunteer.  And I'd ask all members of the 

House to join me in welcoming her today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

my brother Bob Scott from St. Paul, Alberta, who's down here 

visiting for a few days. 

 

And he has a couple of things going for him -- one, that he's not 

a politician, and the other one is he was smart enough to leave 

the farm.  And I'm now farming his land, so he's down here to 

give me instructions for the coming year. 

 

I'll ask members to join in welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

Highway Hockey League All Stars Champions 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I 

want to pay tribute to another provincial title, in fact a hat trick 

that has taken place. 

 

For the third year in a row the Highway Hockey League All 

Stars have won the SAHA (Saskatchewan Amateur Hockey 

Association) adult rec B provincial title with their win over a 

team from Hague.  The team had quite a change in players this 

year, so the challenge was definitely there as to whether a 

provincial title was again possible. 

 

In this category, players must be 25 years or older and can be 

from anywhere in Saskatchewan.  They can't have played 

contact hockey after December 31 of the current season and a 

new regulation this season places this team in the B category if 

the slapshots are not allowed.  In previous seasons this team 

would have been classified as A. 

 

The team was coached by Gordon MacMurchy Jr., with 

assistant coach Barrie Peeke.  Team manager was Norm 

Erickson. 

 

I want to pass congratulations to the Highway Hockey League 

All Stars on another great year and for providing great 

entertainment for the area.  It wasn't easy, as usual; with so 

many other commitments, the team sometimes showed up with 

only a handful of skaters, but they persevered and for that they 

have their third consecutive provincial championship.  And all 

the best in the next years to them.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Wishart 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last week I talked 

about how the type of communities is reflected by the presence 

of co-ops and credit unions and wheat pools.  I talked about the 

community of Bankend which was influenced by the co-op and 

the origin of Sask Wheat Pool. 

 

Today I want to talk about the neighbouring community of 

Wishart, which is influenced by the presence of their credit 

union.  It is a small community whose assets grew in this credit 

union to over $5 million and it took 50 years to do this, Mr. 

Speaker.  They provided 50 years of service to this community 

and later on this summer they will be having their anniversary 

celebrations. 

 

It is also important to know that this all started in 1944 and it's 

also an important year because of the Douglas election victory 

at this same period of time which saw the first social 

democratic government elected in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many good things happened in 1944 which made 

and continue to make Saskatchewan a better place to live.  

Thank you very much. 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

                                        

Hudson Bay Route Association Convention 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Hudson 

Bay Route Association is holding its annual convention in 

Hudson Bay on April 10 to 12 this next week. 

 

The history of the Hudson Bay route goes back a long way to 

the late 1800s when prairie farmers lobbied the federal 

government for a railroad to the bay, that would mean a shorter 

distance to port, and in turn lower freight rates.  Approximately 

30 years after feasibility reports were complete, in 1908 the 

branch line from Hudson Bay junction reached The Pas, 

Manitoba. 

 

Due to the lack of progress and delays, the track from The Pas 

to mile 214 was constructed with public funds, Mr. Speaker.  

Progress on the line was stalled once again, and in 1924 the 

On-to-the-Bay Association was formed to keep the project on 

track. 

 

Finally in the spring of 1929, the last spike was driven.  The 

line was completed just as the Great Depression hit.  But still 

westerners refused to abandon their ideals, and in 1944, Mr. 

Speaker, the On-to-the-Bay Association was transformed into 

the Hudson Bay Route Association.  The association today 

continues to promote the ongoing and expanded use of the Port 

of Churchill for grain shipments from the west. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regina Disabled Veterans' Association 60th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, this weekend the Regina 

Disabled Veterans' Association will be celebrating its diamond 

anniversary -- 60 years of service to soldiers disabled in our 

country's wars and 60 years of service to the community at 

large. 

 

As a recent article says about the association:  their service did 

not end with the war.  The DVA (Disabled Veterans' 

Association) was chartered in 1934 with the aim of providing 

services for veterans who had been wounded in war.  Originally 

they lobbied government for disability pensions and increased 

food, shelter, and clothing allowances. 

 

From that beginning, the association has expanded its activities 

to other areas of concern for veterans, and it has also extended 

its work into the community, as the Red Cross and Telemiracle 

will attest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our nation's wars retreat more and more into 

the past, a fact for which we can all be grateful, it is easy for us 

to forget that there are still those who carry the scars of their 

service to us and to their country.  The Disabled Veterans' 

Association is here to make sure we don't forget, and for their 

60 years of determined work, I congratulate them. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Stockholm Dinner Theatre 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's obviously 

a theatrical renaissance taking place in Saskatchewan as the 

statements by a number of members in the past few days would 

indicate. 

 

I have further proof in my own constituency in the town of 

Stockholm.  Stockholm has the population of approximately 

500 men, women, and children.  By the time the current dinner 

theatre production at Stockholm has finished it's seventh 

sell-out performance, it will have played to over 830 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Globe Theatre in Regina or the Persephone 

Theatre in Saskatoon had a play that was proportionately 

successful, it would play to over 300,000 people. 

 

This is truly a cooperative effort, entirely by local people.  The 

play, entitled "Hill-billy Weddin'", is written and performed by 

the 18 actors and one director.  The actors are also the waiters, 

greeters, and servers of the dinner.  The actors provide the 

service in costume and in character.  As well, there are a 

number of people involved in all the very necessary backstage 

work needed to make the play a success. 

 

And a success it is.  They originally planned to perform one 

night; they have been held over seven times.  Members may see 

me for the last few available tickets if they rush.  My brokerage 

fee is a modest one, I might add. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grain Marketing and Production Problems 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. Speaker.  I 

think there was a subtle message in that.  But anyway, Mr. 

Speaker, this morning I want to pursue a topic raised by my 

colleague a few days ago, the member from Morse, when he 

asked the Minister of Agriculture a very real concern regarding 

the lack of railcars in the grain transportation system and the 

effects that that is going to have on the cash flow of 

Saskatchewan farm families.  Mr. Speaker, with spring seeding 

just around the corner, this particular situation could and will 

have disastrous effects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to bring another concern to the Minister of 

Agriculture.   Mr. Minister, the union representing nearly 2,000 

Saskatchewan grain handlers has been holding strike votes over 

the last couple of weeks.  Recently a union representative said 

that a strike is definitely possible despite the fact it would be 

disruptive to farmers' ability to move grain. 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

Mr. Minister, have you or your officials been in contact with 

either side of this dispute; and if so, have you made it 

abundantly clear to the union that a strike at this time would be 

disastrous to Saskatchewan farm families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

the members may or may not be aware, the matter falls wholly 

within the jurisdiction of the federal government.  We have 

made it crystal clear to the federal government -- as I hope 

members opposite do who may have some ties -- we have made 

it crystal clear to the federal government that this strike would 

be disastrous and that everything possible must be done to avert 

this. 

 

The federal government at times has done that and at times 

have not.  So I would hope that those members opposite who 

have some ties with the federal government would use their 

good offices to try to avoid this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. 

Minister, I thank you for that answer and I wish you would 

have answered the question that I asked.  I'm afraid you've got 

a hold of the wrong union here.  You did not follow my 

question. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I will go on to my second question and give 

you some pause for reflection upon what you just said.  Now 

the light goes on; I see the bulb flashing. 

 

Mr. Minister, with railcar shortages and problems with unions 

on the west coast and in Saskatchewan, the movement of grain 

is becoming a very real concern.  It is tough enough to grow the 

product first of all, given the cost of inputs and the market 

prices, but to have the marketing of that product threatened is 

just too much.  Farmers want assurances from you, their elected 

representative, that you have their concerns as top priority.  

They want and they need your support.  They already know 

that they have ours. 

 

Mr. Minister, farmers cannot support their families nor the 

Saskatchewan economy if they cannot move their grain.  What 

are you prepared to do to support farmers this year?  Or will 

you just issue another report like Agriculture 2000 or maybe 

introduce another one-man commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We are prepared to do what I hope 

the opposition is prepared to do, and that is to use every effort 

to ensure the federal government uses their resources to head 

this off.  These are matters coming within the jurisdiction of the 

federal government.  Only they can resolve it and we are urging 

them to do so.  We hope members opposite who have some 

direct ties with Ottawa are also using their resources to try to 

head this up. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, then let me address an issue that you do 

have some control over, some direct control over, Mr. Minister, 

and that is the cash flow problem that farmers are facing.  And 

that is something that your government does not apparently 

have the ability to understand or act on those concerns. 

 

We have spring seeding simply a heartbeat away, Mr. Minister.  

And your government is sitting on a $300 million surplus on 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) premiums -- money 

which could be put into growing this year's crop instead of 

growing dust in some government account. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you agree that this money -- producers' money 

-- could be better used in the farm economy?  Do you have any 

idea what you plan to do with that money; and if so, could you 

share that with us this morning? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 

question.  In regards to the railcar shortages, Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly do share his concerns.  It seems that some of the cars 

are moving to the main lines, leaving the branch lines short and 

local elevators plugged.  And we realize that. 

 

We also realize that the diversification that the Saskatchewan 

farmers have participated in have meant more specialty crops 

and a need for cars.  The U.S. (United States) of course are 

using more cars this year than before, and therefore leaving us 

unable . . . or the rail companies not able to lease cars. 

 

We've written to Mr. Goodale on several occasions.  We've 

written to Mr. Young with our concerns about this program.  

As you are aware, grain transportation is under federal 

jurisdiction.  And I would hope that the third party, who may 

have some influence with the federal government, would also 

do that.  In fact I could give them Mr. Goodale's phone number 

because we used it several times. 

 

You mentioned the possibility of a GRIP surplus.  And as you 

know, Mr. Member, we will not know if there is a surplus or a 

deficit until the year end.  So I hope that answers your question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I address my next 

question to the Premier, and I'm sure that he will want to 

answer this question. 

 

Mr. Premier, the farm crisis in this province has certainly been 

underscored this morning when you read the newspapers and 

you find out the situation with our current Minister of 

Economic Development.  I should preface my remarks, Mr. 

Premier, by first of all indicating that I certainly wish him all 

the best in resolving his farm debt problems.  However I have 

to ask you one question as it relates to his position as a minister 

of the Crown. 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Last year, when the former minister of Education was facing a 

farm debt restructuring process, she did a very honourable 

thing.  She recognized that her position as a minister may put 

her in a real or a perceived conflict of interest situation, and to 

avoid this she withdrew from cabinet.  In her words: ". . . so 

that my family and I can pursue these alternatives without any 

suggestion or even a perception that I might be in a conflict of 

interest situation." 

 

Mr. Premier, has the Minister of Economic Development 

discussed this problem with you?  Does his present situation 

involve any dealings with ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) or any government agency?  

And if so has he considered following a similar course of action 

as the former minister of Education? 

 

Mr. Premier, I simply want to give you an opportunity to 

respond to the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question.  I've been in telephone communication with 

the Minister of Economic Development this morning.  He 

advises me that there is no ACS money involved and no FCC 

(Farm Credit Corporation) money, which is the federal agency, 

involved, in any direct or indirect fashion with respect to this 

matter. 

 

This is a private situation involving the Shaunavon Credit 

Union and the minister or the minister's relations.  Furthermore 

I'm advised by the minister that payment has been made in full 

with respect to this particular issue as reported in the paper and 

that should put the matter to rest at this stage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Unemployment Rate 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

morning is to the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 

Minister, today we see more proof that your government's 

dismal record of economic development and job creation is a 

failure. 

 

The new job figures show that there were just 424,000 people 

working in Saskatchewan in March.  We've lost 2,000 jobs in 

the past month, Mr. Speaker.  There are 12,000 fewer working 

than there were in March of 1991 under the previous 

administration. 

 

In fact since this government took over, Mr. Speaker, each 

family in this province faces $2,300 more in tax burden; there's 

12,000 fewer jobs; there's 81,000 people on welfare; and things 

simply get worse.  Fewer taxpayers, Mr. Minister, more taxes. 

 

When are you going to admit, Mr. Minister, that you're headed 

in the wrong direction?  And when are you going to abandon 

the policies that have taken us to this place in time where the 

projections simply aren't coming true.  When are you going to 

do that, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

absence of the minister, I'd be pleased to answer that question. 

 

With respect to unemployment, are we concerned about 

unemployment levels?  Of course we're concerned about 

unemployment levels.  But I would point out to the members 

opposite, Saskatchewan still has the lowest unemployment rate 

in Canada, and in fact it has declined from last year.  Last year 

it was 9.6; this year it's 8.5. 

 

Are we concerned about the number of people in the province 

on welfare?  Of course we're concerned and we're working hard 

to reduce that number.  But again, I will be releasing a table 

showing that Saskatchewan, relative to the size of its 

population, has the lowest number of people on welfare of any 

province in Canada. 

 

Are we concerned about out-migration?  Of course we're 

concerned, and we're doing everything we can to provide 

opportunities for young people in this province.  But again 

here, that figure is levelling off. 

 

I would make one final point.  We have said that our strategy in 

terms of economic development is to diversify the economy -- 

for example, increase the number of people in manufacturing 

and processing, and in manufacturing and processing, there are 

3,000 more people working in that area this year, relative to last 

year. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we've said that trade is one of our 

priorities because we are a trading province.  And I would say 

again, in this area there are 8,000 more people in Saskatchewan 

working in trade than last year.  So we're concerned but there 

are also many positives in these numbers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I'm glad the 

minister responsible for a lot of the problem had the courage to 

stand up this morning. 

 

Madam Minister, in your February budget you talked about 

5,000 new jobs that were going to be created.  You were going 

to bring the workforce up to 445,000. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I agree:  you do have the lowest 

numbers in Canada because people simply flee this province 

now.  It's either flee or go on welfare.  There's no options 

because your government has such a dismal record.  There are 

fewer jobs, Madam Minister, than last year when you came in 

with that grandiose prediction in your last budget. 

 

Now your stated goal was 5,000 jobs, Madam Minister.  You 

said it in the budget in February.  You're nowhere near; it's 

going the other way.  Are you going to tell the Assembly this 

morning that you will stand by that 5,000 job number that you 

predicted?  Madam Minister, would you put your job on the 

line as the 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

Finance minister of this province and guarantee those 5,000 

jobs?  Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I must say it is 

amusing that the members opposite would talk about putting 

their jobs on the line if they didn't meet their financial targets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- They would have all been gone.  

They would have all been gone in the last administration. 

 

But what we have to do in this province is we have to put our 

situation into perspective.  And what I would like to point out 

is an example in another province, because I think it helps to 

put our situation in perspective.  And I would choose New 

Brunswick.  And I would choose New Brunswick for three 

reasons: because Frank McKenna gets very good press about 

his innovative ideas to develop the economy; because Frank 

McKenna gets very good press about his innovative ideas to get 

people off of welfare; and because Frank McKenna has been 

mentioned by the Liberal leader as her model. 

 

What are the statistics in this province?  And again, it's not that 

I wish any ill will to New Brunswick.  New Brunswick lost 

10,000 jobs over last year.  Mr. Speaker, 10,000 jobs on a 

labour force of less than 300,000 -- a much smaller labour 

force.  Our unemployment rate is now 8.5 per cent; New 

Brunswick's unemployment rate went from 14.6 per cent to 

15.3 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point is this:  jobs are a problem across 

Canada, not just in this province.  We're concerned about it, it's 

our priority, but the biggest killer of jobs out there today are the 

federal Liberals' high interest rates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister, Mr. 

Speaker, likes to ignore reality, and I'd remind her of what the 

Star-Phoenix said yesterday: 

 

It seems that this has been said time and time again: this 

provincial government never seems to listen. 

 

The image this government is projecting is one of being 

unable to keep its promises. 

 

It does not bode well for anyone who has to do business 

with it. 

 

Madam Minister, yesterday my colleague raised the spectre of 

81,000 people on welfare.  It seems the only place that you 

people have any economic decisions made is in the area of 

gaming, where you're going to encourage all the down-and-outs 

in this province, Madam Minister, to spend what money they 

have left on gambling. 

You know, does Jack Messer have to go play your slot 

machines?  Does Garf Stevenson have to spend his $500 a day 

on your slot machines?  No, because they are on the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) wheel of fortune.  You know, if you're a 

patronage appointment in this province, you're doing quite 

well.  The rest of the folks, Madam Minister, in this province 

have no jobs; they're on welfare.  They're leaving the province 

because of the policies of your government, Madam Minister. 

 

I ask you once again.  Once again, you made a projection of 

5,000 jobs more than there were last year.  That's gone 2,000 

the other way, according to the stats today.  Madam Minister, 

do you stand behind that extra 5,000 jobs?  Are you 

guaranteeing the people of this province are going to have the 

opportunity to work instead of flee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I am guaranteeing the 

people of this province that our highest priority as a 

government are jobs.  But I do have to correct the member 

opposite when he talks about welfare.  I said I would be 

releasing to the press a table which shows that relative to the 

size of our population, we have the fewest number of people on 

welfare in all of Canada.  Are we concerned about it?  Of 

course we're concerned that there are still people on welfare, 

but we have to have a broader perspective.  Sometimes the 

members opposite suggest that these problems only exist in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But to go back to the jobs issue, the main thrust of the recent 

budget in this province was jobs.  That's why we have 

increased spending on capital.  That's why we have established 

the ag equity fund, directed at rural Saskatchewan, to help 

process our agricultural products here to ensure that there are 

more markets for farm products and more jobs for young 

people and better exports for the province. 

 

He quotes the Star-Phoenix.  I would quote back to him.  The 

business editor of the Star-Phoenix, Paul Martin, who said at 

the end of the last year, the economic indicators in 

Saskatchewan for 1994 are better than they have looked in a 

long time. 

 

Get on the bandwagon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture Strategy 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of its provincial 

economy generated by agriculture of any province in Canada.  

This should make us the leaders in setting the vision 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

for agriculture for the nation.  Mr. Minister, it has been over 

two and a half years since your government was elected on a 

23-page platform document which devoted only nine lines to 

the vision of agriculture. 

 

While crops lay rotting in the fields in the north-east, your 

government is committed to trail-blazing labour legislation.  

While farmers wait and wait for a revised safety net program, 

your government, which has been in office for two and a half 

years, points fingers at Ottawa for not coming to you with 

solutions to Saskatchewan's problems. 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to take a leadership role and 

put forward a credible agriculture strategy for the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a very 

interesting question coming from the member from Shaunavon 

who was elected on that platform and in fact promoted that 

platform. 

 

I want to remind him again, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

has over 40 per cent of the arable land in the country of 

Canada, 3 per cent of the population, and he doesn't recognize, 

I guess, the things that the Saskatchewan government does for 

farmers in comparison to the federal government. 

 

A six-year leaseback program, Mr. Speaker, that Farm Credit 

will not follow;  an ag equity fund to help the farm community 

to diversity; Ag 2000, trying to get a farm program for farmers 

that is tax-friendly and farmer-friendly.  And he sits there on 

one hand and demands more from the province; and on the 

other hand his federal counterparts take 5 per cent out of the 

transportation subsidy -- millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, right 

out of the farmer's pocket.  I don't know where he's coming 

from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again it's 

excuses instead of solutions.  Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan's net 

farm income dropped by $340 million in 1994 from the 1993 

year.  While your deputy minister talks of things looking better 

in Saskatchewan, farmers are scratching their heads wondering 

what planet you're living on. 

 

It's a fact that canola prices are high, but very few farmers have 

canola to sell at those prices.  It's also a fact that cereal grain 

prices are lower than they were last year.  And it is definitely a 

fact that crops laying in the fields from last fall are not worth 

the fuel to get them picked up. 

 

Saskatchewan's farm organizations believe that the federal 

Minister of Agriculture has been very receptive in discussing 

the concerns of Saskatchewan farmers, and seems very willing 

to sit down with you and talk about solutions that you have in 

mind for the problems your government has the responsibility 

for. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me what plan you have presented to 

the federal minister; what demands you have made; and 

whether you will share your plan and your proposed solutions 

for Saskatchewan agriculture with the rest of us? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's interesting 

to note that there's an article here in The Western Producer 

that says: 

 

The federal government's farm policy rhetoric may be 

Liberal red, but the funding plans that should breathe life 

into rhetoric are Tory blue. 

 

The Leader of the Third Party, in 1991 borrowed the 

agricultural policy from Mr. Mulroney. And today the federal 

Liberal government has borrowed the Mulroney agricultural 

policy again. 

 

We continue to work with Mr. Goodale on many issues in the 

farm sector like grain transportation; like help for the farmers 

in the north-east.  We continue to lobby.  Where are you, Mr. 

Member from Shaunavon?  Are you helping? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There is a very 

real possibility that we could experience higher interest rates in 

the short-term.  I have concerns about that just as everyone else 

who owes money does.  The federal government certainly will 

get pressure from us to address that. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, what I want to know from you today is what 

concrete plans you have in place for farm safety net programs, 

crop insurance premiums that are affordable, and emergency 

relief.  What representations are you making to Ottawa to set a 

Saskatchewan agenda for a made-in-Saskatchewan solution to 

our agriculture problems?  And what efforts are you making to 

get other provinces onside with a solution that fits our needs 

right here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I want 

to mention that Mr. Easter, I believe, is a member of the new 

Liberal federal government, and he's saying that the federal 

Liberal policy is the old Tory blue policy.  I'll read the whole 

article for the member's information: 

 

The government farm policy rhetoric may be Liberal red 

but the funding plans that should breathe life into rhetoric 

are Tory blue, an outspoken government back-bencher 

told agricultural minister Ralph Goodale last week.  He 

also said that the new government appears to have simply 

accepted the spending plans that Agriculture Canada 

bureaucrats were preparing for the previous Conservative 

government. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Member from Shaunavon, to join with us in 

lobbying Mr. Goodale to look at realistic solutions to the farm 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's 

apparent why people feel a sense of frustration in rural 

Saskatchewan.  The Minister and the Associate 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

Minister of Agriculture seem absolutely incapable of either 

understanding a question or answering the question. 

 

Can the minister tell me if he believes that there is any 

obligation on his shoulders to provide leadership for the 

agriculture industry of this province, or is he content to sit back 

and follow the lead of other provinces with far less risk while 

he points fingers at Ottawa and shirks his responsibility to 

provide leadership? 

 

Mr. Minister, for the final time today, will you give us some 

sense of what you have in store for farmers with respect to farm 

safety net proposals, crop insurance premiums, and assistance 

for the north-east?  Can you try to answer the question without 

using the words federal government, Ottawa, or Liberal? 

 

Can you tell us what you, the NDP Minister of Agriculture for 

Saskatchewan, will do to take responsibility . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The preambles to questions are 

getting much, much too long and I ask members in the future to 

please cut down on the preambles of the questions and get to 

the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You know 

when you have a Liberal federal government, it could be a Tory 

government; it's like Tory-Liberal, Liberal-Tory.  I know the 

member from Shaunavon is a little embarrassed by the colour 

in his face but . . . and I wish he would join with us -- we offer 

you Mr. Goodale's phone number -- join with us.  You're sitting 

in the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan; join with us in telling the 

federal Agriculture minister the concerns of the farmers in 

Saskatchewan.  We are doing it.  Where are you? 

 

They take five per cent of the transportation subsidy, they take 

it away from farm families in Saskatchewan and you have not 

mentioned that in this House once. 

 

Mr. Goodale says, interest-free cash advances.  Yes, the 

farmers need it, and they do need it.  Have you made one 

presentation to Mr. Goodale on interest-free cash advances?  I 

don't believe you have. 

 

And also in this article, Mr. Goodale can see . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Corporation Taxes in Arrears 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to provide the answer to the oral question of 

which I took notice on March 28. 

 

The question was posed by the member from Morse on behalf 

of Mr. Arthur Bird from Porcupine Plain.  Mr. Bird wished to 

know the dollar amount of provincial taxes owed to the 

Saskatchewan government by Canadian and multinational 

corporations combined and what measures are being taken to 

collect these taxes. 

The total amount of corporation taxes and charges in arrears to 

the province is estimated at between 5 and $6 million at any 

given time.  Only a very small part of this is eventually written 

off as uncollectible.  As a proportion of total government 

revenues, estimated at $4.8 billion for '94-95, the amount in 

arrears is relatively insignificant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Health Districts Act 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

the first reading of An Act to amend The Health Districts Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Eviction of Farm Family From Their Land 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On March 15 a 

major lending institution moved to evict a Saskatchewan farm 

family from their land based on the February 22, 1994 decision 

of Mulatz v. the Toronto Dominion Bank in which leaseback 

rights became the property of the trustee. 

 

The bank cited this as a cause to end its leaseback obligations 

with the family and put their land up for sale days ago, after 

giving the family three weeks notice to vacate the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board had ordered 

the bank to remove a clause from the lease with the farmer in 

question which would put his leaseback rights in jeopardy in 

the event of bankruptcy.  The bank has appealed this order by 

the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board and is now moving to sell 

the land without waiting for the court to appeal the decision.  

This directly contravenes the order of the Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board which remains law until such time as it is 

overturned by the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trustee to whom the leaseback rights were 

assigned by the bank has ruled that the rights have no value to 

him as a trustee, and as of yesterday has turned them back to 

the farmer.  The bank however is still proceeding with its 

action to sell the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given that this has grave implications for almost 

200 farmers in bankruptcy proceedings, and given that the 

order of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board has been ignored 

due to a deficiency in The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 

and given that this has grave and immediate implications for all 

farmers who are currently involved in leaseback programs, and 

considering the declaration of bankruptcy as well as for farmers 

who may be petitioned into bankruptcy 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

by their lending institutions, and given that this puts the status 

of the entire leaseback program at immediate risk, the only 

recourse to protect farm families trying to rebuild their farms is 

to immediately amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 

before a precedent is set. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that there is under the normal 

process of House business no opportunity to debate this urgent 

situation, I therefore move, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That the Assembly cause the government to immediately 

amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act in order to 

protect the rights of Saskatchewan farm families who 

currently face bankruptcy proceedings and those involved 

in leasebacks who must consider bankruptcy as an option 

to contend with onerous farm debt. 

 

Seconded by the member from Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, and 

I shall be quite brief, I would make the argument to Mr. 

Speaker that it is apparent that this matter arose out of a court 

case which occurred some time ago.  It is not a new issue, nor 

is it capable of a resolution he urges, the government to pass a 

Bill.  It strikes . . . I think it's fairly obvious there are other 

opportunities to raise this; the member could move a private 

Bill; he could deal with it on Tuesday. 

 

So I would suggest this is not an appropriate matter for this sort 

of a motion.  There are lots of other opportunities to deal with 

it; it's apparent from within the motion itself. 

 

The Speaker: -- I received notice of this request under rule 17 

to debate an urgent public importance . . . was received in the 

Clerk's office at 7:50 a.m. this morning, for which I want to 

thank the hon. member. 

 

As I understand it, the case made by the member from 

Shaunavon is that a particular farmer's situation currently 

taking place has highlighted the need for amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act to prevent one of the 

important purposes of the Act and the Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board from being circumvented. 

 

In dealing with issues raised under rule 17, the Speaker must 

consider whether the matter is within the administrative 

competence of the government and whether there is no other 

reasonable opportunity for debate. 

 

(1045) 

 

I agree with the hon. member that the matter raised is of public 

importance and falls within the jurisdiction of the provincial 

government.  The key question that the Chair must determine, 

pursuant to rule 17(5), is whether there is a probability of the 

matter being brought before the House within reasonable time 

by other means. 

From the information presented by the member, I find that it is 

not evident that the situation would change appreciably if the 

Assembly had been given the normal two days notice to have 

this debate.  Concerns about The Farm Security Act have been 

ongoing for some time, as raised by the Leader of the Third 

Party in question period on March 11, 1994, page 817 of the 

Debates and Proceedings. 

 

And even this particular case, as raised by the member for 

Shaunavon, has been at issue since March 15.  There have been 

and continue to be other ordinary parliamentary opportunities 

to debate this matter.  The member may submit notice today for 

a private member's resolution under rule 16(1) to be debated 

next Tuesday; or the member may ask for leave, under rule 42, 

to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity before 

orders of the day. 

 

On these grounds I find that the matter raised does not fulfil the 

conditions necessary to gain priority of debate over the normal 

order of business for today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Crisis Facing Saskatchewan Farmers 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask the Assembly for leave to make a motion pursuant to 

rule 42. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may state his motion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Or ask for leave. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe first of all I'll explain 

the rationale behind it, then make the motion, and then ask for 

leave -- which is the normal procedure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the Assembly pursuant to rule 42 to 

debate a motion dealing with a matter of urgent and pressing 

necessity.  And while the member from Shaunavon's motion 

was denied because there was no sense of imminency proven, I 

think it is imperative however, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly 

alert the governments to the crisis facing Saskatchewan farmers 

today in an effort to exact action to alleviate the problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To prove my case, Mr. Speaker, in the north-east alone, Mr. 

Speaker, one-third of between 900,000 to 1 million acres of 

farm land was not harvested last fall, placing those farmers in 

that area in dire straits, Mr. Speaker.  Between 50 and 90 Farm 

Credit Corporation accounts -- Farm Credit Corporation 

accounts -- are in arrears in this region and 50 to 60 per cent of 

ACS corporation accounts are in arrears. 

 

To date, Mr. Speaker, no special consideration has been 

granted to farmers in that area of the province.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan leads the country in 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

farm bankruptcies.  According to the federal Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs department, a total of 166 farmers declared 

bankruptcy last year accounting for 48 per cent of the Canadian 

total of 349. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had twice as many as Alberta and 

almost . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I think the 

member knows full well that under rule 42 he must very 

succinctly state the problem that he wishes to ask for leave and 

not debate the issue.  The member is now debating the issues 

and I want him to state the point and then ask for leave. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

main point and the gist of our motion would be twofold.  First 

of all, that the Canadian Wheat Board has a battle against the 

farmer.  The Canadian Wheat Board should be an ally of 

farmers, not an enemy of farmers, and there is something that 

this government can do and that resolves around -- or revolves, 

pardon me -- around the issue of the $300 million left in the 

GRIP fund. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is undoubtedly a farm crisis that we have 

here and it must be addressed by all levels of government, Mr. 

Speaker.  And so therefore, I move, seconded by the member 

from Moosomin: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to immediately 

takes steps to address the agricultural crisis in 

Saskatchewan, particularly in the north-east where early 

frost and wet seasons have caused crop failure for two 

consecutive years, and where 50 to 60 per cent of 

Agriculture Credit Corporation accounts are in arrears and 

between 500 and 700 Saskatchewan producers are in 

desperate circumstances, and further urge the government 

to support the SGTC's (that's the Senior Grain 

Transportation Commission) recommendation to allow 

private grain cars into western rail fleets because the 

current railcar shortage is costing prairie farmers millions 

of dollars in demurrage and lost sales, and further urge the 

government to consider using the $300 million surplus in 

the revenue insurance program to help alleviate those 

problems. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

thank all members of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing that indeed there is 

a farm crisis in Saskatchewan in particular and indeed across 

all of Canada.  And there are of course . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the speaker, to ask 

leave to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

the Legislative Assembly and ask the members to give a warm 

welcome to a former member of the Legislative Assembly and 

to a former minister of Agriculture behind the bar. Mr. Gordon 

MacMurchy is with us.  And I ask members to please make him 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 

 

Crisis Facing Saskatchewan Farmers 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

too would like to welcome the previous minister of Agriculture.  

He has a very . . .  His timing is obviously still very impeccable 

and so therefore I welcome him to listen to the debate.  I 

remember him more as the minister of Education in times past, 

but also his significance to the farming scene is well known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before the introduction, crisis in 

agriculture is here.  It is rampant upon all farmers of this 

province of Saskatchewan.  In my motion, Mr. Speaker, I 

specifically stated the situation in the north-eastern portion of 

this province where indeed we have a multiplicity of farmers 

experiencing grave difficulties through no failing of their own.  

It was simply a matter of a problem that was compounded by 

mother nature in that area where indeed as many as 1 million 

acres, Mr. Speaker, were just simply not able to be harvested.  

And the farmers are facing the dire consequences of that. 

 

But all of these factors are compounded by what I would 

consider certainly not farmers' initiatives that have created the 

problem, but quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the problems have 

been created by politicians.  I think politicians are to be blamed 

for most of the problems facing agriculture, whether it be 

ideologies or whether it be financial constraints; that by myopic 

vision we are not able as politicians to see the long-term 

implications, the long-term strategies, and quite frankly again, 

Mr. Speaker, the long-term fallout -- the long-term fallout of 

short-term problems. 

 

Now I want to hold the feet to the fire of both levels of 

government, and that is the provincial government as well as 

the federal government.  There are things that our provincial 

government could be doing to alleviate the situation, because 

many of the situations that we are facing right now, Mr. 

Speaker, are as a direct result of provincial government 

strategy. 

 

And I don't have to point out the situation that exists as a result 

of the abrogation of responsibilities in the GRIP program.  And 

I don't want to spend time 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

necessarily rehashing the developments in the GRIP program 

and what this provincial government did to farmers as a result 

of that.  But I don't buy for one moment the argument that $300 

million lying in a bank account, a government bank account, 

gathering and growing dust, could not be better spent, Mr. 

Speaker, growing crops. 

 

That is the fundamental premiss, I think, that this government 

has to recognize.  There is the ability and there is the 

mechanism and the wherewithal to address many of the 

problems facing our provincial farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We found out in question period . . . in question period I stated 

that the biggest investment that this province goes through on 

an annual basis is but a heartbeat away, Mr. Speaker, a 

heartbeat away -- the spring seeding program of Saskatchewan 

is being planned and is being formulated and is almost coming 

to fruition.  And farmers, on a constant basis, are coming to me 

and saying: I don't know how I'm going to put the crop in the 

ground; I'm having trouble with my bankers; I'm having trouble 

with my financiers; I don't know if I will have the wherewithal 

to put the crop in the ground. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, then we hear the Minister of Agriculture and 

we hear the Minister of Finance get up and say: well, but it's all 

because of increased and better-than-expected commodity 

supplies; the farmers got too much for their grain last year.  

That's what they're saying: the farmers got too much for their 

grain last year; that's why there's a surplus in the account.  We 

are saying that the prices were higher than anticipated, we'll 

grant you that, but any time there is a surplus of $300 million, 

let's return it to whom it is due -- the farmers; the premiums 

that these folks have paid.  Let's do that, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

one point, a very salient point that I want to stress. 

 

Other points are to get on with producing a long-term safety net 

that will be there when it is needed.  And I say to members 

opposite, again it is not good enough to say that we had a 

happy little commission wandering around the province and 

they happened to come up with some suggestions.  And we 

think that some of these suggestions have some merit. 

 

So what does the government say that they're going to be doing 

on the issue?  The government is saying right now, well we 

plan to hold meetings; we plan to hold meetings with these 

people to determine what we're going to be doing.  That's what 

the Minister of Agriculture says.  We have a plan; it's called 

Agriculture 2000. 

 

And we question sincerely sometimes, Mr. Speaker, whether 

that means the 2000 farmers that are going to be left, or indeed 

whether they are planning for the year 2000.  And it's open for 

debate and open for question I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, as 

to what is really the significance of that type of statement. 

 

But it's not good enough to say that we're going to be sitting 

down with producers and we're going to come 

up with some kind of plan some time in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bankers will not sign under that premiss. And 

farmers have the right to know what to expect from this 

government.  And they are getting on a daily basis, evidence of 

what to expect.  And it is not, Mr. Speaker, reassuring to them. 

 

Now I want to take a look at some of the statistics that I have in 

front of me from the Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food.  

These are the stat facts, Mr. Speaker, and they deal with 1993 

farm bankruptcies, different bankruptcies.  And on the surface 

. . . and I'll point out some things here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Consumer and Corporate Affairs reports that 166 

Saskatchewan farmers filed for bankruptcy during 1993 -- 166.  

Now an interesting addendum to that is that this is a decrease of 

13 per cent from 1992.  So it seems, Mr. Speaker, that farmers 

are catching their breath, that there actually has been a decrease 

in the numbers of bankruptcies.  And I believe that. 

 

But I guess what we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

for the bankruptcies.  And I have always believed as we 

approached this farm crisis in the mid-'80s and on, that we had 

different levels of expertise, we had different levels of abilities, 

and we had different levels of farm support within the farming 

community itself.  And what we found first of all was that 

many of the farmers that were in trouble exited early in this 

farm crisis that has been plaguing Saskatchewan and indeed all 

of Canada over the last number of years. 

 

(1100) 

 

The poor doers, the farmers perhaps lacking expertise, lacking 

financial backing, were the first ones to go, Mr. Speaker.  They 

are no longer with us.  They are history; they are gone.  And 

then, Mr. Speaker, a second level of farmers, the ones that had 

more wherewithal, that had perhaps more expertise, more 

management capabilities, hung on for a number of years. But 

subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, we find that even that level 

was no longer good enough.  And they, as the term goes, bit the 

dust and they are no longer with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the apprehensible and the disconcerting 

component of this whole procedure and this whole process, is 

that we are always going higher and higher into the level of 

expertise and competence of the farmers that are now finding 

themselves in financial difficulty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw an evidence of that in this morning's paper.  People 

that we least expect and least suspect of having some financial 

difficulties in the farming community suddenly crop up as the 

main focus of attention.  And I'm not only referring to the issue 

brought up this morning in question period, I'm referring to my 

own community. 

 

And I think every one of us in this House can look at their 

neighbours, every member in this House who's a 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

farming member can look at some of their neighbours and they 

have experienced the same thing.  Farmers with the best yards, 

best machinery, all well painted and seemingly doing very well, 

suddenly find themselves . . . well it's not suddenly but it's 

suddenly as far as the public is concerned. They are exposed 

now as being the victims of the current situation. 

 

Sometimes, admittedly because of their perhaps 

overzealousness in acquiring land, in acquiring perhaps 

machinery, and perhaps taking extended vacations and so on. 

But I would suggest to you and members of this House and the 

public that those are the exceptions rather than the rule.  Very 

often we have competent people, competent farmers being 

caught up in the mix and paying a price, as it were.  Paying a 

price, I submit to you, mainly because of decisions made by 

politicians.  I come back to my major premiss -- decisions 

made by politicians. 

 

I'm not necessarily getting after the current member, Minister 

of Agriculture now, nor the one necessarily when we were in 

power, nor perhaps even the federal Agriculture minister, but 

I'll have some things to say about him in a little while, nor even 

. . . It's a global problem and it's being recognized as such, and 

it's being addressed as such through GATT (General 

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations and some of the 

issues that have been going on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the thing that I wanted to point out on the 

166 Saskatchewan farmers filing for bankruptcy is that 62 per 

cent of those farmers were field-crop farmers -- field-crop 

farmers.  The number of livestock farms which filed for 

bankruptcy were 3 -- 3 of those farmers were livestock farmers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have this government that says to make 

sure that we have a healthy farming sector we must diversify.  

The minister is fond of getting up and saying the livestock 

industry is the basis of our survival.  And I can see why he says 

that.  The statistics prove him right.  And I applaud that. 

 

And when he says we must diversify, we must get into the red 

meat industry, we must get into hogs, we must get into 

livestock, we must protect the supply-managed industries like 

the dairy and the chickens and the eggs, I agree with all of that.  

And it's a laudable comment to make.  The sad aspect of it is, 

Mr. Minister, having said that, all the props, all the supports, 

are taken out from under the farmers. 

 

And I can get into -- and I won't -- we can get into some of the 

details about the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) 

program or the interim red meat stabilization program or the 

cash advance program.  Other issues that the farmers were 

relying upon that have been in place, that were in place, to 

support agriculture have been taken away in one fell swoop and 

the minister says, expand, diversify, get into livestock. 

 

And there's an inconsistency there.  And that inconsistency is 

further aggravated by the counter-productivity of this 

government and so many 

of their initiatives.  And I specifically refer to this latest 

back-door tax grab of 3.8 per cent in power.  That's 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, and it's totally uncalled for.  But as a 

livestock producer, that impacts directly upon me because it's 

an accumulative effect of 4 per cent that we've experienced just 

a little while ago. 

 

And the Minister of Finance gets up and says, well folks in 

Saskatchewan, we have to keep our promises, and we promised 

the folks that they would have regular small increases.  And so 

therefore it was time to keep our promise and that's why we 

have another 3.8 per cent increase.  Don't keep some of your 

promises, we say to members opposite. 

 

But this was compounded on top of a nine and a half per cent 

energy cost in SaskEnergy.  Again the livestock industry needs 

a lot of power.  Why would you do a back-door stab with the 

very same motion saying, expand into agriculture livestock 

sector.  And you take not only the supports away -- that would 

be bad enough -- but you go around the back door yet and take 

more money out of their pockets from farmers that are trying to 

survive. 

 

Now that was my little contribution, Mr. Speaker, in so far as 

the provincial government is concerned.  And I have certainly I 

believe indicated some primary aspects that they should turn 

their attention to.  But to me right now, for a larger portion of 

the farmers and for immediate impact, is the situation as it 

relates to the federal government. And that's part of my motion, 

Mr. Speaker, and it cannot be ignored. 

 

We are finding now, Mr. Speaker, a federal government that 

seems to be distanced and immune from the realities of the 

western grain farmer.  The western grain farmer has, over the 

years, experienced dire, dire problems and has suffered the 

consequences of those. 

 

But again, why would we have politicians creating more of a 

mess, creating more impediments to the economic survival of 

the grain farmers of the prairie provinces, and particularly 

Saskatchewan, because we have almost half of the farm land in 

Canada.  We've got 50 million acres of productive arable land.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, grows a whole heck of a lot of crops. 

 

But those crops are no good to us in the elevators.  Those crops 

are no good to us in the bins, Mr. Speaker.  Those crops must 

be brought to market.  They must be sold.  Well heavens, how 

can we sell those crops if we haven't got a means of bringing 

them to market? 

 

And that's the sad part about it.  If we don't have strikes 

somewhere along the line, whether it is in the Pool system, or 

whether it is the grain handlers on the coast, or whether it's the 

railroads themselves, we don't have enough problems.  But then 

when things seem to be moving slowly and there's no reason 

for grain not to be moving to market, we find that, whoops, 

there's a shortage of railcars.  Right now, Mr. Speaker, on a 

monthly basis we are short 5,000 grain cars -- 5,000 grain cars.  

And they're not going to market.  The grain 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

is not going to market. 

 

Our overseas customers are saying to the Canadian Wheat 

Board, to the Canadian farmer, why should we buy grain from 

you if you're not reliable?  Why should we make contracts with 

you to buy your wheat, to buy your barley, if we don't know for 

sure whether we are going to get it?  Oh yes, we like your 

quality; you've got excellent grain; we would love to buy it; 

we'll pay you a premium for it.  But then we shoot ourselves in 

the foot by not allowing that grain to go to market. 

 

And what's the reason for that?  Is that some ideological reason 

why the federal Minister of Agriculture says no, I know that the 

cars are available out there, I know that CP (Canadian Pacific) 

cars are available out there, we know that there are Burlington 

cars out there from the northern states, there are private cars 

available that would pick up the slack, that would be able to 

deliver this grain to market, but I'm not going to allow that. 

 

That is what Ralph Goodale, right from Regina area, as a 

cabinet minister in the federal government from Saskatchewan, 

who represents Saskatchewan farmers -- is supposed to 

represent Saskatchewan farmers -- is saying, no, no private 

railcars allowed.  I don't know, is he a socialist?  I didn't think 

he was, but what's the problem with private railcars?  I suspect 

the government members sitting there right now are saying, 

you bet, we need that, because there's a bigger crisis in the land 

than simply allowing private railcars to go in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's part of the solution -- that's part of the 

solution.  We've had a backlog of the grain not being able to be 

delivered by the strikes.  That put us behind the eight ball.  

We've got a situation now where there are literally no grain 

cars travelling to the Port of Churchill, because it takes boxcars 

to go to the Port of Churchill.  To my best knowledge, there are 

none of those available to go to Churchill. 

 

What is the ultimate tonnage this year of grain that's going to 

be sold through the Port of Churchill?  It's going to be 

disastrously low.  It's compounding the situation. 

 

I have a letter here from the Western Canadian Wheat Growers 

Association, and this letter is addressed to Mr. Peter 

Thompson, who is the administrator for the Grain 

Transportation Agency, Mr. Speaker.  And according to this 

letter that the Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association is 

writing to Mr. Thompson, that is an acknowledgement that the 

crisis will only worsen in the coming months.  It's not going to 

get better. 

 

And yet when the suggestion was made to Mr. Thompson, who 

is appointed by the Minister of Agriculture of the country of 

Canada, when the suggestion was made that this situation could 

be alleviated by having private cars being added to the runs, 

maybe even being added to the pool, the pool of cars, that it 

was rejected.  It was rejected. 

And they say, it is therefore with great alarm that we learn of 

your decision to not act immediately on the SGTC's 

recommendation, and that is that allow private cars to be added 

to the fleet on an unchargeable basis. 

 

So the Wheat Growers of Canada are certainly very disturbed 

by that decision, Mr. Speaker.  And I could go through the 

entire letter, which I will, due to the constraints of time, resist 

the temptation to do it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to make is their sixth 

point, and I will conclude my comments by having the weight 

of the Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association's support 

being added to my comments where it says that the GTA 

appears to have lost sight of its mandate. 

 

What is the mandate of the Grain Transportation Agency?  And 

that is this: to exercise -- at least the role of the administrator of 

the WGTA -- is to exercise his powers in such manner as to 

facilitate the movement of grain and to ensure that the grain 

transportation system is efficient, reliable, and effective, with 

the objective of maximizing returns to producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only reason that they are not allowing private 

cars into the system is because of the perceived perceptions that 

it would be negative towards shippers.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

mandate is not to support shippers.  They will take care of 

themselves.  They are individuals who are quite capable of 

looking after themselves.  It is the administrator's responsibility 

to see to it that the producers, the producers of the grain are 

being supported as opposed to the shippers. 

 

And they conclude by saying: 

 

Please note that the objective is to maximize returns to 

producers.  There is no mention in this mandate of 

shippers.  It is therefore very disconcerting that you appear 

to be placing the interests of certain shippers ahead of 

those of farmers. 

 

Your letter does not even make the slightest reference to 

what may be in the best interest of farmers. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the federal government this question.  Is this 

what your concern is?  Is this what the federal Minister of 

Agriculture's concern is, that he's got to play the rules straight 

with the shippers as opposed to the farmers? 

 

That member, the Minister of Agriculture of Canada, was 

elected by Saskatchewan farmers in large part.  And that is why 

he is now the federal Minister of Agriculture.  And I suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that he is failing and that he is failing the 

Canadian, the Saskatchewan, grain producers miserably in the 

carrying out of his mandate. 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members of this 

House to send that minister a clear message of how we as 

legislators of the province of Saskatchewan are extremely 

disappointed in his carrying out of his mandate, and that we 

urge him to as quickly as possible alleviate those conditions 

that are adding to the demise of the Saskatchewan farmers, 

which he could easily do with a stroke of a pen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to conclude now by once again acknowledging all 

members of this House by allowing this dire set of 

circumstances to be debated in this legislature this morning, 

Mr. Speaker.  And so now, therefore, move the motion that I 

read before.  And here we are, Mr. Speaker.  I have found it. 

 

And I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, the 

member from Moosomin: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to immediately 

take steps to address the agriculture crisis in 

Saskatchewan, particularly in the north-east where early 

frosts and wet seasons have caused crop failure for two 

consecutive years and where 50 to 60 per cent of the 

Agricultural Credit Corporation accounts are in arrears and 

between 500 and 700 Saskatchewan producers are in 

desperate circumstances, and further urge the government 

to support the SGTC's recommendation to allow private 

grain cars into western rail fleets because the current 

railcar shortage is costing prairie farmers millions of 

dollars in demurrage and lost sales, and further urge the 

government to consider using the $300 million surplus in 

the revenue insurance program to help alleviate these 

problems. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's an 

honour to be able to stand in this Assembly and raise a few 

points, bring them to the attention of the members of the 

Assembly this morning regarding the motion that is before us.  

And I think it's certainly appropriate that we do that, Mr. 

Speaker, in view of the fact that we just received a fax this 

morning from Agriculture Canada.  In fact it was just prior to 

coming into the House that it was delivered to our office.  One 

of the inquiries here or the suggestions of the headlines was 

"UGGS for transport inquiry." 

 

United Grain Growers president Ted Allen has called on 

federal Transport Minister Doug Young to undertake an 

emergency inquiry into the crisis in western grain 

transportation and to immediately instruct the Grain 

Transportation Agency (GTA) to change their rules so as 

to encourage grain shippers to lease cars. 

 

Now as my colleague, the member from Rosthern, has 

indicated in his remarks earlier on, Mr. Speaker, certainly there 

is a crisis facing a number of farmers.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think we need to be careful in how we address the issue 

because it's not just farmers, it's 

families, Mr. Speaker.  It's small rural communities.  It's people 

right across this province.  Even the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon are affected when the farming community is facing a 

difficult time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've had the privilege of talking to a number of 

people, certainly in the north-east, regarding the farm situation.  

I've attended meetings regarding health and meetings related to 

some of the concerns people have had regarding the new gun 

laws. 

 

And one of the major areas of discussion that always crops up 

is the problem that farmers are facing in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. And we're finding out, Mr. Speaker, that it's not 

just a problem that's affecting farmers in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan, but it's affecting farmers right across the whole 

spectrum.  However, the north-east area certainly has another 

problem related to their area that most farmers in general have 

been able to overcome.  And that is in relationship in regard to 

the harvest of last fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we realize that the north-east section of our 

province has some of the larger areas and acres of grain that 

still are yet to be harvested.  And this isn't just the first year, it's 

the second year where they're facing a significant problem 

related to harvesting and the fact that they weren't able to get 

the crop off and put it in the bin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you think of the fact that early frost . . . and 

that first of all wasn't considered a real problem. However 

when that first snowfall came . . . and generally in 

Saskatchewan when we get a snowfall in the fall, in September, 

you can expect that that snowfall and that moisture is going to 

disappear.  It will dry up and we'll receive a normal period of 

maybe ten days to three weeks, even a month, of good weather 

late into the fall to allow the harvest.  However in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan that reprieve really didn't come.  They had one 

or two days, and in most cases, some farmers have very little, if 

any, crop today that they were able to harvest. 

 

As we've been discussing this issue, as we've raised the issue 

on the floor of the Assembly, we've continued to ask the 

Minister of Agriculture and the government and the Premier, 

we've raised questions as to what they're going to do to address 

some of these concerns. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture, and even the Minister of 

Highways in his response indicated, well the prices of the 

product, the prices of grain have increased significantly; 

therefore it would be appropriate for farmers to just go to the 

bin and haul a bit of grain out. With the significant increases in 

prices they will be able to generate the cash flow that would 

alleviate the concerns that the lenders have and give them the 

opportunity to pay off some of last year's bills as well as put 

some money aside to put the grain in the ground. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, it's not as simple as that.  There are a 

number of hindrances in the way.  Number one, 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

any time you see a significant increase in grain it's a reflection 

of the fact that there was a lack of product on the farm. It's a 

reflection of the fact that there were poor growing conditions. 

It's a reflection of the fact that in many cases too the grain 

prices, the increased grain prices have come in the areas of 

grain production that has been harvested.  As we've seen in this 

case, Mr. Speaker, higher grain prices for No. 1 and No. 2 high 

protein wheat, when most of the wheat that's been harvested is 

either Canada 3 or else feed. 

 

And if you don't happen to have the right product in the bin, or 

if you have no product in the bin, it doesn't really matter what 

the prices are, you cannot generate the cash flow.  You do not 

have the ability to derive the income to give you the cash flow 

to pay the bills. 

 

And those bills, Mr. Speaker, are bills owed to fuel suppliers, 

they're owed to fertilizer and chemical dealers, they're owed to 

local grocery stores, as people have tried to maintain their 

ability to feed themselves, Mr. Speaker.  And as those bills 

aren't paid, it makes it even more difficult for the local 

businesses in our small communities to survive. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, it may mean that there are few 

people from the rural areas coming into centres like Regina to 

take advantage of the shopping that is available here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the government has an opportunity to at 

least address some of the concerns. And I realize the issue of 

grain transportation is an issue that falls into the federal 

government's court -- its responsibility. However, as a 

province, it's up to the provincial government to continue to 

raise the concern of grain car shortage and the ability to move 

this product to market. 

 

As I look at the release that came in today, just the second page 

of this release indicates . . . the headline is:  "Canada's 

reputation as a reliable supplier in jeopardy".  And we have 

Alex Graham from the Alberta Wheat Pool, recently returned 

from China and Japan, and said the single most important issue 

facing Canadians is our reliability as a supplier of grains and 

oilseeds.  He said the labour situation at the west cost and our 

ability to ship commodities on time are the two issues affecting 

Canada's reputation. 

 

Graham said the turnaround time time of grain cars to the U.S. 

is terrible and so is the shortage of cars.  He said the railways 

let too many cars go back into the U.S. and they didn't keep the 

leases up.  We simply don't have enough cars.  Graham said the 

solution is to have the railroads build and supply cars on their 

own. 

 

And he suggests that the Western Grain Transportation Act 

guarantees railroads a return of 20 per cent on their investment 

and that should be good enough in asking the railways to make 

sure we have enough of a car fleet available to move the 

product into the delivery system, into the handling system, so 

that indeed we can meet the needs of our customers. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, even if we do have product 

available, and as I've indicated, there are farmers who do not 

have the product to even put into the system, but there are other 

producers who do have product to move, and even though they 

would like to, are unable to because of the lack and shortage of 

railcars across this nation to meet the demand out there. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but when you finally get the 

railcars up and running, what do we have?  Lo and behold, 

another avenue that farmers and people right across this 

province have no control over, the ability of dock workers and 

grain handlers at the other end, at the ports, as we saw earlier 

on this year, to go on strike just as we're ready to move product 

into market, just as our customers are sitting there waiting to 

take up this product that's coming their way, and then their 

ships have to sit at dock, Mr. Speaker, waiting for the grain. 

 

And what happens, Mr. Speaker?  They then charge the 

Canadian . . . actually they don't charge the Canadian 

consumer; it does, in a way, come back to the consumer 

through government.  But the producer and the elevator 

companies and the grain handling companies are then charged 

for demurrage for not having that product available. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of problems that are facing 

people in the agricultural industry, in the agricultural sector in 

trying to derive the revenue they need to put product in the 

ground. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is only fair that we remind the 

government . . . and the government, as some of the ministers 

have indicated, do whatever is necessary to emphasize and 

bring forward to the point, even to the federal minister and the 

federal government, the fact that they have a responsibility not 

just to look after, as we're seeing in the last few days, not just to 

look after the province of Quebec and pour the money into 

Quebec to try and build up the fortunes of the Liberal party in 

Quebec seeking re-election, but they have a responsibility to 

represent people right across this country, which includes the 

agricultural sector in western Canada, and specifically here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important that we continue to 

remind the members opposite that they must stand up, that they 

must give leadership, that they must speak out on behalf of 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even though the government may feel good 

about the fact that we're suggesting they speak and put the onus 

on the federal government, the provincial government also has 

a responsibility. 

 

Now we've been in estimates in Agriculture and the Minister of 

Agriculture has indicated that certainly the revenue side of the 

GRIP insurance program, the GRIP safety net, Mr. Speaker, 

has the potential this year -- in fact, I believe he indicated that 

there was a $42 million surplus to date -- and has the potential 

of a $300 million surplus in the account by the end of the year. 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

And, Mr. Speaker, when there are farmers who have been 

involved in the program who had no control and who have lost 

the cash flow that was available to them because of the moves 

of this government, because they took away and changed the 

GRIP safety net, it would seem, Mr. Speaker, that it would be 

only appropriate that the Minister of Agriculture speak to his 

cabinet colleagues and speak with his caucus and indicate 

maybe we should move on some of this cash surplus that will 

be available and make it available right now, whether it starts 

out as a loan and then is forgiven as the funds are available; and 

indeed puts this money back in the hands of the producers, the 

actual producers who were part of the program, who continue 

to pay their premiums. 

 

I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, what we will see at the end of the day 

is the government will take the surplus and that the producers 

who put the money in will get very little out of it.  It will be 

just thrown into another overall safety net program and handed 

out to all producers.  And I'm afraid not just here in 

Saskatchewan but right across Canada, when it should be 

staying here in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1130) 

 

I think it's only right, Mr. Speaker, that indeed the funds that 

are generated in this province stay in this province.  And that's 

why we have argued, Mr. Speaker, even on the grain 

transportation Act, that the money that would be coming to the 

province to help in grain transportation, the province should be 

lobbying the federal government to make that sum of money 

available to the province so that we could utilize it most 

effectively in a most effective manner to guarantee grain 

transportation an access to transportation to move the product 

from the province of Saskatchewan to the west coast or to the 

east coast. 

 

Or even in this case, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Minister of 

Highways indicated the Hudson Bay Route Association is 

holding their annual meeting in Hudson Bay this weekend, and 

I'm sure that one of the concerns they have is the fact that it 

would appear that there is going to be a lack of shipment 

through the port of Churchill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about lack of funds in the 

agricultural sector, when we talk about the inability to move 

product to market, when we talk about the problems that people 

are facing, we are also talking about jobs.  And we just raised 

the concern again today that Saskatchewan had 2,000 fewer 

jobs in the month of March -- 2,000 fewer jobs available when 

students are now in the process of writing final exams and 

looking for jobs to create some economic activity and to build 

up a cash flow so that they can go back to university the next 

year, or wherever they're going to increase their knowledge, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it seemed to me . . . and the one thing I would note in this, 

Mr. Speaker, is the fact that agriculture is a major generator of 

jobs through the summer 

months.  Through the spring season, through the summer 

months and into the fall, farmers right across this province as 

they get into the billion dollar industry of agriculture, employ 

people to work on the farm.  They employ young people.  They 

give them an opportunity, or give them many job opportunities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it's very important when we look at agriculture as 

being a major employer of jobs and a generator of jobs in this 

province, that they indeed look very seriously at raising those 

concerns, and that they do whatever they have available, and 

that they meet their responsibility to the agriculture producer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's appropriate that we have addressed this 

issue, that we've raised the issue this morning.  I think it's 

appropriate that we have brought some of these concerns to the 

floor of this Assembly. And I'm sure that there are many other 

MLAs in this Assembly, be they government members or 

members of the Liberal Party, who would like to bring some 

points forward as well. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to belabour the 

points that I've been raising; I think they will continue to be 

raised.  And I thank you for the opportunity of having had a 

moment to speak and to raise some of the concerns and to 

address the intent of the motion that is before us.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure for me to again rise in the Assembly and talk about a 

very important issue, that being the agricultural economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of the problems that we have in Saskatchewan is that there 

for many years was a very huge lack of support; a lack of 

recognition for the importance of agriculture in western Canada 

by the federal government. 

 

There were some people, when the federal election came 

around last time who thought that might change -- and in fact I 

was one of those people who said, well it couldn't get any 

worse anyway.  And I was looking forward to some new faces 

on the federal agricultural scene and hopefully some support 

for western Canada, as farmers, in areas of transportation and 

areas of marketing. 

 

I've been somewhat disappointed, Mr. Speaker, and I won't go 

on in length about the last federal government because I think 

we've done that many times in this Assembly.  But it's the 

future that I'm very concerned about. 

 

And I've been somewhat disappointed that the current federal 

Minister of Agriculture, although when I hear him speak and 

reported in the press sounding good, there seems to be a 

definite lack of action.  And I know they're a new government, 

but my feeling is that any new government would want to put a 

stamp quickly on the direction that government would change, 

in this case, in agriculture. 

 

The basis of this whole argument in agriculture, Mr. 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Speaker, in my estimation revolves around one thing.  And that 

is do we or do we not have an orderly marketing system in this 

country?  Do we support an orderly marketing system or do we 

not support an orderly marketing system? 

 

The current shortage of grain cars is an issue.  The use of 

Churchill and the Hudson's Bay route is an issue.  The lack of 

support for grain transportation is an issue.  The lack of 

standing up to the U.S. on the durum question is an issue.  And 

these are some of the issues, Mr. Speaker, that I want to bring 

in in the time that I have today, all around the single question 

of why do we need an orderly marketing system? 

 

I often have to remind myself, Mr. Speaker, because I get 

sidetracked.  I get sidetracked on the issues of the day, but 

every once in a while it hits me square in the face again that 

every issue of the day in the last number of years has been 

brought forward for the sole purpose of undermining the 

orderly marketing system that we have in this country.  Every 

one of them.  And I thought with a . . . I was optimistic. I was 

hopeful that with a new federal government, that this might 

change.  But sadly it appears that it isn't. 

 

Let's look at the issue of railcar shortage.  The Canadian Wheat 

Board has put money in through the farmers; governments have 

put money in to buy railcars.  And I asked the question of the 

federal Minister of Agriculture: whose responsibility is it to 

maintain this fleet?  Ultimately whose responsibility is it? 

 

I say that it is his responsibility. And  I'm sure the member for 

Shaunavon will agree with me.  And if it's his responsibility, 

ultimately, to make sure all the players are working together to 

maintain a fleet to get the harvested grain to market, then he 

has to be watching every aspect. 

 

Now I've been around long enough in the agricultural industry 

to see the railroads time and time again trying to improve their 

profits.  Nothing wrong with that.  But they're doing it on the 

backs of Saskatchewan farmers and Saskatchewan's economy 

and the western economy.  There is something wrong with that, 

and that's why it's the federal Agriculture minister's 

responsibility to oversee this. 

 

So if again this issue is coming up, if this is a . . . what if it's a 

power play by the railroads again to force the method of 

payment change?  I mean, does Mr. Goodale know that it's not 

a power play by the railroad?  Does the member from 

Shaunavon talk to Mr. Goodale and say, are you watching for 

this?  I don't know.  We may hear in a minute, if he has 

something to say. 

 

What does the Leader of the Third Party have to say about 

some of the actions of her federal counterpart?  Nothing.  Silent 

support for things like changing his mind on interest free cash 

advances is one thing, but I don't want to get off on that tangent 

because it's not directly related to this. 

But the March 24 Western Producer, Mr. Speaker, is reported 

-- Mr. Feeny is saying that there's a car shortage of several 

thousand cars.  There is very few U.S. cars available, he says.  

But I want to quote something here: 

 

Feeny said the railway doesn't like to describe the current 

situation as a "car shortage."  There are lots of cars, he 

said, noting that CN will have more than 15,000 cars in 

service in April, almost the highest ever. 

 

The railways say the problems are a reflection of 

unexpected changes in crop production and sales patterns, 

especially the increased volumes of special crops and the 

large volumes being shipped to the U.S. 

 

So let's assume that's the problem.  If that's the problem . . . let 

me describe the problem.  Increased volumes of special crops.  

And what's happening, Mr. Speaker, is that because of the 

cereal grains being very low priced, there has been an increase 

in special crops, pulse crops especially.  Those crops are not 

handled through the Canadian Wheat Board; they're handled on 

the open market system. 

 

But what's happening is because of the timing and pricing and 

the fluctuations in the market, the pulse crops are being stored 

in grain cars at the terminals, on sidings.  And I don't know 

their numbers, and I don't think it's a major problem, but it's a 

contributing problem right now. 

 

So the solution isn't really getting more cars into the system.  

The solution is ensuring that the system is operating 

functionally whereby . . . as an example, under the Canadian 

Wheat Board and the orderly marketing system the cereal 

grains move, but we can't allow the railcars to be used as 

storage by special crops.  I mean the farmers don't want this.  I 

mean they want to grow their special crops; they want to ship 

them. 

 

So I say to the federal government, why don't you look at the 

orderly marketing system for special crops?  Because this is 

going to become a greater problem.  Right now we're 

marketing most of our . . . just about all the special crops that 

we grow.  There's very little carry-over every year.  And the 

wheat acres are going down; special-crop acres are going up.  

And if this continues, this means that at some point in time 

we're going to hit a saturation point where we're not going to be 

able to sell all the special crops that we grow. 

 

And right now the system is working fairly well because when 

you can sell everything you grow it's just a matter of getting it 

through the system.  But now we're starting to have problems 

because after there's more than you can sell, there's become an 

ever-increasing problem of cars availability, of sales on the 

open market system. 

 

That's why we have to have the federal minister look at the 

possibility of putting special crops under the Canadian Wheat 

Board.  Because if you don't have the 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

orderly marketing, we would never . . . I really enjoy talking 

about this, Mr. Speaker, because it brings, it snaps, me back to 

reality of exactly why we're here. 

 

And I want to step back.  We grow about the same amount of 

wheat as Kansas.  The only reason that we're in the market in 

the world today the way we are -- the only reason -- is because 

of the orderly marketing system we have.  Because the world 

. . . France now grows as much grain as we do.  The world is 

growing grain.  But we have an orderly marketing system that's 

comprised of deliveries, quotas, fairness -- which means 

fairness to producers -- timely deliveries through the rail 

system, if it's operating functionally, and quality.  And those 

factors have been . . . Our buyers have . . . We have a 

reputation of being very, very good at this.  And that's why 

we're in the market. 

 

We're in there because of the system that was built by our 

forefathers.  And every time that I hear an issue -- I don't care if 

it's durum or railcars or something else -- it's another chink in 

the whole orderly marketing system. 

 

And I'm very guilty of getting sidetracked on the issues of the 

day.  And like I say, sometimes you have to just sort of sit back 

and say, well why is this going on?  Why are the Americans so 

concerned about durum?  Do you think they're concerned about 

durum?  I mean they could care less about durum.  But they're 

using it to erode the credibility of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

And that's what they continue to do.  You read the articles, you 

listen to the senators, and they're playing their little political 

games. You see the ultra right wing in North Dakota and 

Montana organizing as they are at their meetings that started 

this week in North Dakota and moving down to Montana. 

 

They have a commission, Mr. Speaker, in the U.S. now 

meeting in I think it's a dozen or so cities -- towns and cities.  

And this commission is going to report to the President of the 

United States suggesting whether or not he should activate 

section 22 of their agricultural . . . I just forget the name of it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've been listening to the 

member and I think, although it's very interesting, what he's 

talking about in the United States I don't think it's very 

pertinent to the motion that is before us and I ask the member 

to get back on the motion that's before the House. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I realize that I wasn't at this point 

in time talking directly about this motion.  But the purpose of 

this motion is directly . . . is the same in which I was talking. 

 

We're talking here about railcar shortages, okay, and I started 

off by saying, why is there a railcar shortage?  Is it a power 

play by the railroads?  Is it the special crops taking up cars?  Is 

it the unavailability of U.S. cars?  And another reason, a similar 

reason, is the durum.  And I 

won't continue on that, although I wouldn't mind.  But what's 

happening is they're using the system . . . or they're using issues 

and excuses to erode the system. 

 

Another thing that we have to do is something like . . . oh, yes, 

the Wheat Board Advisory. I want to talk about that for a 

minute.  Now the Wheat Board Advisory Committee are 11 

farm representatives who are right now in Vancouver.  And you 

know what they're doing?  I mean they're concerned about the 

railcar shortage, they're concerned about the deliveries, because 

it all affects the economy of Saskatchewan, but they're in 

Vancouver, they're sitting down with the labour movement, 

organized labour in Vancouver, and they're sitting down with 

the elevator companies, the management, to try to drive home 

to them the importance of the shipping system that we have and 

the movement of grain for the western economy. 

 

I think that's a very constructive move because they're not, as 

some members in the opposition are doing, pounding on our 

workers on the west coast, and they're not going to blame 

management.  They're sitting down and they're trying to find 

. . . they're trying to ensure that there's a total understanding of 

the system that we have.  And that system is being eroded, and 

they know it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another problem that we have is Churchill, 

and it was mentioned by the previous speaker.  Now Churchill 

is, for Saskatchewan and Manitoba especially, north-east 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba, a very cheap route.  And we 

wouldn't need as many railcars and we could ship our grain 

cheaper if we did use Churchill.  We have a natural salt-water 

port.  It's closer from my farm to Churchill salt water than it is 

from my farm to Thunder Bay, where it has to go another 

thousand miles to hit salt water. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's been every excuse in the book used 

why we can't use Churchill, and we hear rumblings and we hear 

that maybe this year Churchill's not going to be used at all.  

And I say, where is the federal Liberal government coming 

from?  Are they bound by the votes in the East?  Are they 

trying to use this for political purposes?  Beat the Bob Rae 

government in Ontario by making sure that all the people in the 

lakehead are working and forgetting about northern Manitoba 

and the farmers of Saskatchewan?  Is this what's happening? 

 

I mean, and I ask my colleague from Shaunavon to stand up 

and tell me that he has consulted with his leader and Mr. 

Goodale to ensure that we get not less grain or no grain moving 

through Churchill, but more grain moving through Churchill. 

 

I was up in Churchill last year and there was an ice-breaker 

came in through the solid ice in early June.  There are ways . . . 

modern technology shows us there are ways to move grain 

through that port, but the desire isn't there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say, whose responsibility is this?  And I 

don't want to be too critical of the new federal 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Liberal government, but I want to be critical enough to ensure 

that they listen.  And I think in this House, if we speak in one 

voice, they may listen.  The federal minister is from this 

province; he has an interest, and we have an interest. 

 

But I want to repeat what one of the members said today in 

question period, and I quote from The Western Producer of 

March 31, "Goodale is criticized for copy-cat ag budget". 

 

And in this article, the federal minister is being criticized by 

one of his own back-benchers, Mr. Easter.  Now Mr. Easter 

says that the budget brought forward by . . . the agricultural 

budget brought forward by Mr. Goodale is no change from the 

last Tory administration; it's a "copy-cat ag budget".  And I just 

want to read a little bit into the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

During a Commons agricultural committee meeting March 

23, Wayne Easter (Lib -- Malpeque) complained that the 

government's 1994-95 spending proposals tabled in the 

(House of) Commons, do not reflect (did not reflect) the 

commitments he and other Liberal candidates made during 

the 1993 election campaign. 

A direct criticism of his own minister, saying that he wasn't 

doing . . . wasn't carrying forward the promises made by 

himself and all the other Liberal candidates with regard to 

agriculture. 

 

He said the new government appears to have simply 

accepted the spending plans that Agriculture Canada 

bureaucrats were preparing for the previous Conservative 

government. 

 

Now be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I still 

reserve judgement because I think there's still time for 

something to happen.  I think we still have to give the federal 

minister a little time, but his time is quickly running out in the 

eyes of Saskatchewan farmers.  Because you can't take away a 

promise like you're going to give back interest-free cash 

advances and say, oh, I guess we're not going to do it.  Time is 

running out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying, all this 

points to one thing and that is the demise of the orderly 

marketing system.  The U.S. durum, the cars, the fleet that's out 

there, the lack of use of Churchill -- all pointed at destroying 

our orderly marketing system. 

 

And I want the member, the Liberal leader, to stand in her 

place and tell the people of Saskatchewan in this House that she 

supports orderly marketing and she . . . even though at one time 

a year or so ago, she said she didn't, but that she's changed her 

mind and she supports orderly marketing; and that she has 

relayed that message to Mr. Goodale, that unless we maintain 

an orderly marketing system in this country, we will not 

maintain our economic base through grains, whether it be 

cereals, oilseeds, or pulses. 

In the short term it may look like you can do that.  But when 

you look through and look at the whole picture, you understand 

why the system was made in the first place.  And if we don't 

continue, Mr. Speaker, if we don't continue to support that 

system, we're going to be in grave, grave trouble. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now would like to move an amendment 

to the motion.  This amendment will be seconded by the 

member for Last Mountain-Touchwood.  And I will read it: 

 

That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

encourage the provincial government to continue its 

efforts to assist the agriculture industry with its recovery, 

and urge the federal government to assist with the 

resolution of localized difficulties such as those caused by 

early frosts and snows in the north-east; 

 

and further, that the Assembly call on the federal 

government to resolve the problems in grain transportation 

system including the shortage of rolling stock, and to 

require the railways to provide better and more efficient 

rail service; 

 

and that a copy of the relevant Debates and Proceedings 

from April 8, together with a copy of the resolution, be 

forwarded to the federal Minister of Agriculture and the 

National Grain Transportation Agency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would move this motion.  And in doing so, 

I'd like to indicate that our Minister of Transportation, my 

colleague from Kelsey-Tisdale, has written the Hon. Douglas 

Young, Minister of Transport for Canada, indicating a number 

of things that we think should happen in order to make sure that 

we have a good transportation industry in Canada, for the 

economy of the West.  So our government has already started 

the process. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Has the member moved the 

amendment or is he simply indicating that he's planning to 

move that amendment at some point?  Because if the member is 

speaking after having moved the amendment, then he should 

stop now.  Or is the member giving . . . advising the other 

members that he will in fact be moving that amendment? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I have not said, I so move, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I'm sorry if I didn't make that clear . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I understand the rules.  And I will be 

moving it very shortly. 

 

But as I was saying, we have already . . . I want to get the intent 

of the amendment forward.  Before, I indicated that we have 

already started, through our provincial minister in contact with 

the federal minister, through our Agriculture minister 

contacting the federal Agriculture minister and working with 

them, to try to make sure that we have an orderly, 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

efficient system.  Mr. Speaker, it is so important that we 

maintain the system to maintain the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I don't think I'll say much more but just to end off with the 

way I started:  the only reason that we're in this game is 

because of our orderly marketing system.  It maintains timely 

deliveries, which our customers have to know, and it maintains 

quality.  And unless we move that into our special crops and 

the new crops that are coming in, we will in the short term be 

all right because the market is bigger than we can supply, but as 

we grow we'll be getting into ever-increasing difficulty. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would urge all members of this House to 

support this amendment, especially saying that it's going to be 

sent to the national Grain Transportation Agency and the 

federal Minister of Agriculture, a unified voice showing that 

there is a serious problem and he has the ball in his court.  

We'll work with him -- we're already indicating we have, and 

we're starting to -- but he has to be a little more decisive.  He 

has to have a little more support maybe from his provincial 

colleagues.  But the job has to be done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

encourage the provincial government to continue its 

efforts to assist the agricultural industry with its recovery, 

and urge the federal government to assist with the 

resolution of localized difficulties such as those caused by 

early frosts and snow in the north-east; 

 

and further, that the Assembly call on the federal 

government to resolve the problems in the grain 

transportation system including the shortage of rolling 

stock, and to require the railways to provide better and 

more efficient rail service; 

 

and that a copy of the relevant Debates and Proceedings 

from April 8, together with a copy of the resolution, be 

forwarded to the federal Minister of Agriculture and the 

national Grain Transportation Agency. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me pleasure today to enter into the debate as the seconder of 

the motion that was: 

 

encourage the provincial government to continue its 

efforts to assist the agricultural industry with its recovery, 

and urge the federal government to assist with the 

resolution of localized difficulties such as those caused by 

the early frosts and snow in the north-east; 

Mr. Speaker, there are some problems, serious problems, in 

the north-east and we know that and we have been dealing 

with it and trying to rectify some of the problems up there. 

 

Last fall, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation moved in 

a massive amount of adjusters into that area, gathered them 

from all over the province, sent them up there to get the 

adjusting done on those crops as soon as they could so the 

farmers could get their claim and get the money in their hands 

last fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moved almost in 13,000 adjusters; 30,000 

province-wide claims were processed with 13,000 come from 

the north-east.  They paid out 85 per cent of the claims prior to 

receiving grading information, within two weeks of the adjuster 

visiting the farmers up there. 

 

(1200) 

 

They say that the government hasn't done enough.  Well we did 

what we could with the crop insurance.  We moved the 

adjusters in; we paid 85 per cent of the claims out before the 

grading information was got back -- 85 per cent paid out within 

two weeks of the adjuster being at the farm. 

 

Adjusters were also instructed to use discretion when assessing 

whether the crop was harvestable or not.  So there was some 

leeway given for that area under special circumstances last 

year. 

 

Extension of insurance was granted unconditionally to 

compensate for losses over the winter.  Extension of insurance 

was granted for 1,922 crops comprising of approximately 190 

acres in the north-east of Saskatchewan. 

 

Crop Insurance did more than go out of their way last fall to 

accommodate the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan to get 

the harvest off.  We realize that they were brought in by an 

early snowfall. 

 

We have, last year, negotiated or talked with the federal 

Minister of Agriculture for extra help for the farmers in 

north-eastern Saskatchewan.  He agreed with it at that time.  

Where has he been ever since?  There is no help coming and 

now he's backing off again.  Last fall he did say that it was 

needed and now he's saying not. 

 

Crop Insurance has done, as I said . . . have went out of their 

way to accommodate the farmers in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan.  But Crop Insurance is under pressure itself.  

And why is it under pressure, Mr. Speaker?  It is under pressure 

because of the debt load that was left by the manipulation and 

the poor management of the administration through the '80s.  A 

$600 million deficit that was left in Crop Insurance has their 

hands tied as to what they can do.  They're restricted. 

 

Now the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan not only have 

to worry about paying the crop insurance and paying their 

premiums to keep crop insurance 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

going, they also have to pay a premium to pay off the $600 

million deficit left by the former administration.  Hand tied, but 

we have done everything that we could to make sure the 

farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan got the money that was 

coming to them, even before they should have got it.  But we 

went out of our way to make sure they got it as quick as they 

possibly could. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adding to the railcar shortage, as my associate 

from Humboldt has hit on, I believe he's on the right track with 

that.  The only reason that Saskatchewan farmers are in the 

world market-place, with the quality control that we have, with 

the service that we are allowed to provide to our customers, is 

because of the orderly market system.  Being able to gather the 

grain, knowing where it's coming from, what the grade is, what 

the dockage is; knowing where it is coming and where it is 

going. 

 

What we have now are producer cars, cars outside the orderly 

marketing system picking grain up all over, no control on the 

grading, no control on the moisture content -- helter-skelter all 

over -- coming into one point, and we don't have the quality 

control that we did have under the orderly marketing. 

 

We also have coming through that system unlicensed varieties 

that are hitting the market-place also, causing our producers to 

question our ability to provide good quality product. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the railroads have to control and we have to get 

the orderly marketing through all grains.  And I agree with him 

that all grains should be harvested through the Canadian Wheat 

Board, or through an orderly marketing system so as we know 

what the quality is, we know where the grain is, where it's 

coming from, and we can deliver it and deliver it on time. 

 

As we sit now, with the boats that are sitting in the harbour in 

the west coast, we are paying demurrage on those ships.  We 

are also losing our reputation as a supplier of good quality and 

a supplier on the time frame that was set out to do it within.  If 

the producers or the customers out there want their grain, we 

are known to deliver it when they want it; because of the 

shortage of railcars now we are not being able to do that and we 

are losing our reputation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Agriculture, to bring 

private railcars into the system, I guess in the short term if that 

is going to alleviate the problem or get rid of it for short term, 

then maybe the Minister of Agriculture should be looking at 

that and working as hard as he could to do that.  But I must 

remind the members that when we were under a system that 

had all private cars, it didn't do the job.  The producers and the 

taxpayers were forced to buy cars to put into that system. 

 

And now we have a rail system that has the rolling stock or has 

the engine power and now pulls up to the producers' elevators 

with the producers' cars and runs down to the producers' 

terminals and can't keep up 

and can't make money at it.  We have supplied the cars, we 

have supplied the elevators, and we've supplied the terminals; 

and they are still crying for more help from us. 

 

Then we have the federal government on the other hand that 

cuts another 5 per cent out of the transportation . . . the western 

transportation Act -- 30 or $40 million more out of the 

producers of Saskatchewan; 30 or $40 million more that the 

producers of Saskatchewan would have to put their crops in the 

ground this spring. 

 

The federal Minister of Agriculture on the other hand, too, also 

goes with cash advances, interest-free cash advances.  Some 

farmers can't pay their cash advance off now because of the 

lack of rolling stock; their elevators are plugged.  The other guy 

can pay his off.  They have to coordinate this -- the amount of 

railcars -- and if it takes private railcars in order to get the 

system going again, then so be it.  If they're out there, then let's 

use them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first speaker today hit on what the government 

has done, not only for north-eastern Saskatchewan and what we 

have failed to do, but the whole industry in Saskatchewan.  And 

I want to look a little at the livestock industry, because it also 

adds in here some of the problems in the agricultural industry. 

 

The member says that, because of the FeedGAP and doing 

away with the interim red meat stabilization program, that the 

cattle industry in Saskatchewan is suffering because of that and 

we have come around at the back door to injure the cattle 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I remind the members opposite that in 1980 and '81 in this 

province, the Saskatchewan beef stabilization program was 

brought in.  It was the first beef stabilization program brought 

in anywhere in Canada that guaranteed the cost of production -- 

95 per cent of cash costs, 55 per cent of non-cash costs.  A 

person that went into the beef industry knew what he was going 

to get for that animal, knew what his recovery was on that 

animal when he put it in the feed lot or even when it dropped 

on the ground. 

 

What did the members opposite do?  It was too rich a program.  

They threw it out; it was too rich.  They had the gall to say that 

it was too rich of a program for the farmers of Saskatchewan; 

our cow numbers were going up. And they killed the program 

and they went into the tripartite. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I would like to have a ruling as to whether 

the member is speaking to the main motion or to the 

amendment of the motion. 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I'm listening very carefully to the 

member, and the member knows what the motion is and what 

the amendments are, that he should try to speak to the 

amendment . . . or to the motion and amendment concurrently.  

He should not attempt to stray too far from that or to speak at 

length on agricultural issues that are not related to the motion 

and amendment. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, when you look at the north-east, it 

is not just . . . railcars in there isn't going to help.  The cattle 

industry in north-eastern Saskatchewan is what is keeping that 

corner of the province viable also.  So the cattle industry also 

has to look at the whole agriculture industry. 

 

I want to close then, Mr. Speaker, by saying that the rolling 

stock -- and repeating what is said -- the Canadian Wheat 

Board has to be . . . or an orderly marketing system of some 

kind has to be the only marketing system that can gather the 

grain, that can organize the cars, and that can get the rolling 

stock and get the producers' grains to the market on time and 

the quality of grain that we are known to deliver to our 

customers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite and the member from 

Shaunavon will enter the debate, which I'm sure he will later 

on, I'm sure he will state in that that he will be talking to the 

Minister of Agriculture to do whatever he can to get the rolling 

stock of Saskatchewan or the rolling stock of the railways 

going in Saskatchewan and back here to move the grain.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise 

today to speak in support of the main motion that was put 

forward by the member from Rosthern.  And listening to some 

of the comments that were made from both the member from 

Humboldt and the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, I 

was somewhat surprised.  I heard them both make statements 

that the present provincial government has done all that they 

can do for the farmers.  And I say that is not so, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  In fact in both of their speeches they're continually 

blaming someone else.  They're saying someone else is always 

at fault; they refuse to take any responsibility for agriculture. 

 

One has to wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is it that we have 

such a large Department of Agriculture?  Why is it that we 

even have a Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan any 

longer, if they fail to accept any responsibility; that they must 

show some leadership, show some leadership in not only 

Saskatchewan, but in Canada.  We're the province that's most 

affected.  Our economy is most affected by agriculture than any 

other province in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And for once I 

think it should be upon their shoulders, their responsibility 

should be on their shoulders to bring forward some plans, 

whether it be safety nets or crop insurance or disaster relief 

programs. 

 

However, I didn't hear either of the members speak on 

those issues, in fact they chose to ignore . . . and what they 

have ignored for the last few months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 

address any futuristic thinking in agriculture at all.  Neither of 

those members have got up, that I know of, in this session, and 

spoke of any direction that this province can take agriculture in, 

or any of the problems that many of the farm families are being 

faced with in Saskatchewan.  Neither of those members have 

addressed those concerns. 

 

However they have continuously said that it's somebody else's 

fault, somebody else's responsibility.  They can't even put 

forward a plan, and I think that's getting somewhat 

disappointing, not only from our perspective, but the 

perspective of all the farm families in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Knowing those two members as well as I do and watching them 

give their short talks on agriculture, I truly believe that they 

were both somewhat embarrassed in what they were saying and 

had to say, but I don't know as they had a lot of choice in what 

they could talk about. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason why . . . Mr. Speaker now, the 

reason why I enjoy to get up and speak on the main motion is 

that the farmers in the Shaunavon constituency in the part of 

the province that I represent are going to be in the fields.  In 

fact some of them are in the fields now, as of today, and being 

ahead of many other areas of the province with their seeding 

plans and such. I guess that's exactly why the Liberal caucus 

has always taken the lead and showed a strong leadership role 

in defending the farmers of Saskatchewan and trying to bring 

these issues forward and get them dealt with in a very succinct 

and proper fashion. 

 

Several times during this session in fact, when I look at many 

of the agriculture issues that the Liberal caucus has brought 

forward, probably once or twice a week since the session began 

we've been up with questions in agriculture and making 

statements in the agriculture industry, only to have very few, if 

any, of those questions properly answered. 

 

(1215) 

 

And that's becoming very apparent to the farm families in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I judge this by the amount of 

calls and letters that we are getting into our office regarding 

some of the comments made by the government of the 

province.  On many occasions we have raised the issues that 

were touched on, both in the main motion and at other times 

throughout the day --  that being issues of crop insurance. 

 

I look at the crop insurance program and what's happened to it 

in south-western Saskatchewan.  And it's becoming very 

evident when you have something in the neighbourhood of 20 

per cent of all the participating acres in the crop insurance 

program being dropped in one year alone, just in the past year, 

and what we're hearing from the farmers in this upcoming 

spring for their plans is to . . . once again 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

many of these people that stayed in last year are going to be 

dropping out. 

 

But you've had in one year a 20 per cent decrease in 

participating acres in the crop insurance program, and yet in 

that same time frame you've had a 30 per cent increase in the 

premium rates.  And one has to wonder, is that where this 

government thinks that it's really at for the farm families of 

Saskatchewan?  Farm families that have for several years in a 

row now have been financially hard-pressed. 

 

Who are they defending?  You're very capable in defending 

your family of Crown corporations, very capable.  When you 

formed government in 1991, you took much of the debt of the 

province, brought it forward and made a big issue out of it, 

wrote debt off in the Crowns.  However, in the Crop Insurance 

Corporation, you left a $600 million debt. 

 

I hear today the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

blaming, as they often do, blaming the Progressive 

Conservative Party for not dealing with that $600 million debt 

in the crop insurance reinsurance fund.  And perhaps they are at 

fault. 

 

But now you're in government and you're the one with the large 

majority -- 50-some members.  Why aren't you dealing with it?  

Fifty-some members.  You can deal with that on, actually, 

today.  You could deal with it on Monday.  Over the weekend 

you can prepare some stuff and come in here on Monday and 

start to show us what you really intend to do for the farmer in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In the south-west, the crop insurance premiums have risen.  It's 

gone right through the roof.  And yet at no time have you ever 

stood up -- the Associate Minister of Agriculture has been 

asked this question on numerous times, but never has he stood 

up and said, we know full well that the south-western 

Saskatchewan farmers are really impacted hard by what we're 

doing in the crop insurance program with premiums and such.  

No answers.  Never is he going to address that. 

 

Full well able to write down debt of the Crown corporations.  

Get prepared for elections, get them nice and healthy so you 

can cut 2, $300 million cheque out of some of the Crown 

corporations.  However when it comes to dealing with the farm 

families of rural Saskatchewan, you have no answers and you 

have no intention of bringing any forward.  And that's why at 

the next election, Mr. Speaker, those people -- those people -- 

are going to be dealt with by those same farm families. 

 

Only a few days ago, the Liberal caucus also raised the issue of 

the farmers in north-eastern Saskatchewan, and I noticed those 

north-eastern Saskatchewan farmers are mentioned here today 

on the main motion.  And once again, the Liberal caucus had 

showed some leadership.  And it's usually a week or a couple 

of weeks after we raise the issue that it becomes a bigger issue 

from the other parties of the 

House. 

 

However, the seriousness of this situation in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan where you have six out of ten farmers faced with 

difficulty with their ACS loans, businesses that are having a 

tremendous load placed upon their shoulders because of the 

large increases in accounts receivables, inability to collect 

them, this problem, as I stated a few days ago or day ago, is 

really starting to snowball. 

 

Once you have made the decision, as this government has done, 

to not help the farm families of Saskatchewan, to let them go 

down, to ensure that their programs will not be in a satisfactory 

manner that will protect these people in the event of disasters in 

north-eastern Saskatchewan, then the next step is to let the 

businesses in the area go down.  And it starts to snowball.  

Pretty soon you're not going to have schools. 

 

However, I don't see any concern from the members of the 

government about dealing with rural Saskatchewan at all.  They 

haven't since the day they were elected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What has become, I guess, very evident since the government 

won the election in 1991 is that these issues become much 

more severe.  People are starting to hurt that much more. But 

instead of putting programs in place, programs that during and 

leading up to the 1991 election, that group said that not one 

more farmer, time and time again.  Now of course "not one 

more farmer" means no one out there will get help, not even in 

the form of putting out a program that people can pay into to 

protect their farms, to protect their livelihoods. 

 

In fact you've went the other way.  You've dismantled 

programs.  You took away the 1991 GRIP program, replaced it 

with a program which was unsatisfactory to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan.  After that you've moved again.  You've 

continued to make the programs less and less affordable for 

farmers and the pay-outs are . . . well in fact what we're hearing 

from the farmers is they're not worth having. 

 

In fact, I note an article that was in the Western Producer on 

February 26, 1994, where it says in regards to crop insurance: 

 

Crop Insurance has scheduled 35 meetings across the 

province to explain new crop insurance options and the 

benefits of the overall program, but when they head into 

the south-west it will be an accomplishment if many 

farmers attend the sessions. 

 

"A lot of farmers are really teed off," said Gary Wellbrock, 

a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool director who farms near 

Ponteix. 

 

He hopes farmers go to the meeting to learn about and 

assess the new programs and raise concerns about 

premiums and coverage levels. "But I will be surprised if 

they get a big turnout 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

at these meetings," he said. 

 

Last year there was a dramatic drop in the number of 

insured acres in the south-west because of a big jump in 

premiums and a drop in the value of coverage.  For 

example, (he gives an example) in parts of the south-west, 

crop insurance premiums for barley represent 40 per cent 

of the value of the crop. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, who could insure . . . who would ever, say, 

insure their house for $100,000 if they had to spend $40,000 a 

year insuring it?  They wouldn't.  If that were the case, if that 

were happening, the government I'm sure would step in.  They 

would ensure that . . . whether their own government insurance 

corporation or through reinsurance plans that are used 

throughout the world, they would ensure that there would be an 

affordable plan in place. 

 

But are they doing it for the farm families?  Not even 

considering it.  Not even considering it, Mr. Speaker.  Instead 

what they want to do is try and put the blame always onto the 

federal government without ever having put forward a plan. 

 

I don't know if the farmers of the province are even so much 

asking you to finance it any more, just work with them to see 

what you can do for them.  Can you not even do that?  Can you 

not even develop and design a plan that you can put forward?  

Maybe all three parties of this legislature could take a look at 

that plan, perhaps support it, and talk with one unified voice 

with the federal government.  But you won't even, you won't 

even initiate the process.  That's why I think the people that you 

represent, or the members that were up speaking today, are so 

embarrassed by your comments.  And you should be too. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I'd like to say a 

few comments on the motion, the motion and the amendment 

that were put forward related to why we find ourselves in a 

position where this motion comes forward. 

 

If you take a look over a period of about 20 years, you see a 

huge shift in the responsibility that the federal government had 

taken for agriculture being shifted to the province, to all of the 

provinces.  But what that has meant for the province of 

Saskatchewan is a very huge shift in total costs.  Now making 

that shift means that there is problems generated for this 

government, for the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

During the 80s, the federal government in the '80s that made 

this . . . that was involved in this shift, along with the provincial 

governments of the time, did make a presentation that said that 

they were going to be in a position to cover third line 

protection.  And that was when the first two lines of protection, 

that is the line that the farmers put forward failed or was unable 

to cover it, the second line would come in, which was a joint 

line between the . . . of the programs that were cost shared by 

the province and the federal government, what they picked up; 

then there would be a third line of defence. 

And in that particular case, ever since that was part of the 

proposal that came forward from the federal government to the 

province and then the province accepted the joint funding of 

the programs, that has never once been implemented by the 

federal government. 

 

And I'd like to point out to the Liberal members of this 

Assembly that a federal election changing the federal 

government from a Conservative government to a Liberal 

government leaves the opportunity for the federal government 

to simply come forward and fully support what was previously 

stated was going to be there.  And in doing so, that would mean 

that there would be money available from the federal 

government for the north-east part of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why I feel that the 

amendment to the motion that was put forward is very accurate 

and states what really should take place.  Because the history of 

why we are here indicates that the third line should now be 

implemented. 

 

But in stating this, Mr. Speaker, I don't want to make the . . . 

have anyone leave with the assumption that I fully support the 

programing that was in place.  All I'm saying is that the 

programing that came about from those negotiations and that if 

it was implemented, it would be an improvement on the 

situation that we have here today.  And the implementation 

comes from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have -- and it's been covered 

fairly concise -- but the problem that we have in transportation 

is one where . . . the history of the rail transportation in Canada 

has been one where we have operated a very efficient system.  

And in order to do that we've operated with quotas, with the 

allocation of cars being made so that the best use of those cars 

could be achieved.  And there's a very strange thing occurring 

in the last four or five years -- probably most of it has occurred 

in the last two years -- in that there's been a fairly large change 

in crop production. 

 

And the reason that there's been this change in crop production, 

Mr. Speaker, is that farmers in the province of Saskatchewan 

where 40 per cent of the agricultural field crops are seeded, 

have changed the cropping patterns that they have.  So you 

have here a different use of these railcars and we have lost 

therefore as an efficient system that allocated and moved things 

very rapidly and used a very limited number of cars. 

 

And if we're to continue on this process of changing what 

farmers grow, and I believe that has as much what the federal 

government is saying they should do is change as anyone, then 

we're going to have to revamp our concept of how the rail 

structure works in moving grain and field crop seeds to market. 

 

(1230) 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Secondly, this year there happens to be a new experience in the 

fact that there are sales going south into a country that produces 

probably the largest amount of crop to export in the area of 

field crops, of grains, and corn, and that, of any country in the 

world.  As I think of it I believe I can say without any problem 

that they do export the largest amount of these grains. 

 

And a strange thing has occurred.  This year, due to the fact 

that they don't have an orderly marketing system and that they 

then do not know what . . . the left hand in the U.S. does not 

know what the right hand is doing.  They have moved grain out 

of their country leaving themselves short of specific types of 

grain and we as a country are able to supply those grains and 

move and ship into the United States. 

 

And this has increased the length of time of turnaround of the 

cars in the fleet, and we are therefore in a situation where the 

efficiency of that fleet has dropped considerably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is those types of things that fall within the 

responsibility of the federal government, and in that manner 

they leave me to fully support the amendment that was made to 

the original motion and I will be doing so when the vote comes.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- It's interesting to stand here in this 

debate as a member for the north-east part of the province.  

Very pessimistic attitudes of farming by the opposition and 

especially by the third party, the member from Shaunavon in 

particular.  There's no realization, I think, by those members 

that the agricultural industry in this province is indeed 

improving.  Certainly there are spots in the province that have 

some concerns and have some problems, but in general 

agriculture is improving. 

 

The people out there are a lot more optimistic today than they 

were two years ago.  I talked to a farm machinery dealership in 

the north-east just yesterday in fact, Mr. Speaker, and I asked 

him, what is the attitude of the farm community in that 

particular area?  Is he hearing the same things that I'm hearing?  

And he said yes, indeed he is.  He is hearing that the farmers 

are more optimistic, they're more encouraged.  Machinery sales 

in his particular dealership are up. 

 

I happened to have the opportunity to be in Nipawin a week or 

so ago and I talked to a lot of the farm community there.  

They're saying the very same things, Mr. Speaker -- that they're 

optimistic.  The future looks brighter.  Certainly they realize 

that there is still some concerns and some problem areas.  But 

all in all, they're a lot more optimistic. 

 

The member from Shaunavon is pessimistic, and I believe it's 

because of the lack of support by the federal government to the 

farm community in Saskatchewan and in fact in all of Canada.  

We as a province have instituted some major decisions.  One of 

those very important decisions was the six-year leaseback 

program for farmers that are in trouble.  And 

indeed in the north-east some farmers have taken advantage of 

the program. 

 

On the other hand, we have a corporation, the Farm Credit 

Corporation, which is a federal institution, that is reluctant to 

participate in helping the farmers and giving them that 

opportunity to lease back their land for a period of time so that 

they can stabilize their income and build their farm up again. 

 

And I can see why he's pessimistic about that, but he shouldn't 

be in this House condemning this government.  He should be 

on the phone with the federal Minister of Agriculture, talking to 

him, saying, we've got to do something for the farm 

community. 

 

The Saskatchewan government is doing things within our 

financial limitations, because of the members opposite in the 

last 10 years that they were in power, but we are doing things.  

Ag equity fund this year announced in the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

a $20 million fund to help farmers value-add to their products.  

Jobs for rural Saskatchewan.  But not only that, Mr. Speaker, it 

allows the farm community to be more stable. 

 

Ag 2000, just released this year, a direction for stability for the 

family farm and the ag industry, a direction to look at and to 

discuss.  We in Saskatchewan, realizing that the GRIP program 

was flawed and had a lot of problems, put together the Farm 

Support Review Committee, a committee of producers in the 

province, to design a new support program -- a support 

program that will actually help the farm family and give them 

some stability.  And not only that, but with a realization to the 

rest of the Saskatchewan taxpayers that it is a tax friendly 

program. 

 

Improvements to crop insurance.  The member from 

Shaunavon again in his discussions stated that, you know, crop 

insurance have some problems, and that the premium rates are 

too high and that the coverage is too low.  I'm sure he must 

realize that crop insurance is a provincial-federal program; that 

we have some concerns with the program as well and we are 

attempting to address those concerns.  But he has a 

responsibility to talk to his Minister of Agriculture -- the 

federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Goodale -- and bring those 

concerns to him as well. 

 

We did make some changes to crop insurance this year and the 

farm community is very supportive of those changes, such as 

spot loss hail.  I think more importantly though, Mr. Speaker, 

farmers are taking charge of their own destiny.  They're 

actually ahead of government in the area of diversification, in 

the area of growing more specialty crops rather than the 

traditional crops that we were growing in the province.  Red 

meat, for instance, is up.  It's a billion-dollar industry now in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  I know in the north-east I have 

some farmers growing saskatoon berries.  I have some farmers 

actually producing heavy road equipment for rural 

municipalities.  I have some farmers there 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

indeed building their own air seeders.  I have farmers there that 

are into the tarps and duffle bag business. 

 

Farmers are taking charge, they're changing with the times, and 

are looking after their own destiny.  We, as a province, help as 

much as we can.  We do of course have some concerns that the 

federal government is not maybe taking its full responsibility in 

an industry that affects every Canadian.  Agriculture is a part of 

every Canadian's life, and we have to have a federal 

government that will consider that and look at supporting this 

industry better. 

 

One of the concerns of course that was mentioned is the 

north-east where we had a lot of moisture problems last year.  

The early snowfall, an early frost, wildlife damage to crops that 

remain out.  And we realize that and we are continuing to work 

with the federal Minister of Agriculture to see if there is indeed 

. . . or if indeed the federal minister continues to support his 

pre-election thinking about the third line of defence, a sort of a 

disaster relief program that would be shared by every taxpayer 

in Canada to help the farm families like the families in the 

north-east.  And we continue to do that and we will continue to 

do that.  It would be nice to have some support by both the 

official opposition and the members of the third party. 

 

It's kind of interesting to note too, Mr. Speaker, that we don't 

see anything new in the new federal government in regards to 

agriculture.  I know that the provincial Leader of the Third 

Party did borrow Mr. Mulroney's ag policy for her 1991 

election campaign, and it seems that the federal government 

now is borrowing Mr. Mulroney's agricultural policy again, and 

it seems a little strange. 

 

It's kind of interesting to note that Mr. Easter, who is a member 

of the Liberal government, condemns his federal counterparts 

in not changing direction of agriculture.  And I think that the 

member from Shaunavon should join with Mr. Easter in letting 

the federal minister know that they want a change of direction, 

a change that will help the farm families in Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to deal a little bit . . . I want to deal a little bit with 

the transportation concerns.  There are transportation concerns 

and we're very aware of them.  I have taken the opportunity to 

write to Mr. Young; the Ag minister has written to the federal 

Ag minister, and we will continue to pursue that. 

 

One of the concerns, I guess, is the railways have not caught up 

to the changes in the farm community.  And in fact this article 

in The Western Producer, by Mr. Feeny, states that: 

 

The railways say the problems are a reflection of 

unexpected changes in crop production and sales patterns, 

especially (in) the increased volumes of (specialty) crops 

and the large volumes being shipped to the U.S. 

 

I guess the railways have to change with the times.  As farmers 

change, the railway companies have to change too, to address 

the concerns.  If you sell 

something in a store and it's not a product that the people want, 

then you change that product.  Well the railways have to do the 

same -- they have to address the needs of the farm community. 

 

I want to just say one more thing before I sit down, Mr. 

Speaker, in support of this amendment, is that the Port of 

Churchill was mentioned.  And a very important part of help 

for the farmers in the north-east is the freight rate used to ship 

grain via the Port of Churchill.  Last year there was some 

240,000 tonnes. The need is 600,000 tonnes to break even, and 

there seems no desire by the federal Liberals to enhance the use 

of this port, thus helping the farmers in the north-east with 

lower freight rates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will sit down in full support of the 

amendment.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to add a few 

remarks to the debate here today.  I want to commend the 

member from Rosthern for bringing this motion forward.  I 

want to thank the individuals for the willingness to give leave 

to discuss this issue, because I think it's timely and I think it's 

an important part of the discussion that we need to have in this 

Assembly. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the fact that this information is 

going to be provided to the federal Minister of Agriculture and 

the Transport minister, and I want to say that that's an 

important part of this discussion. 

 

Realizing of course that there are many things and many factors 

that put themselves into place as a background for this motion 

being brought forward and the conditions that exist today, I 

want to go through them, as much as time will allow me, to 

provide to this Assembly some of the reasons why I think it's 

an important issue to discuss. 

 

First of all, there were some issues mentioned from the other 

side of the House that said that orderly marketing was the 

reason . . . a decay of the orderly marketing system and an 

erosion of the orderly marketing system was the reason why we 

were having all the problems in western Canada as it relates to 

the lack of grain cars, a lack of movement of grain. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that the people across the 

way understand that the Canadian Wheat Board sells the wheat, 

does not transport the wheat.  The western grain transportation 

commission transports the wheat, allocates the cars, gives 

direction as to where it's going.  The Canadian Wheat Board 

does not do that, Mr. Speaker.  And I think the people on the 

other side should understand that those are the conditions that 

exist.  And the transportation of grain has nothing to do with 

orderly marketing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is what has to be clearly understood by this Assembly 

in order to transfer this information to the Minister of 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 1994 

Agriculture and to the Minister of Transport.  That has to be 

understood.  And we as a Legislative Assembly need to 

underscore that so that the ministers know in Ottawa what their 

responsibility really is. 

 

(1245) 

 

And I want to point out some things that . . . how they impact 

in western Canada, Mr. Speaker.  The member for 

Kelsey-Tisdale brought up Churchill.  Mr. Speaker, 

information that I have made available to me through a news 

item called Agriline says that the Port of Churchill will not be 

receiving cars this year because the allocation of cars through 

the western Grain Transportation Agency has made those cars 

available for transportation to the Port of Churchill, and 

therefore they will not be available to go to the Port of 

Churchill. 

 

Given that, Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite, given 

that, we will have a decline again in the volume of grain 

moving through the Port of Churchill.  And that is a very, very 

serious consideration.  We are 5,000 cars behind, Mr. Speaker, 

in the volume that is required to be on target for this year by the 

month.  We're 5,000 cars behind in transportation. 

 

Some of the reasons given by the member from Humboldt are 

accurate as to why the grain cars are not available.  However, 

in a recent . . . As of today the Agriline daily business . . . 

Agribusiness News Summary says this, and I quote, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it's important for us to understand that this 

is a belief that is available today, and I want the people of this 

Assembly to understand: 

 

(The) IDEA OF ALLOWING PRIVATE GRAIN CARS 

into western rail fleet apparently is not dead: Grain 

Transportation Agency is talking to interested companies 

to get detailed proposals (to bring those cars in and allow 

that grain to be transported through private held grain car 

companies), trying to see how privately-leased cars could 

fit into allocation system (is what the Grain Transportation 

Agency is going to do.)  Biggest obstacle may be the 

Wheat Board . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want them to know this.  The biggest obstacle 

may be the Wheat Board.  Think about this.  Rumour is that the 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I didn't say this, but I'm telling 

you what's being discussed.  Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . rumor is that the . . . (Canadian Wheat Board) 

threatens to restrict use of its cars to Board grains only if 

private cars are allowed . . . 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a detriment to the very fabric and the 

factor of establishing why those cars were purchased by the 

Canadian Wheat Board in the first place. 

 

And if that happens, Mr. Speaker, then the Canadian Wheat 

Board should step aside in view of that to deal with their 

fundamental demand when those cars were 

purchased in the first place that they would provide the best 

opportunity for transportation of all grains to all ports for all 

farmers in western Canada.  And that's what they were bought 

for, Mr. Speaker, and that's the point that needs to be made here 

today. 

 

And I want the Minister of Agriculture for Canada to 

understand that if that is a fact, then he needs to step in and deal 

with it in a very precise and a concise way.  And that's the role 

that he should play. 

 

As it relates to the Canadian Transport minister, he should also 

be aware that he has the responsibility to allocate and that he 

needs to allocate to places like Churchill, Port Arthur or 

Thunder Bay, Prince Rupert or Vancouver. 

 

Another problem that is occurring, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Vancouver grain terminal labour negotiations are stalling.  We 

have had one strike there already, Mr. Speaker; the arbitrator in 

the labour dispute came forward and said: we will pay to the 

workers what the employers offered as their last offer.  So what 

did that cost us, Mr. Speaker?  It cost us demurrage in the 

millions, it cost us lost markets throughout the world.  And the 

member from Moosomin read into the record some of the 

things that are dealing with . . . the lost markets in China and 

other places; the Alberta Wheat Pool has indicated that that is 

where the markets are being lost. 

 

We must understand, Mr. Speaker, it is a cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan, it's a cost to the people of the province of 

Alberta, and also the people of Manitoba. 

 

Then we come into another item that needs to be addressed.  

Mr. Speaker, the people are having serious problems -- decline 

of rural Saskatchewan irreversible, Mr. Speaker.  Why is it 

irreversible?  Because all of these things are dragging down, 

down, down. 

 

And that's what they're doing.  We can't market.  We can't 

deliver our grain.  We can't deliver our products into the 

market-place.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  All these outside forces are 

driving us back into the place where we can't do it. 

 

Top that all off with, Mr. Speaker, as we speak, Sask Wheat 

Pool employees are voting on whether they should go on strike.  

Top that all off with that, Mr. Speaker.  They're voting whether 

they should go on strike.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is again a 

deterrent to the grain going to market. 

 

My question is, Mr. Speaker, why does everybody think that 

they have to take out of the farmers' pockets in western Canada 

to live, so that the farmer who grows the grain himself can't 

live?  Why do they think that they have to take it out of my 

pocket -- and the members of this Assembly who are in 

agriculture understand that -- why do they have to take it out of 

our pockets so that they can increase their wages? 

 

And if, Mr. Speaker, there's lots of farm boys here that wouldn't 

mind going working for $20 an hour in 



April 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

Vancouver or Prince Rupert, or in Thunder Bay or in Churchill 

. . . Mr. Speaker, they would like to do that.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

that's the reason why we think this is important to discuss here 

today and that's why we're urging the members of this 

Assembly to support the main motion too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are significant items that need to be raised in 

this and I know that there are considerably more.  However, I 

want to conclude my remarks by saying this: the people that 

live off of agriculture in Saskatchewan are getting bigger and 

bigger and bigger.  That volume is getting bigger.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is the reason why rural Saskatchewan has a 

problem.  They have a problem because it costs more to deliver 

grain from Saskatchewan to Vancouver than the grain is worth. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we should be 

supporting this motion, delivering it to the Minister of 

Agriculture, delivering it to the Senior Grain Transportation 

minister, and then, Mr. Speaker, having him understand that we 

clearly need some help in making sure all of the ducks get lined 

up and so that they don't fall off the track.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why I will be supporting the main 

motion here today. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:53 p.m. until 12:54 p.m. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Renaud  

Tchorzewski Hamilton  

Shillington Trew  

Teichrob Flavel  

Johnson Scott  

Goulet Crofford  

Mitchell Stanger  

Upshall Knezacek  

Lyons Carlson  

Calvert   

-- 19 

Nays 

Neudorf Britton  

Martens D'Autremont  

Boyd Goohsen  

Toth   

-- 7 

The division bells rang from 12:56 p.m. until 12:57 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Flavel  

Wiens Scott  

Tchorzewski Crofford  

Shillington Stanger  

Anguish Knezacek  

Teichrob Carlson  

 

Johnson Swenson  

Goule Neudorf  

Mitchell Martens  

MacKinnon Boyd  

Upshall Toth  

Hagel Britton  

Lyons D'Autremont  

Calvert Goohsen  

Renaud Haverstock  

Hamilton Bergman  

Trew   

-- 33 

Nays 

-- Nil 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would ask that question no. 51 to 54 

be converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Questions 51 to 54, motions for return -- 

converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


