






















































Hansard: February 16, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 215 
 February 16, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, two 
individuals seated in the west gallery. First, Dennis Bredhal 
who is the manager of technical operations AECL-CANDU in 
Saskatoon. Dennis, if you would stand up for us, please. 
 
And also George Spark, the educational coordinator at 
AECL-CANDU in Saskatoon. They are working on a very 
important project for the people of Saskatchewan, and I wish 
all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the House, Ian 
MacDougall who was the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Estevan in the 1960s. Ian's constituency is part 
of the southern half of my own constituency now. Ian and I 
worked together with Producers Pipelines for many years. And 
I'd like to ask everyone to welcome Ian to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
Mrs. Cathy Mills who is a teacher and teaches special ed at 
Birch Hills. Cathy has been very actively involved in politics 
and in my organization in Kinistino. 
 
She's also, Mr. Speaker, and fellow members, taken a very 
active role in the wellness model in health care reforms, and 
has been a tremendous leader in the Birch Hills area. 
Accompanying her are her lovely children, Janice, 11, Taylor, 
8, and Lorren, 5. Also accompanying them, Mr. Speaker, is 
Cathy's parents, Mr. Al and Betty Yeaman from Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan. I would ask all members to acknowledge them 
warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Roy: -- As well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to add my voice to 
the Minister of Economic Development. I had the opportunity 
to meet this morning and I'd like to introduce to you and 
through to the members of the Assembly, Mr. Dennis Bredhal 
who is the manager of technical operations at Atomic Energy 
of Canada Ltd. in Saskatoon. And also Mr. George Spark who 
is an official with Atomic Energy of Canada in Saskatoon. And 
I'd like all of the members to again welcome them very 
warmly. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's with great 

pleasure that I introduce to you and through you today to the 
members of the Assembly, Brett Slade, a young man from my 
constituency who's sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Brett is 
presently attending university and they're down today to 
discuss matters of concern with the environmental minister, I 
understand. 
 
Brett's family of course is well known in the area -- the famous 
pure bred Hereford breeders of the Slade ranch, Robert and 
Ann Slade. And strangely enough, Mr. Speaker, as irony would 
have it, last night was the night that the pipeline blew up out in 
our area, and that pipeline does run in fact very close to their 
ranch. So we hope that there hasn't been any injuries or 
anything like that. 
 
But I'd ask the Assembly to join with me in welcoming Brett 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, sir. I'd like to introduce a 
guest in the government gallery over there, a friend, Mr. Bud 
Fogal, a prominent and very innovative farmer from the 
Lafleche district. He's a prominent and very hard-working 
member of the National Farmers Union. He's a long-time friend 
of mine and my wife's and has been a loyal patient for many 
years. I'd like you to welcome him to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the other members of the Assembly, a 
special group of students from the University of Saskatchewan. 
They are members of the agriculture and bioresource 
engineering program in third and fourth years. They are 
accompanied by their professor, Jon Gillies, who was the 
chairman of our Round Table on Environment and Economy. 
 
The students that are with him today, with whom I met at 
noon -- a very energetic and interested group of students that 
will serve us well in the future as we work towards a 
sustainable society -- are Brett Slade, Joel Flory, Tracy 
Chambers, Tony Larsen, Duane Sholter, Deborah Lewko, 
Ethan Richardson, and Bruce Pon. 
 
Join me in welcoming these students and Professor Gillies to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly 14 students 
from the Canadian Bible College here in Regina which is 
located in the . . . I guess on this side . . . which is located in the 
Elphinstone constituency. 
 
These individuals are from various areas of the 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

province and Canada and I want to welcome them here. And 
the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden will be meeting with 
you after question period. So all members welcome to the 
students from the Bible College. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the 
west gallery, the gallery closest to Moose Jaw,, Mr. Speaker, 
are 17 students from the Cornerstone Christian School. These 
are students in grades 1 to 8. They're visiting the legislature 
today for a tour and so on. They're accompanied by their 
teacher, Verna Kowalczyk; adults with them: Al Van 
Koughnett, Yvonne Johnson, and Danny Orser. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to see some very good friends 
and close neighbours of mine from the Snyder family in the 
gallery there with them. I would ask all members to join the 
group from Moose Jaw . . . to welcome the group from Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask them to rise, is the board 
of directors of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. They've 
taken time off today from their busy schedules for their board 
meeting. And I would certainly wish that all members would 
join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Pipeline Explosion 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Environment and Resource Management. Mr. 
Minister, last night there was a major gas line explosion 
north-east of Maple Creek. Fortunately reports have it that no 
one was injured and we're happy to hear that; but the fact is that 
this explosion took place and it is a great cause for concern. 
 
This explosion took place, Mr. Minister, in a very sparsely 
populated area, but it should be pointed out that this same 
pipeline passes within a few hundred metres of several farms in 
the area and very close to several of the small communities in 
the area. So the damage could have been, and of course might 
in some future time be, much worse. 
 
An explosion that is seen in Lethbridge, that saw fire trucks 
leaving towns like Hazlet to travel 60 miles and thinking the 
fire was much closer, gives some perspective to the size. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you please report to this House exactly 
what happened? Why this explosion took place, how much 
damage was caused, and what precautions you will be taking to 
ensure that this kind of thing will never happen again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I'd like to respond and give a brief 
report in regard to the question that was asked. Last night at 
approximately 8 o'clock there was an explosion on a pipeline in 
the area that the hon. member mentioned. This was a large line, 

a 42-inch line that is owned by Foothills Pipe Lines; it is not 
owned by the province or by TransGas. 
 
Fortunately there were no injuries, and there are approximately 
17 farms that will be without service. TransGas and 
SaskEnergy made arrangements this morning to bring in some 
natural gas in a compressed form to hook up the 17 farms that 
were there, and the technical personnel have been sent out to 
light furnaces and gas appliances and make sure that the 17 
farms are back on to natural gas as soon as possible. 
 
It is an unfortunate situation. Pipelines very rarely blow up. 
There's only been a couple of cases in Canada where this has 
happened. We'll be monitoring the situation just as closely as 
we possibly can. 
 
Unfortunately, when pipelines get too old or if there's weak 
spots there that develop over the years -- in this case the 
pipeline was some 12 years old -- unfortunately this will 
happen from time to time. 
 
On the TransGas system we have never had an incident like 
this, and we expect not to. We monitor very . . . as closely as 
we can to make sure that occurrences like this do not happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- I thank you, Minister, for your direct 
follow-up. I had thought perhaps you might need to take some 
time to go and check into this matter but you've obviously been 
briefed and I'm glad to hear that. 
 
I hope, Minister, that you do take this matter very seriously. 
When flames can be seen a mile in the air in a ball of fire that is 
described by one person this morning as appearing to be the 
atomic blast and the end of the world coming, when people of a 
town the whole size of Maple Creek feel that an earthquake has 
hit their town and they're 30 kilometres away, this I think 
explains some of the magnitude of the power force that lies 
within these transmission lines. 
 
And I think it does require that we have some follow-up, that 
we have some assurance from you that there will be testing 
done on these lines, and that your follow-up will be to ascertain 
exactly what caused this explosion so that we can prevent those 
kinds of things from happening in the future. There are simply 
too many people's lives at stake with all of the lines that we 
have running through our province. So I would ask you, 
Minister, will you do that? Will you guarantee us that today, 
that you will take the effort necessary to test these lines as well 
as to find out what caused the explosion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I stress again to the hon. member this is 
not a gas line that is owned or regulated by the province of 
Saskatchewan. The gas line that blew up is owned by Foothills 
Pipe Lines which in turn is owned by Nova Corporation out of 
Alberta. The line connects gas fields in Alberta with markets in 
the United States. The gas line in question is actually regulated 
by the National Energy Board and not the province. 
 
In terms of the member wanting some assurances that we keep 
good maintenance and do testing on the TransGas system in 
Saskatchewan which is owned by SaskEnergy, I can assure you 
that we do take good care of our lines. We monitor them very 
closely, and the situation in Saskatchewan, I hope that that 
never happens. I don't think anybody can give the member or 
the public assurance that this will never, ever happen. 
 
Again I repeat, it's a very rare occurrence, and unfortunately 
Nova's pipeline did blow. We assume at this stage, without 
having detailed reports, that it blew because of a weak spot in 
the line which may not have been properly insulated or coated, 
and at some point a spot developed that was weak. When gas is 
put through the gas line system, there's some contraction and 
expansion of the line, and over time these lines will in fact wear 
out. And I'm sure that Nova will be instructing Foothills to loop 
the line. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Government Revenue Increases 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister 
of Finance. We have heard from government members that the 
budget speech to be delivered tomorrow will contain no new 
taxes. We have heard that time and time again, Mr. Speaker, 
and we will likely hear that again tomorrow. And I'm sure all 
back-benchers will applaud. 
 
My question, Madam Minister: I'm wondering if you can 
provide this Assembly with a list of all the taxes, utility rates, 
premiums, fees, tuition fees, levies, and/or tolls that will 
increase this year as a direct or indirect result of your 
government's policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government intends to live up to its commitment to the people 
of Saskatchewan. The commitment was clear. If we met our 
deficit reduction targets, which we have -- in fact we have more 
than met our deficit reduction targets -- there would be no 
increases in taxes. That means no increases in incomes, sales, 
gas taxes. 
 
Now the member opposite also would know that utility issues 
are a separate issue. They are decided on a different basis. But I 
think what we have to do is we have to look at some basic 
facts. You'll look at the cost of utilities across Canada -- car 
insurance, power, electricity, telephones, the basic 
utilities -- Saskatchewan has the second lowest utility rates of 
any province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- So even though we have financial 
problems, we take pride in the fact that we have protected our 
consumers from massive increases in utility rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, I'm not 
sure that you're aware, certainly many taxpayers are unaware, 
that over 40 per cent of our government's revenues and 
expenditures are not covered by what you're going to be giving 
to us here tomorrow in your budget address. Over 40 per cent 
of the provincial government's financial activity occurs outside 
the budget process in the Crown corporations. So when you 
speak of no new taxes, that simply isn't accurate. That's just the 
tip of the iceberg. 
 
People have seen their SaskPower rates increase 11 per cent, 
SaskTel 5 per cent, SaskEnergy 15.5 per cent; SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates and fees have 
risen dramatically. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell this Assembly that there will be 
no utility rate increases, fee increases, premium increases, levy 
increases, or any other revenue increases that will directly 
impact on the taxpayers of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would reiterate the 
point I made before. What we have said is that there are no tax 
increases in this budget. We mean no tax increases in this 
budget. I know the Liberal government in Ottawa has said there 
are no tax increases in their budget. I will wait to see whether 
that is true, whether in fact base broadening turns out to be for 
the average person tax increases. 
 
I also understand that for the average person an increase in any 
kind of utility rate is a concern. I understand that concern. But 
we have done our best to protect them from massive increases. 
Let's look at the recent SaskEnergy increase. Why did we have 
to increase that rate? Two reasons. Number one, we no longer 
own our own wells and the members opposite will know the 
reason why. 
 
Secondly, because we have to buy our gas on the open market 
just like anyone else, we were faced with a 40 per cent increase 
in gas rates. Now we absorbed 30 per cent of that and we felt 
very, very uncomfortable with having to pass on 9.6. But we 
did our best to protect the consumers here from massive price 
increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

 you claim that there are no new taxes. I'm wondering if you 
also neglect to account for the increase in property taxes that 
are a direct relationship to your changes in your policies. 
 
User fees have occurred in cities, towns, villages, and RMs 
(rural municipality); property taxes are going up. Madam 
Minister, your government's reduction in transfer payments to 
municipalities have gone down; your programs have cut 
straight across all of the taxes that people in the provinces pay 
directly and indirectly. 
 
Can you commit today, or perhaps tomorrow, when you make 
the claim that there will be no new taxes, that there will be no 
direct increases to the taxpayers of the province? Because 
they're all taxpayers, Madam Minister, and will you make that 
statement to the people of the province, that there will be no 
direct or indirect taxes tomorrow when you announce your 
budget for the next year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
obviously knows I can't tell third parties what to do. But I 
would like to say something about third parties. I would like to 
say something here about third parties. They have been our 
partners in deficit reduction; they've had to make difficult 
choices. I understand that. And I thank them for their 
cooperation. 
 
But we have to see this issue in perspective. Yes, it is true that 
over the last three years we have reduced grants to urban 
municipalities by 29 per cent. But let's look at that in 
perspective. Alberta is decreasing grants by 72 per cent over 
three years. 
 
Recently I was in the city of Lloydminster and was told by the 
people in that community that three years from now the city of 
Lloydminster will be getting $350,000 a year from the 
Government of Saskatchewan in third party grants; from the 
Government of Alberta they'll be getting a goose-egg -- zero. 
 
So I understand the problems of third parties. But again, we've 
done our best within our financial circumstances to work with 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Madam Minister, 
Saskatchewan people have been taxed out of this province. In 
an article in today's Leader-Post it says: "In the short run, 
businesses will be looking for some positive signals in the 
Saskatchewan budget this week", Madam Minister. Signals so 
that they can reinvest in the province. 
 
Alberta's tax load is about 76 per cent, Madam Minister, 76 per 
cent of the province of Saskatchewan. Will you put into place 
an opportunity for the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
to begin to evaluate, on the basis of opportunity in 
Saskatchewan, the reason why they would want to stay here? 
Because of your taxes, you have driven them out. In fact, 
Madam Minister, a former director of your Gaming 
Commission moved his business to Alberta, and that is what is 
happening all the time. The train has left the station, Madam 

Minister. 
 
Will you allow the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
some equity in the tax base so that they can stay in this 
province and become involved in the business opportunities 
that are here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 
members opposite to calm down for just a minute and to listen 
to some basic facts. And I challenge them to deny these basic 
facts. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan has gone from having one of the 
highest deficits in Canada to, as of today, before the budget 
even comes down tomorrow, we have the lowest per-capita 
deficit in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- There's another fact that I would 
challenge the member opposite to dispute, and it has to do with 
taxes. With a family at $25,000 a year income, Saskatchewan is 
now, when you take taxes and basic utility costs, the third 
cheapest place in Canada in which to live. 
 
And let me give you a preview of the budget tomorrow. That 
number will change tomorrow. Saskatchewan will move from 
being the third cheapest place in Canada to live to being the 
second cheapest place in Canada to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Child Hunger Programs 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I address my 
question to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, on page 18 of the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
1991 platform document it says: the first job is to determine the 
resources available for our priority commitments. Can you tell 
me where child hunger ranks on the NDP government's list of 
priorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would be happy to inform the member that while 
child hunger was a priority for the government, for us in 
opposition, it continues to be a priority for us in government. 
And we've made many strides, we've made many strides, Mr. 
Speaker, to address that issue. 
 
The key, Mr. Speaker, is economic development and jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. And I'd be pleased to advise the member 
that in fact January of this year the social assistance case-load 
went up the least -- 126 new families -- went up the least that 
it's gone up in five years, Mr. Speaker. That's an indication that 
the 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

economic development plan is working. That is the key. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member may also be aware that last Friday it 
was just released that we provided another $1 million to school 
lunch programs to address the issue of family poverty. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, we provided increase to 
social assistance benefits, not decreasing them like they did in 
Alberta and Manitoba. We provided family income benefit 
increases to Saskatchewan working poor. I've been talking to 
your federal counterpart about assisting us in that area further. 
And so I would welcome -- as I talked to the member this 
morning about a debriefing from Ottawa -- I'd be welcome to 
solicit her support on how she could get her federal 
counterparts to be supportive if she's really serious about 
dealing with the issue of poverty, which I think she is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- In your recent announcement you approved 
projects of $858,500 for child hunger programs. Can you tell 
me what the per capita allotment is for each child served by 
these programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, the member gave me a 
written question last week on this same issue and I have 
provided a four- or five-page response outlining in detail all the 
measures that we have taken dealing with the issue of child 
poverty. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the economic development 
plan that we put in place, Partnership for Progress, is well on 
the way. There are very positive indicators relating to retail 
sales, housing starts, oil and gas activity, and so on. The 
business community in my home town of Saskatoon are very 
optimistic about 1994, and many are expecting to hire 
additional staff, Mr. Speaker. And I would encourage the 
Liberals to be positive and optimistic as well. And we're still 
waiting from the Liberal leader for her idea a week on how to 
create new jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, actions speak louder than 
words. The fact is that the combined grants for Moose Jaw 
Native Friendship Centre, Prince Albert Share-A-Meal, 
Nipawin Nutrition for Kids, Hunger in Moose Jaw, 
Pleasantdale Central School, Meadow Lake school, North 
Battleford school, Tisdale school and Parkland Gospel church 
were $87,600. Those grants cost the taxpayers less than it did to 
increase the pay cheques of 17 political staff in Executive 
Council. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this evidence of how the New Democratic 
government sets its priorities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm a little bit disappointed 
in this line of questioning because a month after I was 
appointed Minister of Social Services, by invitation, I requested 
that the Liberal leader join me to gain some of her ideas about 
what we could do in the area of social services, social policy 
reform. 
 

We had a good two-hour meeting. I left her with a number of 
documents related to our strategic plan. This was back in 
October 1993. I invited her to get back to me with her ideas and 
suggestions. The next time I hear anything it's in question 
period. I would be delighted to sit with her and discuss what 
we've done. 
 
Now since we bring in MA (ministerial assistant) salaries, Mr. 
Speaker, the member took a fair advantage of that issue in 
election and she failed to mention that her leader got a 37 per 
cent increase when they became a caucus. 
 
What she was criticizing, Mr. Speaker, what she was criticizing 
by the MAs' salary increases, we're talking about single parent 
and women who are at the secretarial level who got some 
marginal increase whilst her leader gets a 37 per cent increase, 
Mr. Speaker -- 37 per cent increase. That's hypocritical, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, your meeting with our leader 
was before the raises to the political staff. 
 
Mr. Minister, in your news release you said, in these difficult 
economic times, it is important that we protect the most 
vulnerable members of our communities. Do you believe that 
the political staff whose salaries have been raised are more 
vulnerable than the hungry children, and if not, how in the 
world can you justify your expenditure decisions for $89,000 of 
taxpayers' money going to political staff instead of child hunger 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder who's playing 
politics here, Mr. Speaker. That's the party, that's the party 
that's talking about the new politics. I sat down with her leader 
in good faith a month after I was appointed. Three months later 
I haven't heard from her. All of a sudden we hear . . . we get 
this question in question period, Mr. Speaker. It's her leader 
that got a 37 per cent increase -- 19 or $17,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So how concerned are we about child poverty, Mr. Speaker? In 
the last . . . since we formed government, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased the money to low income people by $130 million. 
Mr. Speaker, low income programs by $130 million. I can tell 
you that no other government in Canada is going that way. 
Alberta is cutting like crazy; so is Manitoba. The Maritime 
provinces, the Maritime Liberal provinces, are the 
highest-taxed provinces in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Control of Program Spending 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance, and it also deals with a 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

matter that may have long-term tax implications on the people 
of Saskatchewan. Yesterday it was reported that your 
government intends to turn over as much as $550 million a year 
to aboriginal people to fund health, education, social services, 
and justice. That's $550 annually for every man, woman, and 
child in Saskatchewan, about to be turned over to a level of 
government that doesn't even exist yet, Mr. Minister . . . or 
Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, this report raises far more questions than it 
answers and I would like to ask some of these questions today. 
First of all, what is the time frame for the transition of this 
money to native groups? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The news reports yesterday were based 
upon a leaked draft document which is still under consideration 
by the government. The reference to $550 million was, as I 
understand it, in an appendix to that document which set out, 
Mr. Speaker, the level of funding which is already provided to 
Indian and Metis people. So there's no new money involved 
here. 
 
We are embarked, as is every province in Canada, upon a 
process of discussion with aboriginal groups leading towards 
self-government. As those discussions continue and as 
agreements are reached, it will involve inevitably the taking 
over of programs for the delivery of services by aboriginal 
people for aboriginal people. And every government in Canada 
agrees that that's the way in which we should go. 
 
Now inevitably that will involve some money which the 
government is now spending being spent by aboriginal 
governments with respect to those programs which are moved 
over to aboriginal management and aboriginal control. That's 
what that document is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I think that everyone in 
Saskatchewan agrees that we must work together to ensure that 
aboriginal people become equal partners in our society. But 
with equal rights and equal partnership, come equal 
responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You are going to turn over up to $550 million a year to fund 
native programing. Are aboriginal people also going to be 
expected to start developing their own revenue sources to fund 
self-government? Is that what your plans are, and if they are, 
would you mind telling this Assembly what they are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- First of all, I want to repeat to the 
member that we are not turning over $550 million to aboriginal 
government, unless -- unless -- it should happen that in the 
process of negotiations involving the federal government and 
involving the other provinces in Canada, that kind of 
jurisdiction should be involved. But we don't expect anything 
like that to happen. 
 
Now as to the question of aboriginal governments looking to 

their own sources of finances, I believe that will happen. 
Statements have been made by Indian leaders in particular 
across this country to the effect that they intend to look to their 
own sources for financing their own forms of government 
before they look to the federal and provincial governments. 
 
In the end, I think it will be a mix of all three and I think that's 
appropriate, and all members of the House would agree with 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, this whole issue raises a very 
interesting question about how we in Saskatchewan are going 
to be governed. You're planning to turn over as much as $550 
million -- that's $550 for every person in the province per year. 
That's going to concern a lot of people because they will have 
no say as to how this money is spent. They will have no ability 
to vote or be for or against the spending of this money. In a 
sense, for the majority of the people of Saskatchewan this could 
amount to a form of taxation without any representation. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, how will these expenditures be made 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan who are providing 
this funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is reading his 
questions from a paper, and he's determined to get through that 
paper no matter what answers I give to him. 
 
I repeat again, this is not a question of turning over $550 
million. This is a question of Saskatchewan participating with 
the federal government, as every other province and territory in 
this country will, to realize the dream of aboriginal 
self-government in this country. Every jurisdiction in this 
country has agreed and continues to agree that aboriginal 
people have the inherent right to govern themselves. 
 
Now the member is concerned about accountability. And the 
member will know -- because when you were in power they 
had a lot of arrangements with Indian and with Metis people 
involving the transfer of money -- they will know that those 
transfers were accountable. They continue to be accountable. 
They will continue to be accountable. Indeed the former 
premier initiated the treaty land entitlement, the treaty land 
entitlement process which involved the transfer of something 
like $450 million to Indian people in Saskatchewan. That 
money is accountable. It's earmarked for certain purposes and it 
is to his credit, as my members have said. And that's . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I think we've run out of time in 
question period. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Research Council Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Research Council Act be now introduced and read 
for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting Fisheries 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 
Fisheries be introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 42 
 

Closure of Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I stand today to request leave of 
the Assembly to move a motion under rule 42. 
 
The Speaker: -- The Leader of the Opposition has asked leave 
to move a motion under rule 42, but I believe the member must 
state what the subject matter is and then we'll ask for leave. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker a 
matter of urgent and pressing necessity has arisen as a result o  
the federal government's intentions to close several military 
bases across the country. A particular concern to Saskatchewan 
citizens is the future of CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Moose 
Jaw. 

f That this Assembly join with the broad coalition representing 
all Saskatchewan political parties, elected representatives 
from all levels of government, business, and labour, in 
expressing its support for CFB Moose Jaw, and call on the 
federal government to keep 15 Wing, CFB Moose Jaw in 
operation.  

Mr. Speaker, this morning government representatives at all 
levels, from all parties, joined to voice a united support for the 
base at Moose Jaw, and wish to echo that endorsement in this 
Assembly. House leaders have agreed, Mr. Speaker, to keep 
comments concise and speakers to a minimum -- as such, our 
request that a vote on the motion be taken after a maximum of 
20 minutes debate. Again, Mr. Speaker, given the short time 
frame before the decision on base closure is made, I request 
leave to move a motion under rule 42. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving the 
following motion seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
Palliser: 
 

 That this Assembly join with the broad coalition representing 
all Saskatchewan political parties, elected representatives 
from all levels of government, business, and labour, in 
expressing its support for CFB Moose Jaw, and call on the 
federal government to keep 15 Wing, CFB Moose Jaw in 
operation. 

 
I so move. 
 
I'm going to be very brief, Mr. Speaker. This morning the 

leaders of all three parties in this Assembly and representatives 
of local, provincial, and civic governments, met in this building 
to express a really united front to the federal government in 
Ottawa on this issue. I think the arguments that were made this 
morning about the historic significance of the role of CFB 
Moose Jaw and 15 Wing in our province were made most 
eloquently today. Time has proven that Moose Jaw has played 
an integral part in the entire question of defence of our country 
and the issues surrounding the air force and its role in our 
country. 
 
The Snowbirds demonstration squadron aerobatics team that 
are celebrating their 25th anniversary this year have been a 
symbol for all Canadians to be proud of. I think I'll leave to the 
seconder, the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, to make some 
of the economic arguments. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
from representing that air base in the provincial legislature for 
the last nine years, that the pilots that are produced there are 
without any parallel in Canada today. And certainly they're 
world-class people and they've proven it. And that's because the 
base is such an efficient, low-cost deliverer of quality products, 
in this case air force jet pilots. And they are recognized around 
the world. 
 
I think it behoves this Assembly to add its weight to all of the 
people that were gathered here in a very non-partisan, united 
effort today. So once again, Mr. Speaker, I for the record would 
move: 
 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
want to thank my friend and colleague, the Hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, for moving this motion, and also all members of 
the Assembly for allowing us to take a brief time to recognize 
an important issue in a timely manner on this last day of debate 
in response to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
All members of the House will be aware that concern has been 
raised across the country recently in areas in provinces, all 
provinces, and particularly in areas which are homes to military 
bases, in light of the federal government's announced 
de-emphasizing and reductions in military spending, and the 
expected announcements possibly as soon as next week as to 
whom is affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was, I think, a memorable gathering of 
people in this building earlier this 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

morning. It can be said very accurately that there was a unified 
voice of support expressed across the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I point out that in the entire nation there is 
only one province that has spoken in support of a single base. 
That province is Saskatchewan and that base is 15 Wing Moose 
Jaw. And it took place this morning in this building. 
 
(1445) 
 
I will also then obviously be asking all members of this 
Assembly to join unanimously, to join in that unified voice 
from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if someone would have walked by room 218 of 
the legislature this morning, they would have looked in and 
they would have seen gathered in the same room Tories, 
Liberals, Reform Party members, New Democrats, provincial 
politicians, federal politicians, labour representatives, business 
representatives, rural municipal government, and urban 
municipal government in the same room -- all gathered together 
to express common support for 15 Wing Moose Jaw. 
 
Some people would say, Mr. Speaker, if they looked in, what's 
wrong with this picture? And I would say, Mr. Speaker, the 
answer to that question is, nothing. The fact of the matter is that 
what is right is that partisan and parochial interests have been 
set aside by a large number of actors in our province to express 
their support for 15 Wing Moose Jaw. 
 
Letters of support will be going forward today to the Prime 
Minister, to the Minister of Finance, and to the Minister of 
Defence who, by the way, will be visited later this week by 
New Democrat, Liberal, and Reform MP's (Member of 
Parliament) from all the parties that are represented in the 
province of Saskatchewan, expressing their support. 
 
The Hon. Leader of the Opposition said he'd like me to 
comment, and I'll do so briefly, about the economic 
significance of the base to us here in Saskatchewan. CFB 
Moose Jaw is our only base. It employs about 1,600 people 
with a total net salary of nearly $50 million. Military spending 
in Saskatchewan is about half . . . we have about 4 per cent of 
the population and about 2 per cent of the military spending 
here; in other words, about half of our per capita representation. 
 
CFB Moose Jaw provides a practical and safe setting for the 
training of pilots. And as I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, as all 
of us do, that as long as there's an air force we need pilots; as 
long as we need pilots they need a place to be trained; and the 
place that we suggest in the province of Saskatchewan is at 15 
Wing Moose Jaw. 
 
And so in concluding, Mr. Speaker, I want to add my voice to 
that of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. My appreciation to 
all of those who attended this morning. And ask that all 
members of this Assembly add their voice to strengthen 
Saskatchewan's message to Ottawa in support of 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw. 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise 
in this House and speak to this motion. While we as legislators 
understand the dilemma of the federal government in making 

difficult decisions about reducing defence spending, we also 
understand that there will be considerable pain and dislocation 
of many individuals and groups affected by the decisions 
regardless of where they occur in Canada. 
 
And although I have already communicated my concerns to the 
Minister of Defence a few weeks ago about the possibility of 
15 Wing Moose Jaw closure and the impact that this would 
have on our province, it is important that we all be on record 
today as urging the federal government to spare the city of 
Moose Jaw and the province of Saskatchewan in this round of 
necessary defence reductions. 
 
This base is extremely important to our province, as the 
member has spoken -- important historically, economically, and 
socially. And while we realize that other towns and cities 
across the country are likely lobbying for the retention of their 
defence facilities, there are several reasons why the Moose Jaw 
facility is unique and should be spared. 
 
15 Wing Moose Jaw, as has just been cited, is not just 
Saskatchewan's only major defence training base for basic pilot 
training, but it is also the regional service and supply base for 
all reserve, militia, and cadet units for our province. 
 
And furthermore, Saskatchewan has received few procurement 
defence dollars relative to all other parts of Canada, and that's 
been traditional over many, many years. On a per capita basis, 
our province receives less than half the national average for 
payroll and operating defence expenditures and is far lower 
than every province except Prince Edward Island. In 
economically depressed regions such Nova Scotia, they receive 
more than 10 times the per capita defence spending. 
 
I want to bring it to the attention of this House that it is not my 
role to speak for the federal government on this or any other 
issue, nor is it the federal government's role to speak for the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party. My first commitment, our party in 
Saskatchewan's first commitment, is to further and promote the 
interest of Saskatchewan people regardless of what government 
is in power in Regina or in Ottawa. 
 
In closing, I want to applaud the mayor of Moose Jaw, Mayor 
Don Mitchell, who has carried the torch on this issue and has 
been so outspoken on his city's behalf. I wish to acknowledge 
the commitment of all political parties, the business and labour 
leaders, political . . . or provincial organizations in different 
levels of government to see this issue resolved on behalf of our 
citizens. And I truly hope that everyone's tremendous efforts 
will not be in vain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

The division bells rang from 2:52 p.m. until 2:56 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
Van Mulligen Serby 
Wiens Cline 
Tchorzewski Scott 
Lingenfelter Crofford 
Shillington Stanger 
Koskie Kluz 
Teichrob Knezacek 
Johnson Harper 
Atkinson Keeping 
Kowalsky Jess 
Carson Carlson 
Mitchell Langford 
MacKinnon Swenson 
Upshall Muirhead 
Hagel Devine 
Bradley Neudorf 
Lorje Martens 
Pringle Boyd 
Lautermilch Toth 
Calvert Britton 
Renaud D'Autremont 
Murray Goohsen 
Hamilton Haverstock 
Trew McPherson 
Draper Bergman 

-- 50 
Nays 

-- Nil 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Crofford, seconded by Mr. 
Whitmore. 
 
Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am happy to be 
taking part once more in a debate on the throne speech. 
 
I'd like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by praising the mover and 
seconder in this debate, my colleagues and my friends, the 
members from Regina Lake Centre and Biggar. I congratulate 
them not only for their fine speeches but because I think it's fair 
to say they have pushed this debate into an area of speculation 
and vision which is a valuable lead for the rest of us to follow. 
 
I think it helps us in our duties if we take the time to think not 
just about what we are doing here but why and for what 
purpose. I would like to return to that theme in a few minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wish to convey my own congratulations and 
appreciation to you for the fine job you do. As a former 
teacher, I appreciate your role in keeping a well-run, fair 
classroom, or I mean to say Assembly, with a sense of justice 
and decorum. But above all, to allow democracy to be 

achieved. 
 
I also join with all my colleagues in welcoming the new 
member from Regina North West. I congratulated her 
personally the other evening at Government House and we 
spoke a bit about what the job involves. It is a challenging 
job -- often frustrating, but more often a very rewarding one. 
And we don't often say this enough, is that it even can be fun. 
 
I look forward to hearing her contribution to the debates in this 
Assembly. Her presence in this Chamber at this time is a 
consequence of our democratic reform. And not that I wouldn't 
prefer a New Democrat in her place, but what is more 
important is that the people of Regina North West are 
represented in this Assembly today because of our six-month 
by-election legislation. This is truly democratic reform. 
 
And I can recall my constituents being appalled at the lack of 
democratic principle when seats were left vacant for months 
and even years when there was no political will to hold a 
by-election. Never again will people be denied their voice and 
representation from this Assembly for periods longer than six 
months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, I want to comment, as did the 
member from Regina Lake Centre, on why and for what 
purpose I am here. One of the fundamental reasons I ran for 
election was based on strengthening representation -- more 
accountability of government to the people. In other words, 
bringing government closer to people. 
 
I am proud to say that this throne speech, along with many of 
our past initiatives, supports a government achieving economic 
and social justice through the power of community and 
cooperation. Cooperation, community, and consensus building 
are essential elements in bringing government closer to the 
people. 
 
I am proud to represent the constituency of 
Bengough-Milestone, a constituency where farming, 
entrepreneurship, oil, small business, are an integral part of the 
economy. I represent people who are hard-working, creative, 
adaptable, and resilient -- people who believe in community 
and cooperation as an integral part of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As the elected representative of the area, I have taken seriously 
my role in bringing government closer to the people. I have had 
numerous accountability meetings in my constituency along 
with several public meetings with ministers and the Premier on 
issues of concern and importance to my constituents. These 
meetings have ranged from discussions on health care reform, 
the Co-op upgrader, agriculture, finance, and economic 
development. 
 
In December the entire government caucus met in various 
towns throughout Bengough-Milestone. 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

Caucus committees with their associated ministers met with 
community groups and listened to the concerns raised in our 
communities. I heard nothing but praise for our government for 
holding these meetings throughout Bengough-Milestone and 
Weyburn in December. It was not that everyone agreed with all 
of our initiatives, but it was that the government was willing to 
listen to the ideas and concerns of the people in our area. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier, the cabinet, and 
the MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for holding 
these meetings in our area. And I also want to thank my 
constituents for attending these meetings in their communities. 
 
I again heard words of praise from several caucus members, not 
only for the excellent hospitality of the area but also for the 
excellent thoughts and ideas raised to our government. This 
type of two-way communication is essential to keep a 
government responsive and accountable to the people of this 
province. 
 
I know as we have moved government out of Regina 
throughout the province, I have gained a better understanding 
of the whole province and its people. And although there is a 
great diversity of landscape, economic activity, and people, 
there is a commonality of tremendous pride, fairness, 
community spirit, and cooperation. 
 
I feel the Saskatchewan spirit was well summed up in a quote 
from a Saskatchewan sports dinner honouring Saskatchewan 
athletes last week. The quote, or how it was said, is that when 
you are in Saskatchewan it feels like all of Saskatchewan is 
your home town. What a wonderful thing to be said about our 
province. The provincial winter games held in Kindersley are a 
tribute to our home town spirit. 
 
The role of government is to be a tool of the people, therefore 
decision making must involve these people. I feel decision 
making is at its best when consensus can be reached. And 
although this cannot always be reached, it must be attempted so 
that governments can be constructive tools in building a better, 
more just society. 
 
(1500) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is a speech of renewal. 
Renewal, not in the sense of doing things exactly the same as 
was done in the past, but renewal in the sense of optimism for 
our future, a renewal of our economy, a renewal of the 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
It is also appropriate that two important 50th anniversaries in 
1994 were mentioned in the throne speech: the 50th 
anniversary of the D-Day invasion, honouring those who 
fought to preserve democracy, and the 50th anniversary of the 
election of Tommy Douglas and the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), North America's first social 
democratic government; a social democratic government that 
shaped not only important changes in Saskatchewan, but right 
across Canada. Both these anniversaries mark important 
victories for democracy and remind us of the important 
responsibilities we all have as elected members and citizens to 
take an active part in safeguarding democracy. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a New Democrat, I am proud to see in our 
throne speech today that the power of compassion and 
cooperation will motivate our government as it did 50 years 
ago in the formation of the CCF -- to govern for a more just, 
more cooperative community in which all can enjoy a better 
life, both now and for all of us and for all our children's futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is a speech of continuity which 
outlines from where we started and reminds us of where the 
government is going in a four-year plan. It reminds us that our 
journey over the last two years has often been difficult with 
unprecedented challenges along the way. But together with all 
Saskatchewan people we have made great progress; progress 
only made because of the willingness of Saskatchewan people 
to make sacrifices today in order to secure a better 
tomorrow -- a better tomorrow for their province and their 
children. 
 
To my constituents and to the people of this province, I thank 
you for your cooperation these past two years. Because of your 
participation, we are making progress. The achievements are 
yours. They are a reminder of what we can accomplish 
together. 
 
In 1991 we campaigned on, first things first: common sense 
financial management. We said we would get our financial 
house in order, and we've done that. The day we took office the 
annual budget deficit for the coming year was $1.3 billion. Two 
years later the deficit is $295 million, a billion dollar 
turnaround. 
 
And how did we do it? Through progressive taxation, 
compassion for those most in need in our society, and sacrifice 
by us all. It's not been easy but we are now on target to present 
Saskatchewan taxpayers with a balanced budget in 1996 as 
promised. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, now we are all proud to say that in just two 
more budgets we will reach the place that all governments 
should naturally be in, a balanced budget. The four-year plan is 
on track, and when we achieve that it will be time for great 
fiscal rejoicing in the land. The first government, federal or 
provincial, to balance a budget since the Deputy Premier's last 
budget for the Blakeney government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we should be a bit subdued in our 
satisfaction when that day comes. The elimination of deficit 
budgeting will be a great accomplishment, the day our revenue 
covers our expenditures. But we have to remind ourselves that 
when we get there it's only then that we can begin to pay off the 
accumulated debt, and that will take a long, long time. 
 
Some critics say we're too focused on the deficit. But as our 
Premier said at our last provincial convention, we don't seek a 
balanced budget so that bankers will 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

say nice things about us; we seek a balanced budget so 
Saskatchewan will never again have to care what the bankers 
are saying about us. 
 
Reducing the deficit gives us the fiscal freedom to make our 
own economic and social policy decisions. So as you can see, a 
balanced budget is not the end in itself, it is simply the means 
to an end, the end being a better quality of life. Money spent on 
building programs for our Saskatchewan communities rather 
than over $2 million a day being sent out of the province to pay 
the ever-increasing interest on the debt. 
 
Balancing the budget will take four years with our plan. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the way we have not ignored other 
priorities of jobs, agriculture, health, education, and families, as 
we're restoring public finances. 
 
But some would ask, what are the alternatives to our plans? 
And as a former teacher, a science teacher, I think it's important 
to examine all options in seeking your solution. If we look to 
the opposition in this Assembly for alternatives, what do we 
hear? 
 
Well from the Tories we hear very little, in fact. We hear they 
don't want to think; that they have no suggestions. I found it 
remarkable that the Opposition House Leader urged the 
government to halt the debate before even a fraction of his 
members had spoken. 
 
What that tells us, and what it certainly tells the people of 
Saskatchewan, is that there are no ideas across the floor. No 
ability to contemplate, no ability to blue-sky. As the member 
from Regina Lake Centre said, just a raw desire for power so 
they could once again do to the province what they did in the 
'80s -- to which I say, not a chance. 
 
From the Liberal leader, we've heard various solutions. Reduce 
taxes, but spend more. Don't cut programs, but reduce the 
deficit faster. Even in an elementary classroom, students would 
easily see that these solutions do not add up, no matter what 
kind of math you use. 
 
As a matter of fact, in just a few days in this House, the 
proposals of the Liberals would cost an additional, probably 
well over I should say, $300 million -- 300 million more in 
spending, but no new revenue. Sounds a lot like the economics 
of the '80s -- totally irresponsible unless your motive is to turn 
the province over to the bankers. 
 
I wonder if the member from Shaunavon really took time to 
analyse the Liberal solutions, or is it just easier to be in 
opposition? Easier to suggest solutions of spending more when 
you don't have to be responsible for the implementation of 
them. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, our plan, our solutions, make sense for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Our plan as laid out in the throne 
speech is a plan for the year ahead of government action with 
purpose, with compassion, and cooperation. 
 
From day one we have made jobs and economic development a 
priority. We have changed Saskatchewan's economic 
development strategy from one geared to give-aways to large 

out-of-province corporations, to a strategy that puts local 
businesses, cooperatives, and communities first. It is set out in 
our Partnership for Renewal paper. 
 
The thrust of our jobs policy is to build on our natural 
strengths -- agriculture, forestry, mining, communications, 
tourism, and people -- in such a way that our economic 
community is home-grown with deep roots, independent, and 
yet globally competitive. 
 
We're bringing communities together in economic development 
authorities, using our principles of cooperation and community 
to identify and pursue opportunities. It is a comprehensive 
strategy of training, education, and economic planning. 
 
In the throne speech we see a number of positive initiatives 
which will help facilitate these partnerships for growth in jobs, 
in the formation of regional economic development authorities 
to help economic planning, promotion, and marketing for our 
region. Some of these have already been established. In my 
area of the province, communities are interested in working 
together with government as a facilitator for economic 
development. 
 
And our communities do not want government throwing money 
at economic development that is not viable. And that is why 
they are happy to see SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) being replaced with Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. 
 
This new corporation will have a much sharper focus and 
mandate than SEDCO. It will foster and facilitate economic 
development in Saskatchewan: first, by providing a range of 
financial services including lending guarantees and some equity 
to small and medium-sized viable businesses which are located 
in Saskatchewan; secondly, by taking an active role in 
promoting economic development for the province by seeking 
loan and investment syndication with private-sector financial 
institutions to help cost share projects; by assuming a proactive 
role in attracting new businesses to Saskatchewan where 
financing would help to facilitate the transaction. 
 
Emphasis will be placed on financing businesses which export 
goods and services, and those which replace imports where 
these enterprises will not compete with other, existing 
Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
(1515) 
 
All projects will be subjected to commercial viability analysis 
before economic development benefits are considered. No 
amount of investment achieves employment and growth 
objectives if the wrong projects are chosen or if projects are 
poorly managed. 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

We all know that lesson all too well. Projects based on 
viability, not on patronage -- what a unique concept. 
 
To help our businesses access export markets and develop 
products for international markets, there are three initiatives in 
our throne speech. One is the establishment of a trade 
development organization; secondly, a new research and 
technology commercialization plan; and third, a Transportation 
Policy Council. These were areas businesses asked for help 
with, and we are delivering. 
 
Another area of economic development that we are playing an 
important role in is communication technology. There is a 
proposed Canadian network for the advancement of research, 
industry, and education, commonly called the electronic 
highway project -- a massive project expanding and upgrading 
Canada's information technology. We are actively pursuing a 
major role in this project as SaskTel's information technology 
is one of the very best in Canada. This could mean more 
high-tech jobs in the future for our province. 
 
In fact SaskTel International is exporting our 
telecommunication expertise around the world. The original 
contract for a communication system for the Chunnel, linking 
the United Kingdom with France, first went to a European firm. 
When they ran into difficulty, SaskTel International was 
contacted and our SaskTel engineers and technicians helped to 
design and install the communication system. 
 
The area of biotechnology is also becoming an exciting area of 
expertise that we have established in this province. 
Saskatchewan was one of the first provinces to join the 
federal-provincial infrastructure program, a partnership 
between federal, provincial, and municipal government, to 
rebuild key elements of our public infrastructure while 
providing jobs in rural, urban, and northern communities. 
 
Another partnership being established is the joint 
industry-government tourism authority. It will be responsible 
for developing and marketing Saskatchewan as a tourist 
destination. I'm excited about this initiative as Saskatchewan 
has a great deal to offer in tourism. In my constituency, I have 
attended meetings on the development of the Claybank brick 
factory as a tourism and a heritage project. The meetings are an 
example of how partnerships are being established. 
 
The project will be driven by the community with partnerships 
being established with the private sector, all three levels of 
government, as well as interaction between government 
departments responsible for tourism and community service. 
The Claybank brick factory is only one piece of a larger 
strategy of developing a tourism region involving historic and 
natural sites, native heritage, the Big Muddy, and recreation 
areas in the South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the partnerships are working. We continue to 
have the lowest unemployment rate in the country; oil and gas 
drilling was way up in 1993 -- 174 per cent over the previous 
year; retail trade in the first 10 months of 1993 is up 5.4 per 
cent. That's the highest percentage increase on the Prairies, 
even including sales-tax-free Alberta. We shipped more 
machinery, more clothing, more textiles, more wood products, 
and more transportation equipment from Saskatchewan this 

year than last. 
 
Saskatchewan's economy is recovering and Saskatchewan 
people are doing the jobs themselves. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
cannot talk economy in Saskatchewan without talking 
agriculture. Agriculture is a critical component of economic 
development in my constituency as well as the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In recent years farm policy has been ad hoc, politically 
motivated, and unresponsive to the changes in 
agriculture -- billion dollar hand-outs at election time, poorly 
conceived programs like GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program). And actually, to my surprise, yesterday I heard a 
member opposite asking questions about GRIP as still being 
the kind of program that farmers would like. It's out of touch. 
 
We saw that second line of support programs that were funded 
a hundred per cent by the federal government before 1988 
being transferred to the provinces. The province now funds 40 
per cent of these agriculture programs. 
 
Now well over 40 per cent of the agriculture land base in 
Canada is in Saskatchewan, with less than 4 per cent of the 
population. The burden has been enormous. But in spite of 
these pressures, farmers are adapting. Farmers have responded 
to the prolonged price decline in cereal grains by seeding less 
wheat in Saskatchewan -- 12 per cent less in 1993 than the year 
before -- more cash crops sensitive to the markets; mustard, 
canaryseed, lentils, canola. An agriculture revolution. 
 
At the same time we've also seen a steady growth in livestock 
production. Livestock cash receipts are expected to be at a 
record $1 billion in 1993, and continued growth is expected 
over the near future. 
 
Game farming has also emerged as a potential growth sector. 
Game farming scarcely existed in 1986. But by the beginning 
of 1993 the province recorded 118 registered game farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only has there been the shift in what kinds of 
goods we're producing, it's also how we're producing them. 
New technology has spurred change in how we're producing 
them as well. For example, no-till methods of seeding, which 
were hardly a factor in 1986, were used on 10 per cent of the 
seeded acreage in 1991. 
 
Another major trend is the emergence of cottage industries. 
Many in the constituency of Bengough-Milestone have seen 
farm families develop new opportunities in food processing, 
greenhouses, children's toys, and garment manufacturing, to 
name just a few. 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

To my mind, these are positive signs. Farmers are indeed trying 
to reclaim their future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's no denying that agriculture has endured 
enormous hardships through the last decade. But from the 
problems that we've seen in the cereal grains sector, a stronger, 
more aggressive industry is emerging. 
 
Last year our provincial government asked Saskatchewan 
producers and farm organizations to come together to 
determine a new future for the industry. This strategy, 
Agriculture 2000, suggests a number of key initiatives and 
partnerships for the farm sector. 
 
But one thing has been clear -- the need to diversity and add 
value to our products. Agriculture 2000 suggests a number of 
key initiatives for doing just that. Among them is strengthening 
alliances between producers, government, the research 
community, and processing industries; encouraging 
partnerships of community groups and individuals, for 
example, to undertake economically viable processing 
ventures; and forming strategic partnerships with companies 
outside of Canada that capture market opportunities and give us 
the competitive advantage for agriculture products. 
 
Two other initiatives announced in the throne speech are tied 
closely to our Ag 2000 document -- they encourage 
development of agriculture products -- the agri-food equity 
fund, and the beef industry fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can already see exciting things happening in 
Saskatchewan in biotechnology and value added agriculture 
businesses. A few examples are Pound-Maker, an ethanol 
feed-lot complex at Lanigan; and the POS (protein/oil/starch) 
pilot project's creation of Canamino, a plant that will separate 
oat growth into compounds for the cosmetic industry, 
increasing their value from 30 cents a kilogram to $200 a 
kilogram; Biostar, a biotechnology company which will 
manufacture vaccines for the livestock industry and export 
them worldwide. These are only a few examples and there are 
many others, large and small, around the province. The point is 
that there is much can be done through commitment, 
partnerships, and innovation, to help producers move back into 
vital markets. 
 
I also want to commend the Farm Support Review Committee 
for working diligently, consulting farmers and the industry, to 
put together their report on safety net options. In their report 
they have outlined three options for our government to use in 
negotiations with the federal government and other provinces 
to create a national, whole-farm, safety net program that better 
reflects the needs of the family farm. 
 
Still, for many farm families these are very tough times. Our 
government knows this and understands it. The cash crisis has 
not been solved, farm debt is still a serious problem, especially 
for younger farmers. The level of our farm income is proof that 
farm receipts are still very low. For many it's not a problem of 
understanding what direction to take, it's that the resources 
simply aren't there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to maintaining 
effective debt mediation and the farm leaseback program. And 

I urge our government and our Minister of Agriculture to 
continue to seek new solutions to the problems of 
intergenerational land transfer such as community-based land 
trusts. This is still one of our more pressing challenges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am confident in the direction of Ag 2000. With 
continued cooperation, with new and changing partnerships, 
with the innovative spirit of our farmers, our agriculture 
industry will develop, grow, and prosper. Our family farms and 
rural communities depend on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been no greater initiative in our term 
than our health care reforms -- wellness. Wellness is a renewal 
in health care. It is a renewal and it's of new partnerships. And 
it's been said in this Assembly before by other speakers to the 
throne speech, but I'm going to repeat it myself because I think 
it is so key to the whole issue of health care reform, that 
Tommy Douglas had said: when we began to plan medicare, 
we pointed out that it would be in two phases. The first phase 
was to remove the financial barrier between those giving the 
service and those receiving it. The second phase would be to 
reorganize and revamp the whole delivery system. 
 
And of course that's the big item. That's the thing we haven't 
done yet. And that's what I can say today, is what we're doing. 
 
But many still ask why. New technology, improved 
communications, sky-rocketing costs, and new philosophies of 
health demand our current system to be adjusted. We see health 
care reforms taking place right across Canada. But I'm proud 
that in Saskatchewan our reform is with a plan, a plan that 
involves communities. 
 
If we look to Alberta, their health care reform involves drastic 
cuts, increased privatization of services, but no plan. In Alberta 
you can get an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) test in a 
private clinic if you have $1,200 to pay for it. This is not the 
health system we want for Saskatchewan. 
 
We must have a rational and fair system in place to ensure that 
our residents have a reasonable access to it and that all the 
other new technologies of medicare are available. Health care 
must be viewed in a holistic manner -- jobs, education, 
nutrition, and family. The whole human environment must be 
tackled if we are to prevent illness and maintain wellness. 
 
How are we going about this? You should listen carefully on 
how we're going about this. Thirty health districts now 
empower Saskatchewan people, communities, and health 
professionals to come together to plan and deliver services 
which best meet their community needs. It dramatically reduces 
400 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

governance boards to 30 health districts, and creates and 
integrates streamlined systems which will help us get the most 
from our health dollars. 
 
Today many health districts are entering the second stage. 
They're developing the programs they need to build a healthier 
future -- the actual wellness plan. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
commend the people in my area who are sitting on the district 
boards. They face many challenges in assessing the real health 
needs of our communities and being able to implement a 
delivery program to serve these needs. 
 
I have been very involved in health care reform in my area. The 
changes are not easy and often have been contentious. But I 
know that we will succeed. And there have been problems and 
there have been mistakes, and that can be expected any time 
when you're pioneering any new initiative. But change would 
never occur if we were afraid of mistakes. We would never 
move ahead; we would never advance. Instead we would wait 
for collapse. 
 
(1530) 
 
But what is most important is if we learn from our mistakes and 
make adjustments. And I've said this over and over even to my 
children, is a mistake is an opportunity to learn. And we are 
learning. Because of the process we have set up, with 
partnerships in cooperation in health care, we will adjust, we 
will learn, and we will succeed. 
 
An example of cooperation is being announced later today, 
where the Rural Health Coalition and the Department of Health 
have reached an understanding on the coalition's concerns 
about the provision of health services in rural Saskatchewan. 
And as I said earlier in my speech, consensus must be 
attempted for government to work well, and it is working. 
Discussions have been successful. Consensus has been 
achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in the year ahead, with the 
implementation of each district's wellness plans based on real 
needs, that we will see more responsive health care services in 
our communities. I commend the communities of 
Bengough-Milestone for having patience with these reforms. I 
am proud of the ideas and initiatives I hear coming from these 
communities. Meetings have been held where communities are 
identifying their needs. 
 
And it has been made clear in the area I represent, they see 
emergency services as essential; improved respite and palliative 
care as needed; long-term care needs being met locally; and a 
variety of community health care services ranging from 
preventative programs, educational services for youth, parents, 
and seniors, just to mention a few. 
 
Bengough held a wellness fair in which the whole community, 
along with outside agencies, took part. I saw evidence of a 
whole community pulling together to improve their health 
status in a holistic way -- home care offering wellness clinics, a 
druggist demonstrating safe usage of drugs, Sask Housing 
encouraging independent living skills, Emergency Measures 
explaining emergency procedures, students involved in 
SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) 

and fitness programs, sports and recreation involved in 
programs for all ages, Saskatchewan Mental Health explaining 
their services, dental education, fire-fighters with a safety 
display, and the list goes on. 
 
The possibilities are limited only by our creativeness. And 
looking to the future, I see improved emergency response for 
rural areas, health care centres both rural and urban providing a 
variety of services -- chiropody, speech and language, 
physiotherapy, occupational therapy, preventative services, 
educational programs, crisis intervention, dental services -- but 
the beauty of the reform is that these will be crafted to suit the 
needs of each individual community. 
 
I see more opportunities for nurses to have direct access, nurse 
practitioners having an active role in our communities. I see 
more support for seniors in our community where ageing is 
treated not as an illness but as a natural process which needs 
various support mechanisms. I see mental health service being 
available for children, youth, and adults; programs developing 
parenting skills; physician services integrated with our district 
health services; and physicians being trained for rural practice. 
I see communities and citizens taking more responsibility for 
their lifestyles, their environment, their services in meeting the 
whole needs of each individual -- physical, mental, and 
spiritual. 
 
This is an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, an opportunity for exciting 
change. Mr. Speaker, so closely connected to the wellness is 
the theme in the throne speech on family. If we can truly 
strengthen our families, we will be improving the health status 
of our population. In this the International Year of the Family, 
it is fitting that we move ahead with the action plan for children 
and amendments to legislation which will improve the working 
condition of Saskatchewan families. 
 
The action plan for children focuses on the needs of children 
and families. Projects have been initiated to address child 
hunger, family violence, illiteracy. A children's advocate within 
the Ombudsman office will have a protective role, meeting the 
needs of children and youth. The expansion of the Unified 
Family Court is also a positive initiative so that a court has the 
expertise in dealing with family law issues involving children 
in a more responsive, supportive, and less adversarial manner. 
 
The feeling of security, whether it be for our children or for 
their working parents, may have the most profound effect on 
improving our health status in this province. It is well-known 
that populations with high unemployment and 
underemployment and less community well-being are at greater 
health risk; higher drugs and health intervention costs. Our 
greatest impact on wellness may well be strengthening our 
families and their security along 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

with our community's development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is still one more area I want to highlight in 
the throne speech -- education, an area dear to my heart. As in 
all other areas I've spoken of, education is also involved in 
partnerships. Partnerships in post-secondary education that 
must meet the economic and social needs of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Education and training must be coordinated and responsive. 
High school apprenticeship programs are being piloted, linking 
school to the workplace. Students will receive high school 
credits and credits towards apprenticeship. Now more work 
needs to be done in this area, and I feel very strongly that 
improving apprenticeship programs and co-op programs is an 
initiative that we must encourage. This is an excellent example 
of integrating theory with practice and education with training. 
 
The second initiative I want to commend the Minister of 
Education for is introducing amendments to The Education 
Act. This will allow areas who wish to voluntarily amalgamate 
to proceed. Some areas have felt these amalgamations will save 
them money in administration, money that can be used in 
programing. We do not want to stand in their way. We will 
monitor these amalgamations carefully to see their impact on 
education. I believe this is a very positive approach as again it 
is community and local driven. 
 
Education and teachers have constantly dealt with change. 
Education is not stagnant but a very vibrant, changing, 
reforming field. Because this is Teacher Appreciation Week, I'd 
like to salute teachers both as a parent and as a politician. 
Classroom teachers today are facing the challenges we are 
facing as politicians on a real-life basis as they deal with our 
children and youth each day in their classrooms. 
 
The theme of the throne speech has been woven around the 
power of cooperation and compassion. These elements are part 
of every teacher's day. It has been well documented that 
cooperative learning is essential in our classroom to help 
prepare students in their roles as productive citizens and 
workers. 
 
An example was highlighted to me just the other evening when 
my daughter was studying for her grade 6 social test. She was 
reviewing a unit called "Independence" and I was amazed at 
the issues the grade 6 students were studying -- the cutting 
down of the rain forests, GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade) and NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), the building of the Chunnel joining England and 
France, CFL (Canadian Football League) expansion into the 
United States, and grain subsidies. 
 
They had worked in groups developing pros and cons to these 
issues, debated the issues, and presented their views to the 
class. These skills of cooperation and critical thinking being 
developed in these students should be praised; and all too often 
we criticize teachers for what they're not doing, but fail to 
praise for what they are doing and doing well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme of the throne speech and my speech has 
been centred around renewal -- renewal which is powered by 
community, compassion, and cooperation; renewal which is a 

partnership of all aspects of our society. 
 
The interconnectedness of the functions of government reminds 
me of what biologists call the web of life. Seeking consensus in 
decision making is like the balance of nature. Our economic 
strategies must balance worker and employer interests and 
balance out development and jobs with environmental 
sustainability. 
 
Our fiscal strategies must balance revenues and expenditures, 
cut-backs with jobs. Health care must balance services with 
needs. Our decision making must balance the interests of our 
province. The lesson we can learn from nature is that 
partnerships, balance, and cooperation are important parts of 
maintaining our communities, our web of life. 
 
The journey of renewal has been difficult. Saskatchewan 
people have had to sacrifice for building a brighter future with 
renewal, optimism, and hope. 
 
So because I endorse our commitment to progress with 
compassion, to innovation through cooperation, I'm happy to 
support the motion in support of the throne speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's a 
pleasure for me to have a few remarks to make in conjunction 
with the throne speech. 
 
First of all, I'd like to welcome Anita . . . the member from 
Regina North West into our midst. I'm sure by now she has got 
her feet wet, as the saying goes, and is starting to feel more 
comfortable. 
 
And the other thing I'd like to say, Mr. Speaker, I noticed there 
was two themes seemed to be running through all of the 
speeches given by the members from the other side. And one of 
them was the decorum that was in the House, and they were 
congratulating you, sir. And I believe that I should maybe be 
entitled to some of that credit because you haven't chastised me 
once yet. And so I would like to acknowledge also that you're 
doing a very good job. 
 
And the other theme I noticed running through the speeches, 
Mr. Speaker, was the name Tommy Douglas. They were rolling 
him around quite a bit during their speeches. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I wondered why. It took me a little while to figure this out, but 
I think I have it figured out. 
 
My colleagues have outlined a few of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, 
why they thought -- and I think I concur -- that this particular 
throne speech was a bit of a waste of time and money. It was 
very vague. And when you 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

realize we're spending $35,000 a day just to listen to an NDP 
throne speech, it was really drivel. We could be going toward 
many other more useful causes, Mr. Speaker. And in keeping 
with our original position, Mr. Speaker, I intend to keep my 
remarks very brief. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Thank goodness for that. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- And one of the colleagues has said, thank 
goodness. Well I concur with that. You folks should have been 
doing the same thing. We could have been well into a couple of 
Bills by now. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I noticed the two themes and I 
mentioned the first one. The other was, why are they digging 
up poor old Tommy all the time? Well it came to me when the 
member from Kindersley mentioned his friend, Jimmy 
Socialist. That's when it triggered why poor old Tommy was 
being . . . I would suppose they were told over there, each and 
every one, mention Tommy Douglas. Why? Well as the 
member said, they're running scared over there. They have lost 
the support of the unions. 
 
Why are they looking to Tommy? Well the only other 
explanation, Mr. Speaker, is they have legislation what we 
suspect is going to bring the labour unions back into the fold. 
But how do you look after those old CCFers, those old folks 
that used to vote Tommy Douglas, populous socialists? 
 
Mention Tommy Douglas because the old CCFers were going 
and voting Liberal. And they got panicky over there and they 
said, how are we going to stop that? Mention old Tommy. Roll 
old Tommy's bones around a few times and those old CCFers 
will come back into the fold. That's the only explanation. That's 
the only thing I can think of. 
 
Because when you think about it, the member from Kindersley 
put it I think quite fairly, and not viciously but fairly. He said, I 
don't know Tommy Douglas. I don't know who he is. I know he 
was a premier and he's entitled to the respect that we give our 
premiers in this province, but I don't know. That was the 
trigger. It's the old folks they're trying to get back into the fold. 
 
And that explains why, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the 
Premier I detected panic in his voice. We have been listening to 
the Premier many times and he's been very articulate, very 
strong -- good speeches. But that speech the other night had a 
tremor of panic through it. He's hurting. He's worried. So talk 
about Tommy. Get those old folks back into the fold. We're 
going to fix the labour unions up. 
 
(1545) 
 
And why does he do that? Because he has to make sure that 
those old CCFers don't realize they're voting for a labour 
government when they vote NDP. They're not voting for a 
socialist, old-Tommy-Douglas-populous type of political 
reform, they're voting for a labour government. And those old 
folks won't do that. So drag up Tommy. Drag him up every 
time you can. 
 
And that's why I think they were doing that, Mr. Speaker. So 
after I got that kind of settled, then I decided, well I will make a 

few remarks -- I wouldn't say in support of the throne speech 
because there wasn't too much to support, but I did pick up on a 
couple of things that were said there. And one was the bogus 
billion, and I want to talk a little about that later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government members have been saying, Mr. Speaker, 
we're right on track when they speak about the direction in 
which the government has taken -- right on track. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, they use that line, trying to defend the cuts to rural 
health care facilities that have jeopardized rural families to a 
certain degree. They use that line, Mr. Speaker, when trying to 
defend slashes to education, to municipalities, and to seniors' 
programs like the seniors' heritage funds. Mr. Speaker, they're 
bouncing seniors all over this province. And that bothers me. 
I'm a senior. Now are they trying to cut down the medicare 
costs or what? I don't know. 
 
The only problem I can find, Mr. Speaker, is many of these 
things need not be done. They didn't have to be done. All we 
have to do is look to Alberta where they have tax breaks for 
corporations and no sales tax. And that's played a significant 
role. That has played a real role in creating what is now being 
called the Alberta advantage. Well, Mr. Speaker, here we could 
call the NDP government programs the Saskatchewan 
disadvantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the decisions of the members opposite have been 
drastic and in some cases, according to the Finance minister, 
brutal. She said they were brutal. And what do they use to base 
these decisions on, Mr. Speaker? Fiscal responsibility. That's 
the basis they use to be brutal -- balance the books. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are figures that members opposite pop 
out of nowhere just to try and justify their actions. We were, for 
example, Mr. Speaker, examining the workings of the Crown 
corporations and there were some questions that remained 
unanswered. In fact the Provincial Auditor couldn't explain 
them. That's very serious. 
 
The first is the removal of $180 million of debt from the 
financial statements of Sask Water Corporation. The second 
relates to $197 million write-off of assets. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as the Provincial Auditor states: in our 
examination we have not yet seen sufficient or appropriate 
evidence to support those write-offs. You heard that, Mr. 
Speaker. The Provincial Auditor can't see a reason for these 
write-offs. Just like the Canadian association of chartered 
accountants could not understand why the NDP government 
was adding hundreds of millions of dollars to the deficit figure 
two years ago through such additions as $19 million for the 
Fair Share Saskatchewan program, just to create a bogus billion 
dollar deficit. 
 
Well just a minute here. Fair Share, they cut that; they 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

axed that. But they still use the $19 million anyway. No 
wonder the auditor's confused. I imagine half the people in 
Saskatchewan are confused. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, again I point out to you the bogus 
billion -- the bogus billion dollar deficit. And it was bogus. 
How about the $250 million dividend from the Crown 
Investments Corporation? By foregoing that dividend from CIC 
the projected deficit basically doubled in size. Again more of 
the bogus billion. 
 
Then there's the government's failure to include 45 million in 
revenue from the retained earnings of the Saskatchewan Liquor 
Board. Again, Mr. Speaker, $45 million more into the bogus 
billion. 
 
Well that's just a few examples. Mr. Speaker, the list could go 
on and on as to what they did to create that bogus billion dollar 
deficit, which we will be -- I'm sure you'll 
understand -- looking at when the budget comes down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of the 14.2 billion accumulated debt left in 1991, 
7.7 billion is reimbursable debt while 6.5 billion is operational 
debt. Well, Mr. Speaker, this reimbursable debt includes loan 
guarantees on economic development projects for which the 
provincial government is paid interest. They collect money on 
those guaranteed loans, Mr. Speaker. Commercial 
fee -- regular, everyday occurrence; it's done all the time. 
 
I'm sure some of the back-benchers over there don't even know 
that. They don't even know that Saskferco pays the 
Saskatchewan government for the loan guarantee. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these are things the Canadian association of 
chartered accountants say they should not be included in the 
deficit picture. But that's exactly what the members opposite 
have done. They have created a bogus billion-dollar deficit. 
 
And from the beginning, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have been manipulating figures on paper just to justify their 
massive tax grabs. They slashed health, education, cuts to 
municipalities. They upped utility rates, and every other hurtful 
decision that has been made. And this is just the kind of thing 
that members opposite are famous for. They've done it before 
and they're doing it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this smoke and mirrors show will enable the 
members opposite to rise right before they call the next 
provincial election and say, we balanced the budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Houdini rises again. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Houdini rides again. Right. The magician, the 
magician over there with his three-coloured pencil -- the truth, 
the facts, and the what might be's. 
 
Well there again we hear some of the members talking about 
we have reduced the deficit by a billion. Well you can sure do 
that when you didn't have a billion to start with. There was no 
billion-dollar deficit to start with. It was bogus, false, 
misleading. And I can show you the figures right out of your 
own books. But you won't look at them, and you won't let your 
back-benchers look at them either. Because they're there. 

They're there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, any farmer, any farmer -- and there's a few 
of them here -- can move grain from one bin to another. All it 
takes is a little auger and you can do that. But that don't change 
the amount of grain you've got. If you've got half a bin of grain 
and you put it in another bin, you've only got half a bin. So 
we'll be looking for those kind of transfers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That's the same thing in the end, the same amount of grain. 
That's just what the members across the way started telling the 
public. It's about time they started telling us which bin the grain 
is in. Is it in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan)? Is it in the Crowns? Well, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I'm not going to have much more to say, Mr. Speaker, because 
as I mentioned before, there isn't a whole lot to talk about. But I 
will be watching when the budget comes down tomorrow to see 
how the Finance minister transfers funds from one bin to 
another; if we still have any loan guarantees left that they used 
in their bogus billion and all the other false bogus figures they 
used to create that bogus billion. We're going to be looking for 
those things and we're going to be pointing them out. And we're 
going to try and follow those transfers of funds that they're 
using over there to manipulate the figures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the time, and I will take my seat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
sincerely appreciate this opportunity to participate in this 
throne speech debate in the short time available this afternoon. 
I hope to focus most of my comment around health and the 
renewal of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
But before I begin, I do want to make an observation coming 
from the remarks of the member from Wilkie that we just heard 
in the House. He was chastising us somewhat for, in his view I 
take it, the overuse of the name of Tommy Douglas, the 
overuse of some of premier Douglas's comment and vision that 
he left with our party and our province. 
 
Now what I find passing strange, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
member from Wilkie never mentions his former premier. I find 
it passing strange that he never mentions the name of their 
party's former premier who actually still continues to sit in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I tell you, I and every member of this 
government, when we bring the name and the vision and the 
writings and the comments of premier 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

Douglas to this House, we do it with a great deal of respect an
gratitude for his contribution to the life of Saskatchewan. 

d  

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I do want to focus my 
comment around health care renewal in our province and I 
want to quote to you again this comment that comes directly 
from the throne speech. 
 
In our throne speech we heard the Lieutenant Governor read 
these important words. She said: 
 

 Together we will renew our health system to keep it secure 
for our communities, our families, our children, and our 
grandchildren. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in a very short sentence that is precisely the 
challenge and the opportunity which is before us in this House, 
in this government, in this province. It is, Mr. Speaker, to work 
together to renew our health system to secure it for our 
communities, our families, our children, and our grandchildren. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am humbled to have a small part in 
this process of renewal that is happening across the province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud -- proud to be part of a 
government that has the courage and the will to undertake this 
essential renewal of health care for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, beyond that I 
stand in awe today, in awe of the people of our province who in 
this process of reform have worked, have cooperated, have 
sacrificed to begin the change that we see happening, to begin 
the strengthening of health reform for the future. 
 
I stand in awe of the contribution that Saskatchewan people are 
making to this process. And we who are legislators owe to all 
of those across the province who are working so hard, a deep 
debt of gratitude. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 60 years ago, 61 to be precise, a group of 
men and women met here in Regina and formulated a vision for 
health care. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was at that time a very 
radical vision. They called it, and I know my colleagues across 
the House don't like the word, but they called it socialized 
medicine. 
 
Sixty years ago, sixty-one to be precise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
group of men and women came to Regina and formulated a 
vision for health care. One sentence in their vision captured its 
essence. It was placed in a document called the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation Program, and one sentence 
captured that vision. They said in the 1930s: 
 

 A properly organized system of Public Health Services 
including medical & dental care, which would stress the 
prevention rather than the cure of illness, should be extended 
to all our people in both rural and urban areas. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a vision that is 60 years old, that is 
as current today as the day it was written. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that vision took 30 years to become a tangible reality, the 
tangible reality we call medicare, a vision placed on the 
principle that no family's health should depend upon their 
wealth. A principle based on a properly organized system of 
public health services. 
 
It took us 30 years in this province, Mr. Speaker, to put that 
into the tangible form we know as medicare. And here we are 
these 30 years later, now called upon to renew and rebuild this 
medicare. 
 
I would like to share with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with 
members, a little parable that for me is an accurate parable of 
the choices we are having to make today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm told that in Greece there is a 
monastery which monastery is only accessible through a basket 
which is attached to a rope which is then hauled up the cliff to 
where the monastery is located, by the monks. The only access 
is in this basket. 
 
Now the story is told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a visitor coming 
and wishing to visit the monastery, ready to board the basket, 
notes that the rope is frayed, worn, under stress, and frayed. 
The visitor then with some concern says to the monks, just how 
often do you change the rope? To which the monk replies, well 
of course we change it every time it breaks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that to be, number one, an extremely 
valuable parable when we're talking about preventative health; 
but more to the point, when we're talking about the need to 
renew health care delivery in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a choice, because health care delivery 
over the past 30 years has been put under stress. It has worn. It 
is frayed. And I'll talk a little bit in a few minutes about some 
of the points where I see we have been under stress and where 
the system is frayed. We have a choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We can either let the rope break completely or we can choose 
to reweave, to renew the rope of health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are those in Canada today who 
would let the rope break, who would let our system of publicly 
delivered, publicly funded, universally accessible health care 
services break and collapse and move us right back to the old 
two-tiered system of health care, one for the rich and one for 
the poor, that we knew in this country before the vision that 
was born here in Saskatchewan. We know we have a political 
party not represented in this legislature but represented in this 
country and represented in the House of Commons, who in the 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

recent federal election were talking about just that -- two-tiered 
health care; one for the rich and one for the poor. 
 
We can let the rope break and let health care collapse, not 
unlike what we see happening in our sister province of Alberta, 
which I'll, if time permits, talk about in a few moments -- or we 
can make the choice, the choice to renew that rope, to rebuild, 
reweave the rope. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the choice of this government and this 
political movement is to rebuild, renew health care, not just for 
ourselves but for our children and our grandchildren. That's the 
choice we're making. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say just a 
few words about where I see the need and the requirement for 
change and where I see our system having become frayed, 
worn, and under stress. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might find interesting these figures. I 
have in front of me the total spending of the Department of 
Health over about the last 20 years in total dollars and factored 
in 1993 dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are spending today, in Saskatchewan, in the 
budget of the Department of Health, in actual 1993 dollars, 130 
per cent more than we were spending in 1971. In 1971 in '93 
dollars we spent $614 million. This year we are spending near 
$1.5 billion in 1993 dollars. It is clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we are spending a great deal more money in Health. The 
question then becomes, are we as a result any better; are we any 
happier? 
 
And so I refer them to some relatively recent health care 
indicators, broadly based. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1989, which 
is the last year I could get completely accurate statistics, in 
1989, 2,591 people died of heart-related disease. Mr. Speaker, 
in 1971, 20 years before, the number was 2,567. In fact, the 
number of people dying from heart-related disease is greater 
today than it was 20 years ago. 
 
In 1971, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 1,363 Saskatchewan people died 
of cancer. In 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that total had grown to 
1,827 -- a phenomenal increase. 
 
We are spending more money but, Mr. Speaker, are we actually 
affecting the real health indicators of Saskatchewan people? As 
you well know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the year 1971 we had 
never heard of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) 
or sexually transmitted diseases as we know them today. 
 
Over 20 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our suicide rates in 
Saskatchewan have remained virtually unchanged. And yet 
what is alarming to me is that I am told suicide is now the 
second highest cause of death of teenagers in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1971 the Saskatchewan divorce rate was 88 per 
100,000 people. In 1992 the divorce rate in our province is 230 
per 100,000 people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we getting better? 
Are we happier? 
 

It's time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we begin to look at the broader 
picture in health and what makes us healthy people and healthy 
communities and a healthy society. 
 
Our system, Mr. Speaker, has been under stress. We have 
found in our system growing over the years a number of 
inefficiencies. We've had up until very recently, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, over 400 overlapping health care boards and 
jurisdictions, each of them operating singly, each of them 
delivering a single service. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've had in our province what I describe 
as an inequitable distribution of health care providers and 
professionals. For instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
two-thirds of our population, two-thirds of our population live 
outside of the two major cities of Saskatoon and Regina, and 
yet only one-third, one-third of our doctors. I say that is an 
inequitable distribution of health care providers. We can note 
and each can document a lack of integration in the delivery of 
services. 
 
We're living with changing demographics which puts stress on 
our health care system. We have interestingly enough a 
fast-growing seniors population in Saskatchewan. We are an 
ageing people. And yet at the very same time, the other 
extremely fast-growing portion of our population are the 
young, teenagers and under 20. Both segments of our 
population presenting their own demands on health care. We've 
new, in our time, new technological demands, very expensive 
technologies, that we desire and we need. 
 
We live today with environmental factors that 20 years ago we 
didn't consider. Perhaps one of the most obvious is the change 
in the ozone layer and the rise of skin cancers as a result. 
 
We live in a time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of societal change. I 
referred to some of the divorce statistics. We know that we 
have an extreme problem with child poverty in our province. 
 
And another very significant change that directly affects the 
provision of health care in our province is that in the year 
1981-1982 we were making no interest payments on a public 
debt from the Consolidated Fund. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Wasn't even a line on the budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Wasn't a line on the budget, as my 
colleague points out. Today we have a line in our budget of 
$850 million in interest payments, the third highest in the 
provincial budget. 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the health care cord of delivery, the 
rope of delivery is frayed, it's under stress, and it needs to be 
renewed. And this government has taken the challenge, with 
the people of Saskatchewan, in renewing our health care. 
 
And so just very briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to share 
with members what I believe are the three stages of that 
renewal. The first stage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was not an easy 
stage. And that was simply our need to put our financial house 
in order; our need to bring down our expenditures to deal with 
the debt and the deficit. And that has had an effect on every 
aspect of government, and health care is no different. 
 
And so we had to make some very difficult decisions 
respecting programs like the drug plan, respecting programs 
like chiropractic care, and the children's dental plan. Physician 
payments were reduced; reductions in long-term care and acute 
care reductions. These were very difficult choices but necessary 
if we are going to have the available resources to make our 
system continue in the future. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in making these very 
difficult decisions, at each and every point this government 
laboured long and hard to protect those most vulnerable and 
most in need. 
 
I contrast this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with what I see happening 
immediately to our west, into the west in Alberta. In Alberta 
we're hearing of Draconian cuts to health, ranging up to 30 per 
cent of the budgets of hospitals in one blow. 
 
I read in the press from Alberta just this very week in The 
Edmonton Journal on Wednesday, speculation that health 
care workers in Alberta are looking at having to accept 12, 15, 
20, and as much as 30 per cent in wage cuts, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I see from the Alberta press this week, the Calgary Herald, 
again on Wednesday 9, an article that talks about some group 
of people not identified, described in fact as a secret 
cost-cutting master plan being delivered for the Government of 
Alberta and being provided to the Government of Alberta, 
which plan talks about in Alberta introducing health care 
premiums for seniors who can afford to pay them, Blue Cross 
premiums. It talks about including as an income taxable 
benefit, our health benefits. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our difficult choices, financial, and 
difficult they were, at each and every point we sought to 
maintain benefits for those who need the benefits most. And to 
work in public, not in some secret fashion, but to work in 
public with Saskatchewan people in developing our means of 
proceeding. That was the first stage, Mr. Speaker. It's not been 
easy, it's not been easy for Saskatchewan people but it was an 
absolute necessary first stage. 
 
The second stage of renewing our health care structure and 
delivery was to move to the district board model, long 
recognized as an appropriate model for health care delivery. 
The Murray Commission, in our consultations with 
Saskatchewan people, recognized as the appropriate method of 
health care delivery for the future. 
 

Now I recall the debates last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I recall 
sitting in this House and listening to members opposite saying 
to us, it'll never work, it can't work. You can't go out and ask 
communities to come together, to negotiate, to work, to discuss, 
and to form districts on their own. They told us, it can't work. 
Health care gurus from other parts of the country were telling 
us, it can't work; you'll never get people to agree to this. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to report to the House this 
afternoon, it worked. It worked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
Saskatchewan people are the kind of people who will work 
together, who will cooperate. And over the course of the past 
year we have seen communities across our province come 
together, form their district organization, and begin now to 
work together in a real way to deliver health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, some said, you see, 
some of our political opponents and others in the health field 
who were opposing were saying, no, no, what you should have 
done, you see, is just taken a map and drawn the districts 
yourself and imposed it, as the Liberal government did in the 
Maritimes; as the provincial Conservative government in 
Alberta intends to do. They're talking about doing 10 or 12 
regional boards, just slapping them on. 
 
Well I compare this situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
situation I encountered as a student over at the University of 
Regina some few years ago. When I was a student over at the 
University of Regina there weren't that many buildings on the 
campus. We had a classroom building and a lab building and 
the education building was still new, and there was just a new 
phys ed building. And you know, the very creative landscape 
artists or whoever they are -- landscape architects or whoever 
do these things -- they planned the sidewalks over there, and 
they were all very nice geometrical designs all over the campus 
and they were very nice. Of course we students arrived on the 
place and we went from one door to the other door straight 
across the lawn. Now when I travel over to the University of 
Regina I find that the sidewalks have moved to where the 
people walk. 
 
In the formation of district boards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
was our approach -- to allow communities to decide where 
people walk; to allow communities to decide where those 
districts will best suit their needs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with all the scepticism that we were 
confronted with a year ago, it has worked, and the people of 
Saskatchewan have come together. 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

And what's happening now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we're . . . It's 
early, it's early. Some of our districts have been in place now 
for some time, others are now just getting up and running and 
they have massive tasks ahead of them. They're all working on 
the needs assessment process. They're all putting their staff in 
place. I'm encouraging them to work as much as they possibly 
can with health care workers in their districts, to make them a 
part of the decision-making process. They will be working this 
year on global funding. 
 
A very significant, if not revolutionary, reform has taken place 
over the course of the past 12 months in health care delivery in 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, for those who have been a 
part of it in all parts of our province, we owe them a large debt 
of gratitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, our time is drawing to a 
close. I could share with you thoughts for a long time on the 
subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now moving into a very exciting phase of 
health care reform, the phase where we're beginning to look 
now at the renewal of programs and service delivery 
mechanisms. We will, in the course of the next few weeks, 
months, and years, be looking at issues such as physician 
management in our province and ensuring that we can provide 
basic physician services to all residents of our province, where 
they are. We need to be looking at multi-disciplinary 
approaches to health care in the treatment of clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most engaging hours I've spent was t  
visit in the community of La Ronge where that community has 
planned a replacement for its now-existing acute care hospital. 
They have planned, as a community, a health care centre where 
the needs of the whole person will be met in one centre. And so 
there will be under one roof, there will be acute care beds, there 
will be long-term care beds, there will be addiction treatment 
beds, there will be community workers, and the first person th t 
you will meet will not be a doctor, but will very likely be a 
public health nurse. 

o The people of this province are health conscious. We may not 
have the (expensive) health equipment to be found (in other 
places) . . . but we have something in Saskatchewan which is 
beyond price: we have in Saskatchewan, a people who are 
health conscious; a people who are prepared to work together 
for health, (a people who are prepared) to provide health 
facilities for others. 

a 

 
There are exciting things happening in communities all across 
our province, Mr. Speaker, and this reform is only just 
beginning. 
 
But even beyond that, as I look to the new century, to the year 
2010, our understanding has only just begun of what in essence 
makes for good health. And we are beginning to understand, as 
some of our native brothers and sisters have understood for a 
long time, that we need to treat the whole person -- the whole 
person. Mental health, spiritual health, physical health, 
economic health -- that's the whole person, Mr. Speaker. And 
as we begin to understand that more and more in the provision 
of health care, more and more we will become happier and 
healthier people and a happier and healthier society. 
 
I've seen some amazing work, Mr. Speaker, done by a Dr. 
Fraser Mustard, an extremely well-known and renowned 
physician from Canada. Dr. Fraser Mustard addressed our 
Provincial Health Council and he showed us the direct 
relationship, Mr. Speaker, between our community life, our 

employment, and our health. He showed us documents, 
statistical work from Great Britain, showing that in 
communities where unemployment is high, so is prescription 
drug use high. And where communities where employment . . . 
where unemployment is high, so is the prescription drug use. In 
communities where there is good employment, prescription 
drug use falls. 
 
He showed us work done in Jamaica among young children, 
and the health benefit that is added to a child's life through 
basic nutrition and basic nurture -- amazing changes in 
children's life through very basic things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's the future. That is the future -- to look at the 
whole person in the context of health care, to look at our 
education, to look at our employment, and to look at our 
physical needs and our spiritual needs, Mr. Speaker. And that's 
where we're going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I was provoked by the member from Wilkie. I had not 
planned, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon to share in my portion of 
the debate comments by former Premier Douglas. But he has 
provoked me to do so. 
 
And so I want to come to some conclusion, Mr. Speaker, by 
sharing with this House words that were spoken in this room on 
March 21, 1945, and spoken from that bench that is directly in 
front of me by the then Premier Douglas. He gave a major 
address to this Assembly that day on health services. It was part 
of the budget debate that year. I want to quote, and I ask 
members to hear these words again. He said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Mr. Speaker, that has not changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, Premier Douglas said in 
this House in 1945, I quote: 
 

 We are in the vanguard of public health on this continent, 
because we have a health conscious people who regard health 
as something beyond price, who are convinced that health is a 
public utility and the right of every individual in the nation. 
Having gone thus far we intend to stay in the vanguard . . . 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard February 16, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, that has not changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In this great and worthy task, Premier 
Douglas said: 
 

. . . let us take again as our slogan: 
 
"I will not cease from mental fight, 
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand, 
Till we have built Jerusalem 
In England's (Saskatchewan's) green and pleasant land." 

 
Mr. Speaker, we who believe in socialized medicine, we who 
believe in a social democratic vision of health care, have not 
changed in our principles. We yet believe that no person's 
health should depend on that person's wealth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, we who share a social 
democratic vision for health believe that we must so structure 
our health care system that it meets the needs of the person and 
not vice versa. Mr. Speaker, we who believe in social 
democratic health care provision are committed to the renewal 
and the reweaving of that rope which will deliver health care 
services not just to ourselves and our communities, but to our 
children and to our grandchildren. And to that vision and to that 
commitment we will not fail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because in this throne speech, health care and health care 
renewal is clearly identified -- but not only for this reason but 
for many others, Mr. Speaker -- I will proudly stand and vote 
yes in the very few moments when we are called upon to vote 
for the Speech from the Throne. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to enter into this debate on the throne speech. First of 
all, I want to welcome the new member to the House from 
Regina North West. I hope she enjoys her stay here. I can 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, it will be a short one. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, want to congratulate my colleagues, the 
member from Regina Lake Centre and the member from 
Biggar, for moving the throne speech and seconding it. And I 
really appreciate the thoughtful addresses that they gave us, 
very meaningful, and certainly gave us all in the House here 
something to think about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very, very proud to be a part of the throne 
speech and the throne speech debate. I'm very proud of the very 
positive throne speech that our government has put forward, a 
throne speech that is full of hope, full of direction, full of 
direction for the province to rebuild and renew itself. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the Opposition House 
Leader suggested that he wanted to throttle and put a gag order 
on his back-benchers and didn't really want them to participate 
in the throne speech. And that, Mr. Speaker, at the time puzzled 
me. But then after listening to what the rhetoric that has come 

from the back benches of the Tory caucus, I can understand 
why he'd be ashamed to have them speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all well know that 1994 marks the 50th 
anniversary of a number of great events that have taken place in 
the world and affected Saskatchewan and affected Canada. Of 
course we all know of the June 6 invasion by the Allied troops 
of Normandy that as Sir Winston Churchill said, marked the 
beginning of the end of the Nazi tyranny that had engulfed 
Europe. 
 
I find it quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, that nine days later, on 
June 15, the voters in Saskatchewan stormed the polls to use 
their power, through the ballot box, to rid Saskatchewan of the 
Liberal tyranny that had engulfed it at that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, if you look at the circumstances 
in which Tommy Douglas inherited the province of 
Saskatchewan in 1944, a province that had been devastated by 
debt and brought to its financial knees by the Liberal 
government of the time, compare it to the situation that we 
inherited as government in 1991, a province that was 
devastated by debt and brought to its financial knees by the 
Conservative government, you can't help but agree with what 
my constituents have told me, that there is really no difference 
between a Liberal government and a Conservative government. 
 
But my grandfather who raised his family in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, in the 1920s and 1930s under Liberal and 
Conservative governments, used to insist that there was a 
difference. A very slight difference, but a difference. My 
grandfather used to say that a Conservative government will 
skin you from the top down, while a Liberal government will 
skin you from the bottom up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm sad to say that the 
former Conservative government in this province not only 
skinned us, but they fleeced generations to come with their debt 
and deficit programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has adapted a constant common 
sense fiscal policy in rebuilding Saskatchewan. We have a plan, 
and even the Leader-Post is saying that our plan is better than 
the one in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- For, Mr. Speaker, they are saying that slow and 
steady wins the race, not the slash and hack 



February 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

policies of the Conservative government in Alberta. 
 
The Liberals, as the Premier has indicated, the Liberals in Nova 
Scotia aren't only pretty bad, Mr. Speaker, they're extremely 
bad. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I must inform the Assembly that under 
rule 13(4), it is my duty at this time to interrupt debate and put 
all questions necessary to dispose of the main motion. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:31 p.m. until 4:37 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 
Romanow Calvert 
Van Mulligen Renaud 
Thompson Murray 
Wiens Hamilton 
Simard Trew 
Tchorzewski Draper 
Lingenfelter Serby 
Shillington Whitmore 
Anguish Sonntag 
Koskie Flavel 
Teichrob Roy 
Johnson Cline 
Atkinson Scott 
Kowalsky Crofford 
Carson Wormsbecker 
Mitchell Stanger 
Penner Kluz 
Upshall Knezacek 
Hagel Harper 
Bradley Keeping 
Lorje Jess 
Lyons Carlson 
Pringle Langford 
Lautermilch t  

-- 47 
Nays 

 
Swenson Britton 
Muirhead D'Autremont 
Neudorf Goohsen 
Martens Haverstock 
Boyd McPherson 
Toth Bergman t 
 

-- 12 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Support for Canadian Forces Base Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Thunder Creek: 
 

 That by leave of the Assembly that Mr. Speaker transmit to 

the Rt. Hon. Jean Chrtien, Prime Minister of Canada, and 
Hon. David Collenette, Minister of National Defence, and the 
Hon. Paul Martin, Minister of Finance, a copy of the 
resolution supporting continued operation of 15 Wing CFB 
Moose Jaw, adopted unanimously this day, including the 
transcript of the debate as well as the record of the division 
on this resolution. 

 
I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Ways and Means 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for Regina Churchill Downs: 
 

 That the Assembly pursuant to rule 87 hereby appoint a 
Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be granted to 
Her Majesty and consider the ways and means of raising the 
supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member for The Battlefords: 
 

 That the said address be engrossed and presented to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 
Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:46 p.m. 
 
 


