




















































Hansard: March 31, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1285 

 March 31, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Well I think I win the prize today, Mr. 

Speaker.  I have just a huge group up here in the gallery, in the 

west gallery, that I'm introducing to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly -- 100 students from Riffel High 

School.  And they're accompanied by their teachers, Jim 

Hudson, Dave Stouse, and Dale Flichel -- I hope I'm 

pronouncing that right.  And we'll see you for a photo at 10:30 

and for a visit in room 218 following the photo.  Please join me 

in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd also like to welcome 

the students from Riffel High School, many of whom live in my 

constituency and go to Riffel just outside of my constituency.  

I'd ask again for everyone to join me and welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Prince Albert City Police to Learn Cree 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in my 

home town of Prince Albert many people are looking for ways 

that we can improve race relations.  Today I want to bring to the 

attention of this Assembly a recent announcement of the Prince 

Albert Police department.  It was announced that the city police 

employees will soon start learning to speak Cree.  This is one of 

the biggest steps towards cross-cultural understanding in Prince 

Albert.  The city police employees will engage in an 18-week 

language course which will focus on conversational Cree for 

beginners, and the actual course will begin in May.  This 

program is a result of a recommendation of the Nerland inquiry 

that a police officer fluent in Cree should be on duty on all 

shifts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that this is an example of things that citizens 

in Saskatchewan can do to bring us closer together.  It will help 

break down the barriers of racism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel the Prince Albert Police department and all 

those in the project should be congratulated.  Particularly I want 

to congratulate the city Board of Police Commissioners and the 

police department for undertaking this very, very important step. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

16-and-under Provincial Curling Championships 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  A bad 

poet with a good eye for detail said, a hundred 

years ago or so, mighty oaks from little acorns grow.  Last 

weekend at Meadow Lake Curling Club, we were treated to 

some excellent curling at the 16-and-under provincial curling 

championships.  The next Sandra Petersons or Rick Folks were 

on display for the large crowds.  And, Mr. Speaker, the teams 

shot the lights out. 

 

The final was triply exciting for the home crowd because it 

involved our Meadow Lake team skipped by Jason Richter, who 

ended up playing the Moose Jaw rink, skipped by Jeff Street, in 

three straight play-off matches.  I regret to say that our rink got 

its sequence backwards -- it won the first match and then lost the 

next two, so the Moose Jaw rink took the title.  I blame the 

members from Moose Jaw Palliser and Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

but I can't prove it. 

 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 16 teams, with coaches and 

supporters, came from all over Saskatchewan to our town.  They 

got to see a part of the province they perhaps had not seen before 

and they had the fun of associating with their fellow curlers from 

across the province.  They will take home with them a better 

knowledge of the infinite variety we in Saskatchewan have to 

offer. 

 

I congratulate all the curlers, especially our team, made up of 

Jason Richter, Ashley Russell, Clayton Mamchur, David Blatz, 

and coach Ellice Mamchur.  A special thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

to the organizers of the event under the leadership of Elwood 

Demmans and Lena Dubray.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trophy-size Buck Taken in Biggar 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

town of Biggar has once again lived up to its name.  Today I 

would like to announce to the Assembly a new world record has 

been set within my constituency, just north of the town of 

Biggar, for the largest white-tailed buck ever recorded. 

 

The buck was taken by Mr. Milo Hanson, a farmer from the 

Biggar area, last November.  This news has travelled all over the 

world.  In fact the story of the hunt just landed on the front page 

and cover story about Outdoor Life magazine, a major sports 

magazine. 

 

The world record brings good news to Saskatchewan for many 

reasons.  With the coverage of this story and the excitement it 

will produce, the Saskatchewan tourist industry will surely 

benefit. 

 

This trophy buck has drawn international attention to the quality 

of our wildlife.  This speaks well for the habitat protection and 

practices of Saskatchewan farmers who own much of this land.  

Many visitors will be attracted to Saskatchewan as a result of the 

attention this event has brought us all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Milo Hanson on his 

prize-winning buck, and also thank him for the 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

potential rise in tourism and boost in our economy because of it.  

New York might be big, but truly this is Biggar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Zoo 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In Saskatchewan it's not 

uncommon that adversity often leads to a good solution, and that 

was the case late last year when the former owner of the Moose 

Jaw zoo decided to give up the operation.  The Moose Jaw 

zoological society came to the rescue to take over the operation 

in conjunction with the city of Moose Jaw and the province of 

Saskatchewan, formulate a plan to do that. 

 

Tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, is an official day when another step 

takes place, and the operations of the zoo will be taken over by 

Dr. and Mrs. Sung, who recently moved to Canada, to 

Saskatchewan.  Dr. Sung was formerly the veterinarian, 

zoological veterinarian at the Korean zoo in Seoul, Korea. 

 

As a result of his involvement, in conjunction with the 

zoological society, a number of changes will take place at the 

Moose Jaw zoo over the coming months.  The children's play 

area will be improved and the petting zoo is going to be 

enlarged.  There will be a number of special weekend events.  

And in conjunction with the Moose Jaw zoological society there 

will be a significant emphasis, improved and increased, on 

educational programs, tours, and promotions. 

 

As well, Dr. Sung will be involved in an international exchange 

of animals with Korea.  There'll be upgrading of a number of 

facilities and particularly the monkey house, Mr. Speaker, 

because at the end of the day, Moose Jaw is determined to 

continue in monkey business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MLAs vs Media Hockey Match 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Well the 

Easter bunny came early for certain people in north-west Regina 

last night.  The spirit of giving was in evidence during the 

combined hockey game and Easter egg roll contest between the 

mighty MLAs (member of the Legislative Assembly) and the 

Regina struggling press.  This was the second annual challenge 

cup match between the two teams.  Last year's game ended up in 

a 7-7 tie. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, the game raised $220 for AIDS 

Regina.  Second, to keep the MLAs from getting the feeling of 

self-importance, as they are sometimes accused of by the press, 

they gave the game away to the press, the score being 4-3.  

There was a general feeling that the loss was not the result of 

bad coaching however.  As is their custom, the press made up 

the final goal out of thin air.  It was a well-played game in which 

the lead changed several 

times.  At the end of the second period the score was deadlocked 

at 3-3.  Needless to say, the press was keeping score.  Special 

thanks go to John Weidlich and Costa Maragos who refereed the 

game, calling penalties against the MLAs when the press needed 

them. 

 

I look forward to next week when we make the presentation of 

proceeds to AIDS Regina, and also from a previous game to 

Chili for Children.  On behalf of the team, I wish everyone a 

happy Easter.  May it be meaningful, restful, and to the member 

from Regina Wascana Plains, safe.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recognition of Farm Equipment Dealers 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just like 

to make a few comments regarding the agricultural scene in 

Saskatchewan.  Certainly the agriculture producers and many of 

the organizations have been really concerned with the shortage 

of grain cars and the ability to move grain. 

 

But there's a lot of optimism in rural Saskatchewan as well, and 

I'd like to take a moment to commend the individuals who have 

really put a lot of money into the agricultural scene and certainly 

the farm equipment dealers across this province. 

 

In my constituency, a number of dealers have been holding 

customer appreciation days.  And when you look at it, Mr. 

Speaker, the farm equipment dealers have been major employers 

in our province and in our small communities.  So I think it's 

appropriate that we take a moment to recognize the families and 

the individuals who have been a major part in agriculture across 

this province, and I extend an appreciation and tip my hat to the 

farm equipment dealers across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Easter 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Today begins the final 

weekend of the Easter season.  This is Maundy Thursday, the 

day of the Last Supper at which the commandment to love our 

neighbour was given.  Tomorrow is Good Friday and of course 

Sunday is Easter.  This is the major religious observance of the 

Christian people around the world.  As the member from 

Saskatoon Wildwood said on Tuesday, this is not the forum to 

engage in one's religious beliefs.  But the significance of this 

holiday to our society should be observed. 

 

This is the time in which we celebrate the victory of life over 

death, in which the promise of ultimate triumph over evil is 

given, and in very basic terms in which we observe the passage 

of winter into spring, the season of waiting into the season of 

rebirth.  It is also the season in which we acknowledge the 

exalted principle of personal sacrifice for the good of others, the 

major example of which is at the heart of the 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

Christian religion. 

 

As one denomination's prayer-book says, Mr. Speaker, at this 

time of the year we ask for, and I quote: peace in the world, that 

a spirit of respect and reconciliation may grow among nations 

and peoples.  And we ask for help for the poor, the sick, and all 

who suffer, for refugees, prisoners, and all in danger, that they 

may be relieved and protected. 

 

And I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to wish each 

and everyone a very happy and peaceful Easter.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Electricity Rate Increase 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are for the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. 

Minister, please tell us what you're planning on doing with 

SaskPower is some sort of sick April Fool's joke. 

 

Saskatchewan families already are paying the highest tax burden 

in Canada, already paying the highest utility bills, electrical bills 

of any western province, already paying for massive utility hikes 

you have imposed over the past two years.  Saskatchewan 

families are already paying for all of these things and yesterday 

you hit them again, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, please tell us this is an April Fool's joke.  Please 

tell us that SaskPower rates will not be going up another 3.8 per 

cent tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

the question.  I do want to clarify it's not an April Fool's joke; it's 

no laughing matter.  And I think the member should take it 

seriously.  And I do reinforce that the rates as of April 1 will be 

going up 3.8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my next 

question is for the Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, as the minister of SaskPower has suggested, it 

is no laughing matter.  You promised in your budget that there 

would be no new taxes.  You also said that there'd be no utility 

hikes planned in the foreseeable future. 

 

I guess you were a little bit hasty in making that announcement, 

weren't you, Madam Minister?  You should have checked with 

your boss first -- Jack Messer.  Jack obviously didn't feel that he 

had sucked enough money out of the Saskatchewan taxpayers, or 

maybe he's just a little bit mad about the nasty letters to the 

editor that have been popping up in the newspapers around the 

province. 

 

Why didn't you just say no to Jack Messer when he 

asked for this outrageous increase?  Why didn't you stand up for 

the people of Saskatchewan?  Why didn't you stand up for 

farmers or home-owners or small-business people all over 

Saskatchewan?  And, Madam Minister, why didn't you just tell 

the truth when you were asked about utility rate increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to answer 

that question.  And I would refer the member to Hansard, 

February 16 in which I was asked about utility rate increases. 

 

And I said this: 

 

The commitment was clear.  If we met our deficit 

reduction targets, which we have -- in fact we have more 

than met our deficit reduction targets -- there would be no 

increases in taxes.  That means no increases in incomes, 

sales, gas taxes. 

 

Now the member opposite would also like to know about utility 

issues.  They are a separate issue.  They are decided on a 

different basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to make this simple point.  In other 

provinces utilities are privately owned in many cases, and in fact 

would have been privately owned had those members remained 

in power.  So does that mean when a privately owned utility 

increases its rate, this is a tax?  It has to be only Tory logic that 

would have a utility rate increase as a tax.  We have been 

absolutely clear in our commitments to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, in 

your pre-budget consultations and in your pre-budget speeches 

you said to the people of Saskatchewan, there would be no 

increases in utility rates.  That's what you said, Madam Minister, 

and you know you said it.  It's on tape, Madam Minister, and 

you know indeed that you said that. 

 

As well, other members of your party have suggested things like 

this in the past, and I quote: 

 

An unconscionable attack on poor families.  These 

families have kids who need clothes, they have mortgages, 

they have car payments, and what is the government 

doing?  It's reaching deeper and deeper into the 

pocketbooks, the purses, the wallets, the bank accounts of 

Saskatchewan families.  Higher and higher taxes, higher 

and higher fees. 

 

Those are not our words, Madam Minister, those are the words 

of the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, the former 

SaskPower minister, talking about a power rate increase in 1988. 

 

Madam Minister, when are the actions of your party going to 

start matching the actions of your words? 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

When are you going to stop piling burden after burden onto the 

Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well when you talk about the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, I want to tell you that the policy 

that he stated is the policy of the government, that the increases 

would be in line with the rate of inflation.  And that's basically 

what you have here. 

 

But I want to address the issue that the member brings up about 

saying no to the utility rate increase.  What the member opposite 

fails to tell the public in Saskatchewan is when management first 

came to SaskPower and said they wanted a utility rate increase, 

we did say no.  This debate has been taking place since 

November of '93 within the SaskPower board.  And when we 

said no, we said we want you in management of SaskPower to 

go back and look at internal efficiencies.  And as a result there 

has been some $5.6 million reduction in the operating expenses 

this year at SaskPower, and also a reduction in their capital 

expenditures by $9.6 million, for a total of some $15.2 million. 

 

SaskPower found those internal efficiencies, and because of 

some of the legacy that you've left us with over at the 

corporation in the huge debt that's there, and some of the more 

noble things like rebuilding the ageing infrastructure system that 

we have, it was necessary to bring in a rate increase.  That rate 

increase is in line with the rate of inflation. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw, the minister at that time, stated 

very clearly we would not play games with utility rate increases.  

In fact it would be consistent and a smaller rate increase rather 

than . . . Do you remember the 12.6 per cent rate increase you 

brought in in 1983? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, when Jack 

Messer came to you the other day and suggested that there 

should be an increase in this, you should have said no again, Mr. 

Minister; that's what you should have did for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  You're inflicting pain on the backs of 

Saskatchewan families, Mr. Minister. 

 

And let's also talk about the cost of business of this increase.  

Businesses in this province are already reeling from your 

government's economic policies.  We are down about 12,000 

jobs from the day your government took office and thousands 

more jobs are about to be lost if you push ahead with this 

destructive policy, Mr. Minister, of increases and your labour 

agenda.  Now you're hitting every business in Saskatchewan 

with an additional 3.8 per cent tax on their utility rate and power 

bills. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many people will be thrown out of work 

because of this increase?  And when are you going to start 

working for Saskatchewan businesses 

and workers instead of against them, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I thank the hon. member for his question, 

Mr. Speaker.  When no should have been said was back in the 

days of your administration.  You should have said no to the sale 

of the coalfields that we owned in Saskatchewan.  You should 

have said no when they sold off all the natural gas reserves 

which we have to buy from the producers now.  That's when no 

should have been said. 

 

I want to make it very clear to the member opposite, this is not a 

tax increase.  If it was a tax increase, the Minister of Finance 

would have announced it in the budgetary process.  This is a rate 

review, and we're not going to subject Saskatchewan people to 

huge rate increases, like you did, by manipulative games within 

the SaskPower Corporation at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Utilities Review Committee 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, once again your government is inflicting 

another burden on Saskatchewan families, the families that 

elected you, sir, a short time ago.  And once again the opposition 

is offering you a solution. 

 

The very first Bill introduced this year in the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is a Bill to create an all-party committee 

to review utility rate hikes -- a committee, Mr. Premier, I would 

remind you, that has a proposed majority of its members made 

up by your government members. 

 

Don't you think that this would be a better solution to what 

we've seen in the last two days, Mr. Premier, letting the elected 

officials of this House do their job, rather than having every 

Saskatchewan family left up to the whims of your friend Jack 

Messer who pulls the plug every once in a while on them. 

 

Mr. Premier, we could pass that Bill today.  We could nominate 

people to the committee and we could put the elected officials of 

this House to work on determining whether this rate increase is 

justifiable to Saskatchewan families.  Would you do that today, 

Mr. Premier?  Would you allow that to happen? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Leader 

of the Opposition that members of this Assembly are doing their 

job.  I might add, in my opinion, from the official opposition's 

point of view they're doing their job very poorly when it comes 

to this issue.  But you're doing your job none the less by asking 

questions, as you are here; and you're doing your job or you 

should be doing your job in Crown Corporations. 

 

But I want to tell the Conservative Party opposite 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

there, that if you had been doing your job at the time that you 

were in office, you would not have allowed the privatization of 

the Manalta coalfields, or the privatization of the energy gas 

fields to your large, private corporation friends; thereby entering 

into sweetheart arrangements with them where they sell back the 

power to us at exhorbitant costs, including the boondoggle of 

Rafferty and Shand, resulting in the tax increases as you had 

described them, the utility rate increases that are here before us 

now. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, it is a little bit too late for the Conservative 

Party to be talking about MLAs doing their jobs.  You had not 

been doing your job for 10 years; we're cleaning out your mess 

and we're doing it responsibly and the people know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, you 

can drag out all of the red herrings you want.  Nobody believes 

you, nobody believes you, sir.  What they do know, sir, though 

is that you have put more faith . . . what they know, Mr. Premier, 

is that you have put more faith in your friend, Jack Messer, the 

guy you appointed to the presidency of SaskPower, the guy who 

doesn't hesitate to take Saskatchewan taxpayers to the cleaners, 

either for his own good, or for SaskPower.  They know that, sir. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, there is no public input, no public 

accountability, and no real justification that anyone has seen for 

these rate increases.  Mr. Premier, there is a suspicion that these 

rate increases simply will offset the increased labour costs that 

SaskPower is going to face through your changes to the labour 

legislation in this province. 

 

Put it before the public, Mr. Premier.  Put it before an all-party 

committee, a committee with your government majority on it, 

and allow these rate increases to be studied in this Legislative 

Assembly, instead of two years after the fact in Crown 

Corporations. 

 

It's what the public wants, Mr. Premier.  You know it, your 

ministers know it. Why don't we get on with the job and do it 

now, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, with the 

greatest of respect, that what the public wants from the official 

opposition is responsible opposition.  What they want from the 

opposition is some admission that their 10 years in 

administration brought SaskPower almost -- well I wouldn't say 

almost to a state of ruin, but certainly put in a perilous state -- 

brought SaskPower to the point where you wanted to privatize it.  

And you remember that; you were part of the government that 

tried to do it.  You were going to sell it off to your big-business 

friends. 

 

You already sold off the coalfields.  You sold off the energy, 

gas.  You had a 12.6 per cent increase.  You brought this 

corporation . . . you ran it like a personal 

fiefdom, like you ran everything else in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to the point where we face a mountain of debt. 

 

Now we're running this corporation responsibly and it is simply 

false to say there's no public input.  The board of directors are 

representatives of the public.  You have the right to question the 

increases of the corporation that are before this legislature.  You 

have the right with respect to the Crown Corporations 

Committee.  You have all of these things, if only you would be 

credible in your opposition. 

 

I say to you, sir, 'fess up that what you did to Saskatchewan over 

10 years has hobbled us, and tell the people the truth, that 3.8 per 

cent, under all the circumstances, in the light of all the savings 

that the minister has implemented, is a responsible, fair fee to 

charge with respect to the users. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, everyone in the public today is 

simply saying this is another tax grab by an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government run amok.  And, sir, you can 

make all the excuses you want for Jack Messer and Carole 

Bryant and all the other folks that you've put over there with big 

fat salaries.  You can make all the excuses. 

 

People in this province, Mr. Premier, understand the difference 

between their gas bill and their power bill and their telephone 

bill and their SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) bill.  

And, Mr. Premier, they are sick and tired of having you tax them 

through the back door through those utilities which are 

monopolies in the province, sir, which are monopolies which 

you control with your friends.  And they are saying it is 

responsible for this House to change the way it does things and 

debate these things in the House, sir. 

 

And I'm saying to you, the opportunity is there.  There's a Bill 

before the Legislative Assembly and it says that members of this 

Assembly can debate these issues in public and have them 

justified by the Crown corporations who have a monopoly. 

 

Sir, that is a responsible way to handle it.  Today would you give 

the commitment that the taxpayers of this province are going to 

have an opportunity to have these issues reviewed and that you 

simply won't tax them through the back door like you're doing 

now?  Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the logic of the Leader of 

the Opposition and of the opposition parties is non-existent.  The 

Minister of Finance makes an excellent point.  When a private 

power corporation raises its utility rates, this in the minds of the 

Conservatives and the Liberals is not a tax -- that's a charge.  

When a public corporation does it, it's a tax. 

 

How faulty can that logic and reasoning be?  That is 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

only in the minds of the free enterprise parties, the Liberals and 

Conservatives, to adopt that.  How credible is it for the Leader of 

the Opposition to get up now, having established a Public 

Utilities Review Commission and then disbanding it -- it was 

your commission, PURC, (Public Utilities Review Commission) 

and you disbanded it -- now say that what we need is yet another 

committee of the legislature. 

 

Look, we don't need another committee of the legislature.  What 

we need is you to start rolling up your sleeves and doing your 

job as an MLA -- that's what we need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, the business community and public sector 

employers are in a state of shock over the proposed changes to 

labour standards.  Mr. Premier, an industrial service company 

from Prince Albert recently wrote our office saying, and I quote: 

 

Please review the changes in the legislation with a view in 

mind of the employer who must try to operate a business 

and make a profit.  Without these businesses and the 

profits they make, there will be no need for any legislation 

as there will be no employees to protect. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you would truly listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan, if you would listen to them, you wouldn't be in 

trouble as much as you are.  How much more evidence do you 

need that your proposed changes to labour standards will cost 

people jobs?  How much proof will you need before you'll 

change your mind and withdraw this Bill until its possible 

effects can be measured? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, to assist in putting the 

doomsday declarations of the right-wing members opposite into 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Liberal and Tory. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Liberal and Tory, into perspective, 

someone was kind enough to send me a copy of Hansard, the 

British House of Commons Hansard in 1834.  What was before 

the British House of Commons was a Bill to abolish child 

labour.  Listen to what the cotton mill owners said of that Bill.  

They said: 

 

it is absolutely necessary to the carrying on of the cotton 

trade with (respect to the) advantage, to allow the 

employment of children (who are) eleven years of age . . .  

 

Well the cotton trade continues, and we abolished child labour.  

And I say to members opposite, the doomsday which you people 

paint with respect to the 

assistance which we are granting part-time workers will sound 

just as ridiculous as this does with respect to employment of 

children. 

 

The world did not come to an end when they abolished child 

labour; the world became a much more civilized place.  The 

world will not come to an end when we lend some assistance to 

part-time workers; the world will become a more civilized place.  

And I ask you to give that some thought. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Obviously the 

government is digging deeper every day.  Mr. Premier, in spite 

of what you call a consultative process, businesses had not seen 

the legislation until a few days ago.  The head of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) had to phone 

to ask for a copy because no one from your government 

bothered to send them one, even after it was given first reading. 

 

Employers from one end of the province to the other are saying 

that they expected you to give them time to study the Bill, to 

discuss it with their colleagues and associations, and then be part 

of a meaningful consultation to develop regulations before 

legislation is enacted. 

 

Mr. Premier, I believe you meant well with this legislation.  

However this ends up being one more thing your ministers have 

bungled.  Will you do the proper thing and put this Bill on the 

shelf until the next session? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We listened to members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, who vote for a 24 per cent increase for judges, and 

that's fair.  And yet they seem to believe the world simply can't 

live with a process which will provide some relief for the 

problems faced by part-time workers.  I say to members 

opposite, you've got some awfully warped priorities -- you've 

got some awfully warped priorities. 

 

If there is one thing, Mr. Speaker . . . if there was a consensus on 

this issue as we travelled the province, it's that something should 

be done.  This process provides a mechanism for getting 

management and labour together to resolve a problem that 

everyone agrees should not be tolerated.  I ask members 

opposite to give some thought to the welfare of the public and 

less to their political interests.  And if they do so, I think they'll 

support the process which we are putting in motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, the 

process by which you have set out to amend The Labour 

Standards Act is nothing short of a farce.  You introduce a Bill 

which nobody has seen, wave it in front of the employers for a 

day or two, and then expect people to endorse the legislation.  

Anyone who doesn't is labelled an extremist or accused of 

fearmongering. 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

Mr. Premier, you and the members of your cabinet know that 

this is ridiculous to expect private and public sector employers to 

endorse a Bill which changes every time you meet with someone 

behind closed doors.  Why don't you 'fess up like you recently 

did over the judges' commission recommendations; or 'fess up to 

the way you did with the mistake which you admitted making 

over the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) changes?  

And the list goes on and on. 

 

Throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, you're being called . . . 

throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Premier, you're being referred to 

as Mr. Fess-up.  Will you now in fact 'fess up, admit you've 

made a mistake and attempt to correct it before it goes too far, 

and guarantee us that the Bill will not come to a vote before next 

session? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

members on this side of the Assembly make no apology for the 

ongoing consultation which is taking place with respect with 

both business and labour.  We make no apology for that.  And 

that is one of the reasons why we have been able to, with some 

success I suggest, tackle a very difficult problem. 

 

We continue to meet with them.  We don't apologize for that.  

And if there are improvements to be made -- unlike members 

opposite who begin apparently with all things perfect -- we 

admit, if there are improvements, we will make them.  We make 

no apology for meeting with business and labour.  And we make 

no apologies for accepting their suggestions. 

 

Members opposite are sitting opposite because they refused to 

listen to people who came forward with reasonable, sensible 

suggestions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you're not 

learning it very quickly.  The member from Rosthern says 

they're learning the lesson.  He's learning it rather slowly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Liquor Franchises 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise this 

morning to respond to a question raised in the Assembly 

yesterday concerning the liquor franchise at Elbow.  And I regret 

that I was unable to address the hysterics of the member from 

Rosthern, but I was in Cumberland House on government 

business. 

 

I want to say today that with respect to the franchises, the policy 

of the government is clear, and it is the same policy that was in 

place when he was a member of the government side. 

 

The liquor franchises is the policy, sir, that liquor franchises 

cannot be sold or leased; that local retailers must have 

opportunity to apply for a franchise when there is a change in 

property owners at the existing site; and that there is no 

differentiation made between hoteliers and other retailers. 

With respect to the situation in Elbow, I'm advised that the 

Liquor and Gaming Authority have not yet completed their 

analysis, and as such cabinet hasn't had a chance to review it. 

 

But what I can say, Mr. Speaker, to the member, is our policy 

has changed with respect to officials from the Liquor Authority 

sending free booze over to cabinet ministers' offices.  That 

policy has changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Welfare Numbers 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Social Services.  Mr. Minister, your colleagues like 

to tell us how great your government's economic policies are 

working and how well you look out for families.  Unfortunately, 

Mr. Minister, this doesn't seem to be true. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm for us today, for the first time in 

the history of Saskatchewan we have over 80,000 people on the 

welfare rolls.  Can you confirm, Mr. Minister, also, that since 

you have come to power, 23,000 more people have got on the 

welfare rolls? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all let me say 

that the federal Liberal government has just offloaded another 

$40 million in UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission) 

changes unilaterally that's going to cost us even more. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I asked . . . this member to suggest that the 

case-load has increased has conveniently forgotten that the UIC 

changes of his federal counterparts in April of '93 and the federal 

treaty offloading of July, 1993 have dumped 9,400 new clients 

onto . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes they have, that's a fact, 

onto the case-loads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you take away those 10,000 cases, the situation 

has levelled off and the indicators, which I will be happy to 

respond to in estimates next week, for new job creation for 

February are very, very positive.  The signs are positive.  Be 

optimistic like the rest of the public is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

A Bill to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act and to 

make a Consequential Amendment 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would request that 

notice of this Bill be withdrawn. 

 

The Speaker: -- The Bill has been withdrawn. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

SaskPower Rate Increase 



1292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

the provincial government opposite announced yet another 

increase in the compulsory charges imposed by Crown 

corporations.  The latest increase comes as a 3.8 per cent 

increase in SaskPower rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the monopoly SaskPower has, the 

increase in charges applied by SaskPower amounts to a tax 

increase.  Taxpayers in the province have no choice but to pay 

that increase or have their power cut off. 

 

According to the provincial government's own figures, the 

average Saskatchewan household now pays the highest electrical 

charges of any western province.  With excessive income taxes, 

provincial sales taxes, property taxes, fee increases and other 

utility charge increases, this latest 4 per cent SaskPower tax 

increase represents a significant blow to Saskatchewan taxpayers 

and citizens. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, coupled with the proposed changes in The 

Labour Standards Act, increases to input costs for Saskatchewan 

small businesses adversely affects their viability and ability to 

create employment.  Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

have no opportunity to review these increases before they 

happen nor to scrutinize the reasons behind the increases in a 

timely manner.  Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces that 

doesn't have an independent review system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that today is the last day the 

legislature is sitting before the tax increases come into effect, 

and because the increases represent a significant blow to 

taxpayers and small businesses around this province, Mr. 

Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

decision to again increase power rates and urge the 

government to consider the harmful and irreversible 

impact of another utility rate hike to the less fortunate, the 

business owners, the school and hospital divisions, and all 

other Saskatchewan organizations and individuals; and 

further urge this government to immediately form an 

all-party committee to debate this and every other utility 

rate increase in this province of Saskatchewan from this 

day forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yesterday I received notice under rule 17, 

which was delivered to my office by the member from 

Kindersley.  The notice was put under my door after 5 p.m. 

when my office was closed.  Since this is the first occasion that 

the new urgency debate provisions have been invoked . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- There is no point of order until the Speaker 

makes his ruling. 

I want to remind the member that written requests should be 

submitted directly to the Clerk pursuant to rule 17(2), rather than 

through the Speaker's office.  In future the written request should 

be delivered in person at a time when the Clerk's office is open 

and on the day the matter is to be raised. 

 

I shall now address the matter at hand.  Rule 17(5), which I 

remind members is a new provision, states in part, and I quote: 

 

In determining whether a matter should have urgent 

consideration, the Speaker shall have regard to the extent 

to which it concerns the administrative responsibilities of 

the government or could come within the scope of 

ministerial action and the Speaker shall also have regard to 

the probability of the matter being brought before the 

House within reasonable time by other means. 

 

On this basis, I find the member for Kindersley has made a 

sufficient case that the matter proposed is of urgent public 

importance calling for immediate consideration.  Since there is 

no reasonable opportunity by other means for the matter to be 

debated immediately, I now call upon the member to move his 

priority of debate motion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The point of order that I would like 

to propose to the Speaker is that the member from Kindersley 

was allowed time to present why he believed this to be a priority 

debate.  The member from the North Battleford rose to tell or to 

talk to the issue of why a utility rate increase, which are normal 

and happen as an annual event, is not an emergency, was not 

allowed to speak. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why that was the case. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I want to remind 

members that the members have adopted a new priority debate 

rule which we are now operating under.  Under the new rules, 

the Speaker makes the decision as to whether or not it is an 

emergency. 

 

The Speaker has made that decision.  Order.  Order.  I have 

indicated very clearly that there is no other opportunity to debate 

this issue before the rate increases come into effect.  And the 

Speaker has made . . . Order, order.  The Speaker has made his 

decision. 

 

(1045) 

 

In the future, if members wish to raise a matter of . . . points of 

order, I will listen to them in the future.  On this particular case I 

have made my decision. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I move: 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1293 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its decision 

to again increase power rates and urge the government to 

consider the harmful and irreversible impact of another utility 

rate hike to the less fortunate, to the business owners, to the 

school and hospital divisions, and to all other Saskatchewan 

organizations and individuals; and further urge the 

government to immediately form an all-party committee to 

debate this and every other utility rate increase in the province 

of Saskatchewan from this day forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move that, seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it unusual that the 

members opposite can put forward an emergency debate.  And 

you've had the written correspondence from them -- although it 

wasn't put through the proper channel, and you properly pointed 

that out to them . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is debating my 

decision; I've made my decision that the debate is in order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, I'm not debating your decision. 

 

The Speaker: -- You are referring to my decision and I 

recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it comes as 

very little surprise that this government opposite and the 

members opposite are so sensitive about this issue.  It comes as 

very little surprise, Mr. Speaker, because just the day before 

Good Friday, they want to ram through this kind of stuff, sort of 

in the dark of the night, so the people of Saskatchewan don't 

have an opportunity to have any input and maybe -- hopefully in 

the government's view -- don't realize what's going on. 

 

But fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 

caught on to this and they realize the kind of tactics that this 

government continues to put forward.  Every single time we turn 

around there's another increase, just days before a statutory 

holiday.  You did it just before Christmas in 1992 -- did any of 

you remember that?  Just days before Christmas you brought in 

this kind of thing hoping that the people in a festive mood, in the 

festive mood that they are about to embark on, wouldn't notice 

that kind of increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We're seeing now over . . . just under 13 per cent increase in 

SaskPower rates since this government has taken over, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the minister of SaskPower should be ashamed of 

himself for letting again, once again, Jack Messer run over him 

like a steamroller.  Once again the minister from North 

Battleford finds himself in a position where Jack Messer 

steamrolls over him with yet another decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan don't want to see these 

kinds of increases as they . . . as this government brings forward.  

The Minister of Finance promised, Mr. Speaker, promised prior 

to the budget, prior to the budget that they would not, they 

would not be considering utility rate increases; and the media 

knows that and it's on tape, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan don't believe the minister any more 

when she stands and suggests to the people of Saskatchewan that 

that isn't what she's going to do.  Because it's just a few short 

weeks ago that she gave that commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And now we see this increase piled 

on top of increases in the past, Mr. Speaker.  And it represents, 

Mr. Speaker, a tremendous and significant blow to the economy 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, this increase is going to cut into the jobs in 

the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Already, already 

there are 80,000 people on welfare, on the welfare rolls in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And we can only 

wonder -- and we'll be asking the government questions about 

this in the future, Mr. Speaker -- how many more people, how 

many more people will be forced onto the rolls of the welfare 

rolls of this province, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this latest 

decision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker -- and somehow or another this government has the 

audacity to suggest to Saskatchewan taxpayers that this increase 

is not a tax increase -- well I'd like to know, Mr. Speaker, how 

anyone in Saskatchewan can avoid this type of tax increase, 

because that's exactly what it is, Mr. Speaker.  How can you 

avoid it?   When the power bill comes you either pay or have 

your power shut off. 

 

It's not much of an option, particularly in Saskatchewan at this 

time of the year.  Even though it's a pretty nice day out today, 

Mr. Speaker, this evening we'll see the temperature drop and 

obviously the furnaces and the lights will go on in the houses all 

over Saskatchewan and in the businesses as well, Mr. Speaker.  

They don't have an option in Saskatchewan.  You may have 

options in another part of the world, but you certainly don't in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You turn the light on, you pay. Simple as that.  If you don't want 

to pay, you get the power cut off.  And I think everybody in 

Saskatchewan recognizes that, Mr. Speaker, that it's simply a 

tax.  And if anyone suggests anything different, I don't think 

they're being very straight with the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

According to the provincial government's own figures, the 

average Saskatchewan household now pays the highest electrical 

charges of any western province, Mr. Speaker.  On top of that 

they have 



1294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

excessive income tax, provincial sales tax, property taxes, fee 

increases, and other utility charge increases.  This latest 4 per 

cent represents a tremendous blow to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And probably maybe even more significant, Mr. Speaker, it 

represents another blow to the people of Saskatchewan that at 

times have believed this government about what their intentions 

are.  But we've seen, Mr. Speaker, a continual habit, a continual 

way of operating that this government has found and sees fit to 

operate under and that is, make a promise one day; break it the 

next day, particularly if they think they can get away with it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If it's politically expedient, if it's politically expedient or if they 

think they can rush it through just prior to a holiday, Mr. 

Speaker, then they bring it out and try and slip it under the door, 

Mr. Speaker, so that no one notices. 

 

But fortunately the people of Saskatchewan are a little more 

astute than that, Mr. Speaker, and they realize what's going on.  

In the coffee shops and in the businesses and the homes all over 

Saskatchewan, I would believe this morning, Mr. Speaker, that 

the discussion was on tax increases and was on SaskPower 

utility rate increases. 

 

And I would hasten to say that there wouldn't be a great deal of 

support for this thing, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that's the very 

essence, the very reason why what the Leader of the Opposition, 

in questioning the Premier of this province today . . . is correct 

when he is asking for an all-party review committee. 

 

Sure, the Conservatives disbanded PURC.  No question about it.  

We admit it.  It was costly at the time.  We since that time 

believe though, Mr. Speaker, that there is an alternative that is 

less costly, in fact a very little cost.  If you read the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no per diems for members that would be on 

that board, on that commission that reviews utility rates in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  So it would be a very, very 

nominal cost, if any, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to have 

this committee put in place. 

 

And what could happen, Mr. Speaker, what we envisioned 

happening was simply an opportunity for people in the province 

of Saskatchewan to come forward, make their case about utility 

rate increases to the Government of Saskatchewan, have the Jack 

Messers of the day sitting there and having to justify their 

actions and justify the increases to the people of Saskatchewan.  

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that this would be a pretty high 

. . . or a pretty difficult job for Jack Messer, the minister of 

power, to justify this latest increase. 

 

They say, Mr. Speaker, it's a result of a necessity to pay off the 

Shand power plant, Mr. Speaker.  And everyone in this province 

realizes how absurd that argument is, Mr. Speaker -- absolutely 

incredible that this government would try and suggest that, Mr. 

Speaker.  SaskPower made an annual . . . or a profit last year, a 

net profit, Mr. Speaker, a net profit of $107 million. 

And that takes into account, that net profit . . . therefore it takes 

into account the carrying costs on Shand.  This is a net figure of 

$107 million.  So it is already taken into account, already taken 

into the account the amount of money that's the carrying costs of 

the Shand power plant, Mr. Speaker.  So for this government to 

suggest anything different is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker -- 

absolutely false. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time that SaskPower comes forward with these 

kind of proposals, comes forward with these kinds of plans, Mr. 

Speaker, they already have hedged these kinds of developments.  

They have already sold bonds, Mr. Speaker, to finance the 

operations at Shand.  It's been financed, both in terms of 

short-term, medium, and long-term financing, Mr. Speaker.  The 

financing is already in place, has been for years, Mr. Speaker, in 

place for the Shand power plant. 

 

And I think the people of Saskatchewan understand that and 

realize that it never would have been built had those kinds of 

plans been not taken into account years ago, Mr. Speaker.  A 

hundred and seven million dollar net profit SaskPower had.  And 

now they're saying, we need to have more; we need to have 

another 3.8 per cent.  And one can only speculate about the 

reasons why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one reason that comes to mind about this 

power increase and the necessity for it -- at least the 

government's idea of the necessity for it -- is to provide a slush 

fund, to put together a huge amount, a pool of capital, a big pool 

of money, a slush fund for a future election date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that's exactly the reason why this government is doing it -- 

put together a big slush fund of hundreds and hundreds of 

millions of dollars and try and buy the next election; try and buy 

the seat of the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster for 

example; try and buy the seat for the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. Speaker.  Unfortunately, I don't think any 

amount of money will protect that seat of Rosetown-Elrose, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important to recognize that that 

kind of increase to the people of Saskatchewan represents a 

tremendous blow to the economy of Saskatchewan.  The SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), for example, says 

this will cost the K to 12 operations in Saskatchewan something 

in the magnitude of 160 to $175,000 over the next year, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that is a cost that they simply can't bear, 

particularly in light of the cut-backs that they've received in their 

budgets for the operations of the schools in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is a tax increase -- make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker.  

And the people of Saskatchewan can't afford these kinds of 

increases coming time after time after time from this 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We already look at the loss of jobs as a result of this 

government, Mr. Speaker.  There are 12,000 less jobs 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1295 

 -- less jobs -- in the province of Saskatchewan today than there 

were when this government took over the operations of 

government in the fall of 1991, Mr. Speaker.  And we can only 

wonder, and we'll be asking the government further questions 

about this in the upcoming days after the weekend, Mr. Speaker, 

about the job losses as a result of this change and latest increase 

in the power rates in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important that you look back on this 

government's record and look back at this government when 

they were in opposition about some of the things that they said 

when they were in opposition about utility rate increases.  Now 

they're saying it's not a tax; then they said, in 1988, for example, 

they said it was a tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here I'd like to read a couple of quotes from the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, who was the former minister of 

SaskPower, talking about a power rate increase in 1988, Mr. 

Speaker.  And he said at that time, and I quote: 

 

This is an unconscionable attack on poor families.  These 

families have kids who need clothes, they have mortgages, 

they have car payments, and what is this government 

doing?  It's reaching deeper and deeper into the 

pocketbooks, the purses, the wallets, the bank accounts of 

Saskatchewan families.  Reaching deeper and deeper. 

Higher and higher taxes, higher and higher fees, higher 

and higher utility rates, leaving less and less and less for 

Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are not my words, Mr. Speaker; those are the words of the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow who was, up until the latest 

cabinet shuffle, the minister responsible for SaskPower.  And 

that's when he was talking about utility rate increases in 1988 

when he was in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when are the words of this government going to 

meet the actions?  When are the words of . . . For example, the 

Minister of Finance who said in her pre-budget consultations in 

her pre-budget embargo news conference with the media at that 

time said -- and I heard it on tape yesterday, Mr. Speaker -- said 

at that time that they are not contemplating any utility rate 

increases in the upcoming, foreseeable future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately the Minister of Finance doesn't seen to be very 

perceptive about the future, Mr. Speaker.  It seems the only one 

that knows about the future, particularly with respect to 

SaskPower, is Jack Messer.  And it's obvious that when it comes 

to a showdown with the Minister of Finance and the Minister of 

Energy and Mines, Mr. Speaker, that Jack Messer wins the day 

and not the Minister of Finance or the minister responsible for 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

 

They have lost every single opportunity, Mr. Speaker.  When 

they come up against Jack Messer, they meet 

their match every time, Mr. Speaker.  When it came to a little 

difficulty that Jack was having with the fly problem out at his 

farm, Mr. Speaker, again this government knuckled under.  

Again they knuckled under to the lord of the flies, Jack Messer, 

and he was given a nice little settlement for it and they moved 

the farm down the road and make sure that there's not flies on 

Jack out on the pool side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member is straying 

pretty far from his own motion that he has brought into the 

House, and I ask him to get back to the motion that's before the 

House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister responsible . . . I think the minister responsible for 

SaskPower should stand up to Jack Messer, the president of 

SaskPower.  He should have said no to this tax increase, Mr. 

Speaker.  He should have said no to this tax increase because he 

knows very well, Mr. Speaker, he knows very well that the 

people of Saskatchewan can't afford it.  And the Premier chirps 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker, asking us to say no.  Why didn't you 

say no?  Why didn't you stand up to Jack Messer, sir?  Why 

didn't you stand up and say no to Jack Messer?  Because he's 

really the premier of this province. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  I recognize 

the member from Kindersley.  Order.  The member from 

Kindersley has the floor.  I want to remind the Premier that if he 

wishes to speak I'll recognize him.  But now the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That's the second time I think I've 

warned the Premier, and I ask him please, if he wishes to speak, 

I will recognize him later on. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's little wonder that this 

Premier is as sensitive to this kind of stuff as he is, because . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the member get on with the 

motion that is before him. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this motion 

deals with the utility rate increases that this Premier has hoisted 

on the people of Saskatchewan, the families of Saskatchewan.  

And he stands in his place day after day in question period and 

opportunities like that, Mr. Speaker, and he chides us, and he 

says for us to stand up for the Saskatchewan families and stand 

up for the poor and stand up for the farm families and stand up 

for the small-business people. 

 

Well who is that Premier standing up for today, with this power 

rate increase, this power rate tax, Mr. Speaker?  Who is he 

standing up for today, Mr. Speaker, when he hoists this on the 

people of Saskatchewan just prior to a holiday, Mr. Speaker?  

Who is he standing up for, and who is the minister of SaskPower 

standing up for when he does this, Mr. Speaker?  I think the only 

people that he's standing up 



1296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

for are the party members of the New Democratic Party who he's 

trying to put a slush fund together for, to try and eke out the next 

election for the NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this rate increase, this tax increase, is absolutely 

unconscionable.  It represents a pattern that this government 

seems to feel that it's necessary to bring forward every once in a 

while, Mr. Speaker.  It seems like about every couple of months, 

every couple of months we find ourself in this exact same 

situation, Mr. Speaker, where they promise one thing and then 

they take it away or jack up a fee or a tax or an increase. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Jack up, jack up. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, jack up is an appropriate term, 

particularly when you're dealing with Jack Messer, that's for 

sure, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we believe in the opposition 

that this should have gone before an independent commission, 

independent review commission of some sort.  And we were 

suggesting at least put it before an all-party committee.  There 

was PURC in the past and we recognized, we recognized . . . we 

cancelled it.  Yes, we did.   We recognized . . . we cancelled it 

because it was costly. 

 

And now we are suggesting, now we are suggesting to the 

people of Saskatchewan that there's a better way; there's a 

cheaper way.  There's a way to deal with this, Mr. Speaker, and 

there's a way that we have suggested.  The member from 

Thunder Creek has suggested, the Leader of the Opposition has 

suggested that, Mr. Speaker.  Put it before an all-party utility 

review commission, Mr. Speaker, a legislative body, Mr. 

Speaker, and allow the people of Saskatchewan to have input on 

to this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is wrong.  The Government of Saskatchewan 

knows it's wrong.  They brought it in just prior to a holiday.  I 

ask them, the minister, if he would rescind this order and finally, 

finally say something to Jack Messer that should have been said 

a long time ago; no, is the answer to the question that's put 

before him, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy today to 

rise to second the motion made by the member from Kindersley.  

It is with deep sadness and regret that I find myself having to 

stand in this legislature to do the job of the Premier of this 

province, to take the position that he himself pointed out so 

strongly only a couple of days ago in this very Assembly, where 

he stood before the people of this province and said emphatically 

that he was going to stand up for the seniors of this province. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Will the member from 

Humboldt please come to order?  Will the member from 

Humboldt please come to . . . I will warn the member from 

Humboldt that that kind of impertinence to the Chair will not be 

tolerated. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A 4 per cent increase 

in utility rates, no matter which utility it is, but most specifically 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to warn the Government 

House Leader that he is interrupting and interfering with the 

right of another member to speak in the House, and if he 

continues I will take the necessary measures that have to be 

taken. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

point out very clearly that it is an emergency in this province 

when the utility rate on SaskPower is increased by almost 4 per 

cent. That is a crisis in today's society and it is a crisis for the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And we have to stand in our place in 

opposition to do the very job that the Premier himself a few days 

ago said that he was going to do. 

 

He said to us very emphatically that he was going to stand up for 

the little people of this province.  He said he was going to stand 

up for the seniors of this province.  He was going to stand up for 

the farmers of this province.  He was going to stand up for the 

teachers and the nurses and the workers and the secretaries and 

the waitresses.  He was going to stand up for the little guy. 

 

Well today we've got a 4 per cent increase on the most important 

utility in this province -- the power of this province that keeps 

people's stoves running so they can cook their food and warm 

their houses. 

 

And what do these members say?  They laugh in their seats at an 

increase in cost that will send . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The member from Maple 

Creek is in order but the government House members are totally 

out of order.  And I want to warn the government House 

members, if they want to be named by the Speaker, they will be 

named very shortly.  And I want to warn the member from 

Humboldt. He had been warned once already. He continues to 

interrupt from his seat, speaking loudly from his chair to his 

other colleagues.  I will give the member from Humboldt one 

more warning. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again I want to 

reiterate how important the increase of the utility rate in 

SaskPower will be for this province. 

 

I know that the government members don't want to listen to this 

debate.  I don't know if they wanted to bring this debate into this 

House or not; probably not.  But they have to know that there is 

serious opposition out in the country and out in the cities of this 

province against this kind of rate increase.  And we need to 

debate this in an emergency today because this rate hasn't gone 

into effect yet.  We have time to stop it.  That's why it's so 

important that we talk about this.  We can pull this thing.  We 

can stop it. 

 

It's not a question of needing the money. You've got $107 

million profit in SaskPower last year already.  Tell us where the 

dire need for your money is.  Is there 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1297 

something that we haven't seen?  Is there some kind of cover-up 

for the need for this money?  Will the labour legislation cost 

SaskPower this much money?  We've got to answer these 

questions for the people of this province. 

 

They want to know, why do you have to have this disguised tax 

grab at this time.  And it is important and it is necessary and it is 

right that we should debate this issue here today.  Because you 

still have the power to stop what could destroy jobs in this 

province.  Not only destroy the tax base of this province, but the 

job base of this province.  Because every time you put a little 

more on the top of this pile of encumbrances on the people of 

this province, you drive more of them out of the province and 

you destroy the tax base even more than you did before. 

 

This is not a simple, little thing.  You have your Minister of 

Finance stand up in this House, and prepared budget before her, 

not so long ago, saying there will be no tax increases.  And the 

people have a sudden feeling of comfort because they feel like 

we'll get through this next year if we budget carefully.  That's 

what budgets are all about.  You're supposed to have a budget to 

show the people what to expect for the year. 

 

And now you pull the rug right out from under them.  All of the 

municipalities, all of the towns and cities have finished their 

budgeting process for the year almost -- most of them probably 

have -- and what do you do to them?  You rip the rug right out 

from under them because now you have a utility increase that's 

going to be not budgeted for. 

 

And that goes for every private citizen in this province, every 

individual. And the member from Kindersley pointed out even 

your own people, in their own words in the past, have said that 

you have to take into account the budgeting needs of the people.  

You have to take into account people's mortgages and their 

payments. 

 

How do you suppose people take their pay cheque and pay out 

the bills?  They put out a little bit from the mortgage, a little bit 

more for the payments on the car, a little bit more over here, and 

some less for food, and if you're lucky, maybe a little bit for 

some entertainment.  But the entertainment this year is going to 

have to be to pay 4 per cent more for their power, so that they 

can watch the fly movie on television.  And I hope it's a good 

one. 

 

You've let Jack Messer get out of control and out of power in 

this province and it's time you reigned him in.  Take him by the 

scruff of the neck and say, Jack, this is not going to happen. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the personal attacks on a 

public figure, according to Beauchesne, is simply out of order. 

And I think the members are getting too personal in their 

comments and I wish the member would refrain from doing so. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 4 per 

cent increase that we're talking about here is so devastating to a 

critical economy, that one has a tendency to get carried away, 

and I certainly would not want to attack a public figure.  

However, we must encourage the government to use its power to 

control the people who run the Crown corporations. 

 

A little while ago, we listened to members talking about the 

reasons why we had to have this increase.  First of all they said, 

we've got to pay for inflation.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I point out 

very clearly for you that even though the media carried this 

excuse last night -- and that's what it is, an excuse -- the reality is 

that inflation is not that high. 

 

Then they said, well this excuse is not flying so we'll blame it on 

Shand.  The Shand power plant must have cost too much money.  

Well the member from Kindersley totally destroyed that 

argument for you because everybody knows that that was 

financed through a very, very important contractual system of 

financing.  And believe me, if that wasn't properly financed, 

there would have been some more trouble in the wind, I can 

assure you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the money for this tax grab could not pay off the 

Shand power bill even if you wanted to because you're under 

contract to pay it off so much per year, and that was done in the 

budgetary process last year and this year.  And next year it'll 

happen the same because you've already done that under 

contract.  Or do you plan on breaking that contract like all the 

other contracts you've broken this year and last year for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Is this money grab really a grab to pay off anything?  Or were 

you just on the hot seat for having broken rules and laws with 

the judges?  Or were you just on the hot seat because the labour 

law thing had gone out of control and you needed to throw 

something new into the mix in order to get the media and the 

people off your backs so they start talking about power rates?  

Maybe that's the whole scheme after all. 

 

Well if you wanted to get into a debate, you've got it because 

we're here and we're not going to let you get away with putting 

these rate increases up for the people of Saskatchewan without a 

battle and without at least having an opportunity here today to 

tell you why you're wrong so that you can reconsider your 

action; so that you will put into the mix of your decision making 

the reasons why you can't do this terrible thing to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The utility rate review commission that we have suggested is 

certainly now timely.  You've already got 80,000 people on 

welfare in this province.  You've got eleven and a half per cent 

unemployment and you're going to increase power rates that will 

destroy more jobs.  You want 90 or 100,000 on welfare? 

 

(1115) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the member from Biggar 

that I'm sure that his partner is not that far away that he has to be 

that loud to interfere with the debate 



1298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

that is on the floor, and if he needs to speak that loudly, I'd ask 

him to please leave the Chamber and speak somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The third reason, the 

third excuse I want to talk about that was used in the media for 

why we have to have this increase.  First of all, it was inflation -- 

that didn't fly.  So then we tried Shand -- that didn't fly.  Then 

they said, oh but it's an annual review, we only do this every 

year. 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan are getting tired, very, very 

tired of having annual reviews three times a year.  Every time 

you turn around we're having another annual review, so that 

one's not going to fly either. 

 

So, Minister, take note, the people of Saskatchewan are not 

going to tolerate this increase without letting you know what the 

cost is going to be.  And the cost is going to be very significant.  

Your labour laws are significant, your breaking of contracts is 

significant, but now you're doing something that every 

Saskatchewan person will have to pay for out of their pocket. 

 

I know of no one who can get away without using power in our 

society -- absolutely no one.  And they all must pay; it is a 

captive tax against the poor, a captive tax against everyone.  And 

you cannot tell me that this isn't designed to be a tax because the 

reality is that every time you have a surplus, you put the surplus 

from SaskPower into the general fund and you pay off the bills 

of the province and make yourselves appear to have balanced the 

budget by some magical formula.  And the magic in this formula 

is that it's a tax on the people and nothing else but a tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must convince the government that their timing 

is wrong.  The people of Saskatchewan have mostly budgeted 

for the year.  They cannot stand any more increases right now.  

And I know that my friends want to discuss this matter and I 

think that I have made most of the points that I have to make.  

But we've got to remind the government that we had a 

SaskPower rate increase of 4 per cent, March 1, 1992.  We have 

another one, 4 per cent, January 1, 1993.  Now we have one 

today.  The people of Saskatchewan are being overtaxed through 

the Power Corporation of this province. 

 

Every other jurisdiction of major importance has review 

commissions that check these things out.  The United States has 

done it almost to a fault.  They're so regulated already that it's 

almost becoming an overkill.  And we haven't even caught up.  

In Saskatchewan we lag behind the fair-play politics of 

democracy.  We need to have some fair play for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Do you seriously think that you got elected on a platform to 

increase utility rates the way you're doing and using it as a tax?  

I don't believe you have.  I say to you folks over there, do as 

your Premier said the other day.  Stand up in your place and 

fight for the seniors, 

fight for the farmers, fight for the teachers and the nurses and the 

workers and the secretaries, fight for the waitresses and the 

part-time workers in this province that you say you're going to 

work for with your legislation in labour.  Fight for them by 

standing in your place and stopping this increase and this tax on 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think this is the second time I've 

asked the member from Biggar to quit interrupting another 

member while he is speaking.  If he feels so compelled, maybe 

he should leave the Chamber.  And I also want to ask the 

member from Kinistino to quit interrupting. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly when we 

have an emergency debate in this Assembly, it should be for a 

serious matter.  And this is certainly a serious matter. 

 

It can be that you use a small figure of 3.8 per cent, 4 per cent, 

bring it in just a little under the 4 so it doesn't sound so bad.  

And you can say, well it's just a little bit.  On my power bill, I 

did a little quick calculation here -- $16.  Well that's not so bad. 

 

But let's add it up over the year.  Let's add it up for the 

businesses that spend thousands of dollars a day.  The petroleum 

industry, for example, in this province.  Think about IPSCO, just 

up the street here.  The thousands and hundreds of thousands of 

dollars worth of money that these businesses are going to have 

to put out on top of all of the costs that you're going to bring in 

with your labour legislation; on top of the legislation you 

brought in last year with occupational health and safety and your 

workers' compensation Acts, piled on top of piles of bills and 

debts and encumbrances for this province. 

 

How do you expect this province to survive?  How do you 

expect any young person to ever consider staying in 

Saskatchewan, with Alberta just a hop down the road?  How do 

you expect anyone to stay in this province to build a business or 

to choose a career?  How do you expect anyone to want to be 

here any more? 

 

And if we drive them all out, where are the people going to be 

that are going to pay these bills?  More and more costs for less 

and less people, and it has to come to a stop.  We cannot sustain 

this attack on our people, because quite frankly they're going to 

leave and we'll lose our tax base. 

 

The people from Winnipeg who phoned me last week and say 

they represent financial institutions and manufacturers are not 

going to advise their people to come to this province.  They're 

going to have to say this province is out of sync with the rest of 

the free world -- not only out of sync with Alberta, out of sync 

with the rest of the free world.  And they're going to leave this 

province and they're going to go some place else and they're 

never going to come to Saskatchewan.  And on top of that, you 

drive away the people who are already here. 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1299 

And how do you do it?  One little insidious attack after the other.  

Pile the bills on top of the bills, and then the most Draconian 

labour laws that we have seen in the history of mankind.  And 

the minister stands in his place and defends them with 19 . . . no, 

1880 laws about child labour in England.  I couldn't believe my 

ears, you would justify costs in this province with such a line.  

Never read a history book in their life.  Had absolutely nothing 

to do with the changes in Europe. 

 

And the Speaker's right.  This utility thing is much too 

important, much too important to waste our time talking about 

history.  Let's talk about today and what this 4 per cent increase 

is going to do, tacked on top of all the other costs that you said 

you weren't going to bring in. 

 

Your Minister of Finance told us, no tax increases.  The Premier 

said he's going to stand up for the little guy.  Everybody said 

we're going to do everything so good.  And now the bombshell 

explodes and the people of this province know very well that 

they'll have a tough time hanging on till next year.  And the 

spring hasn't even started, and this must be a cruel April Fool's 

joke. 

 

It has got to be, when you jack up prices of utilities just before 

seeding time, just before everybody goes out with that optimistic 

feeling that Saskatchewan is so well known for, where 

everybody gets that internal feeling of greatness and well-being 

and good feelings because spring is here, the robins are back, the 

geese are flying, and we're going to plant the seeds in the ground 

that will germinate and grow into the finest crop that you've ever 

seen.  Because no farmer has ever planted a crop that isn't a 

bumper while he's seeding it.  He sees beautiful fields of wheat 

in his mind's eye and in his imagination. 

 

And we all start with that optimism in the spring; all of us do 

that every year.  We plant the eggs under the hen to have a new 

crop of young birds.  We watch the calves being born to start 

that new crop that will be next fall's market.  And this year your 

government is destroying that hope in Saskatchewan and I hope 

you take that to heart. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I look forward 

to entering into this debate.  Just so those that are watching the 

emergency of this situation today over the airwaves of 

Saskatchewan . . . I want to say that the debate centres around a 

motion by the member from Kindersley, seconded by the 

member from Maple Creek, who has just spoken.  The motion 

reads: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

decision to again increase power rates and urge the 

government to consider the harmful and irreversible 

impact of another utility rate hike to the less fortunate, to 

the business owners, to the school divisions and newly 

formed health districts, as well as all other Saskatchewan 

organizations and individuals; and further urge the 

government to immediately form an all-party committee to 

debate this and every other utility rate increase 

in the province of Saskatchewan from this day forward. 

 

So that's what we are dealing with here today.  And I think that 

the debate can get quite wide-ranging, as we noticed the member 

from Maple Creek was allowed some latitude to speak about 

labour legislation and other issues before us. 

 

I want to, however, centre on the thrust of the motion about 

utility rate adjustments, and also the pros and cons of a review 

process for the utility rates within the province of Saskatchewan.  

I want to also point out the number of inaccuracies both in the 

speech from the member from Kindersley and the member from 

Maple Creek. 

 

The very first point I would want to make is that they stand and 

say that they would want to participate in a non-partisan way in 

some some special review process of utility rates.  How can they 

stand in the House and say that's what their intention is, when 

even the wording of their motion is to debate the utility rate 

increase? 

 

They're not interested in setting rates that serve the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to provide them with electricity and 

gas and telephones and auto insurance.  They're not interested in 

taking the high ground, Mr. Speaker.  They're interested, as it 

says here, to debate.  To play out the politics of the situation at 

the expense of the taxpayers in the province, the constituents of 

the province, in that they . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, it must be very 

humorous.  If you could share with us your humour, maybe we 

could all laugh about this emergency debate that we're . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member to please 

apologize to the Chair.  He knows full well that that comment is 

totally out of order.  And I ask him to apologize and withdraw 

that comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I apologize and withdraw that comment. 

 

If anyone in this House can find humour in what we're debating 

today, they should place it before all people in the province so 

that people can laugh about what I view as a very serious 

motion.  Otherwise it wouldn't be considered an emergency 

debate before the Legislative Assembly. 

 

So let's look at the issue of a review.  There are all kinds of 

avenues through which the utility rate increases are reviewed.  

Let's take the SaskPower, the topic of the debate here today, or 

at least the focus of the debate. 

 

First off it's reviewed internally, Mr. Speaker, by management, 

by the employees of the corporation.  Are the members opposite, 

the opposition, are they saying that these aren't credible, 

professional people?  Is that what they're saying? 

 

Secondly, it's brought forward to members of the board, 

members who are appointed from the public.  Are they saying 

the public aren't credible and 



1300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

accountable and want to do a good job for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan?  That's what I hear them saying, but 

I think not to be the case.  I think that the board members take all 

kinds of serious due diligence in the job that they do. 

 

But it doesn't stop there with the SaskPower board.  The rate 

review then goes forward from the SaskPower board to the 

Crown Investments Corporation board. And the members of the 

Crown Investments Corporation board pay their due diligence, 

along with the staff there, reviewing rate increases, whether it be 

from SaskPower or from some other utility within the province. 

 

And does it stop there?  No, it doesn't stop there, Mr. Speaker.  It 

goes forward then to cabinet.  And cabinet pays due diligence in 

reviewing requests for rate increases. 

 

(1130) 

 

Also we have the Crown Corporations Committee.  I would be 

happy, at the earliest convenience, if the members opposite are 

serious, to go before the Crown Corporations Committee, an 

all-party committee of this legislature, a standing committee 

entrenched by the rules of this legislature.  I will go there and 

answer any questions that the members might put forward. 

 

And it's not a matter of debate, as far as I'm concerned. It's a 

matter of finding a forum in which the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan can be served in the best possible way. 

 

I suggest that the intent of the motion from the members 

opposite is not to serve the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan but to serve their own misguided interests; their 

political interests that they have, trying to increase their profile 

at a time where they're in some very dire straits in the province.  

They're into their 50-year cycle where they're about to disappear 

from the face of the Saskatchewan political map. 

 

They bring up in debate, Mr. Speaker, the issue that 

Saskatchewan is the only province without a public utility 

review commission of some kind.  That's correct, Mr. Speaker.  

And I would point out to you that every other province in 

Canada has higher combined utility rates than the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As we stand here and speak today, when you combine car 

insurance, telephone, heating and electricity, Saskatchewan has 

the lowest package of utility rates of any province in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Does a public utilities review commission 

work?  Apparently not, because the Tories brought one in.  They 

found it cost them $3 million a year plus.  They didn't like what 

the Public Utilities Review Commission was saying, so they 

abolished it.  They abolished their own Public Utilities Review 

Commission.  Very insincere in their motion. 

They used to have PURC; now they want LURC -- that's the 

acronym, Mr. Speaker, for the legislative utility review 

commission as being proposed by the opposition members.  So 

they couldn't PURC; now they want to LURC; and I question 

their motives as to why they bring this forward.  I can find no 

reason other than their own politically selfish motives for taking 

the busy time of this Legislative Assembly to debate something 

that they say is an emergency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of public review I think there's some 

middle ground.  And I've said many times to the members 

opposite, and to the members of the media in Saskatchewan, that 

we need greater transparency in the way that rates are set 

because people want a greater level of comfort than what they 

do at the present time.  The public demands that, and we're 

going to deliver that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it doesn't have to be the extremes of the situation, as the 

members opposite indicate.  They accuse secrecy and behind 

closed doors with no accountability, and through that discredit 

the very worthy professionals and the public that are appointed 

to boards in this province. 

 

The other extreme they go to is a full-fledged public utilities 

review commission, which they abolished when they were in 

government, Mr. Speaker.  They never talk about middle ground 

of greater transparency.  And there is middle ground. 

 

You know, I've said to members of this Assembly before and to 

members of the media that in the summer of this year, the 

summer of 1994, I will have on my desk the comprehensive 

energy strategy for the province of Saskatchewan.  Part of that 

will look at the issue of greater transparency and how we 

involve the greatest number of people in determining the rate 

setting process and having a process that people understand and 

have the perception and understanding that it does in fact serve 

their needs. 

 

I stand behind this government in saying that the current system 

does serve the needs of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  But we're willing to go further than that to 

provide the transparency, so we can no longer be accused of the 

false debate put forward by members of the opposition in this 

Assembly who have created some of the problems -- most of the 

problems -- that we face in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

How hypocritical of those members to bring forward a motion 

like this today.  And at the same time, as one of the members so 

ably points out, at the same time to stand in here and vote for a 

24 per cent pay increase for judges.  Shame on you, members 

opposite.  Shame on you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would want to say that the record should be 

straightened out as well on the issue of tax increases versus 

utility rates.  Why is it for the members opposite who wanted to 

privatize our utilities in Saskatchewan, and very nearly did -- 

why is it that if a 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1301 

private utility increases rates it's a rate increase; but if a public 

utility, owned by the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

wants to do a rate increase, they call it a tax increase? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They don't understand business, that's 

why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- They don't understand business, they 

don't understand government, and they don't understand the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tax increases are announced in the provincial 

budget and that's done by the Minister of Finance.  And she did 

that.  She put the record before the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  She set out our balanced budget plan whereby 

people can start seeing a light at the end of the tunnel, and it's a 

candle burning. 

 

It's not the same light at the end of the tunnel when the members 

opposite were in government, and people all knew it was a 

freight train coming to run them over.  That light has changed.  

The freight train light has gone out, Mr. Speaker, and the light at 

the end of the tunnel is now a candle.  It's that glimmer of hope 

for the province of Saskatchewan because of the balanced 

budget approach taken by our Minister of Finance. 

 

If utility rate increases were taxes, we'd announce them in the 

budget. But they're not.  The only reason why we have had tax 

increases in the past in Saskatchewan is because a legacy of debt 

and mismanagement by the Conservative government in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Tax increases -- not utility rates -- tax increases would be like 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone who takes the position 

that we should have health care premiums like they do in 

Alberta.  Well that is taxes.  Health care premiums are taxes. 

 

Utility rate increases, Mr. Speaker, are done for a number of 

reasons.  In the case of SaskPower, the utility rate increase that 

was announced yesterday for April 1, goes through a very 

complex process.  The first time management came to us within 

SaskPower and said they wanted a rate increase, the SaskPower 

board sent them back to the drawing board.  They said, you will 

have to examine what you can do internally before we'll allow 

you to go to the public.  SaskPower management and the 

employees of the corporation went back to the drawing board. 

 

In that process they were able to find a reduction in operating 

expenses for 1994, of $5.6 million, Mr. Speaker.  They were 

able to find reductions in capital expenditures by some $9.6 

million, Mr. Speaker.  That's a total of $15.2 million that the 

board said no to SaskPower in the initial request.  And they went 

back and they found some money within the corporation.  And 

even with that, there needs to be a utility rate increase of 3.8 per 

cent over the balance of the year.  What is this money for? 

The money within the corporation is to pay for things like Shand 

and the infrastructure that went around that.  There's a debt of $2 

billion at SaskPower, Mr. Speaker.  It goes to paying the debt; 

money goes to improving the infrastructure system around 

Saskatchewan. 

 

For 10 years the maintenance of our system was neglected by 

the Tory government -- 10 years it was neglected.  Money now 

has to be put in place to do life extension of some of the ageing 

facilities that we have.  And it also has to go into the rural 

underground distribution program, a program that should be 

supported by the members opposite; a program that's more 

economical in the long run, and it's safer for the farmers and the 

public throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those programs must continue, Mr. Speaker.  The Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation today, as we stand here and debate this 

emergency resolution, is by almost any measure one of the most 

efficient electrical utilities anywhere in North America. 

 

And we're not going to rest that it's gone as far as it needs to go.  

SaskPower will continue to develop internal efficiencies, to 

organize themselves with their employees to strive to be better, 

continually striving to be better. 

 

And we are one of the best utilities in North America.  When 

you look at the number of employees per kilometre of line, when 

you look at the number of employees per kilowatt-hour 

generated, we should stand up and be proud of our utility.  Not 

to drag them through this kind of an emergency debate in the 

legislature where the motives are to embarrass the government, 

but at the same time they discredit our employees, they discredit 

the board members by the false accusations that they've already 

put forward in this debate here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about increases -- three since we came to power, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's correct.  There was one in 1992, I believe.  

There was one in 1993 -- January 1, I believe was the date.  

There's now one well over a year later, of 3.8 per cent.  That's a 

total of 11.8 per cent, Mr. Speaker -- 11.8 per cent over three 

different years is basically within line with the rate of inflation.  

The members chirping opposite, we'll address being in line with 

the rate of inflation a little sooner. 

 

But I'd like the members opposite in their future speeches on this 

debate here today to stand up and tell us why they had a rate 

increase of 12.6 per cent in 1983 -- 12.6 per cent.  The following 

year, 9.2 per cent.  Both of those years it was at least double the 

rate of inflation in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

In 1986 when the rate of inflation was 3.1 per cent in 

Saskatchewan, they had a rate increase of 7.5 per cent.  The 

following year when the rate of inflation was 4.9 per cent, in 

1987, they had a rate increase of 7.5 per cent again. 

 

Was there an emergency then?  Was the emergency that you had 

to gouge the people who paid for utility 



1302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

rates at that time?  But a rate increase today that's in line with 

the rate of inflation, all of a sudden there's some new 

circumstances that you want to address in an emergency debate 

before the legislature? 

 

Why don't you get on board and try and and have the best 

possible system anywhere in the world, instead of trying to 

discredit the people of the province and trying to discredit the 

employees who are the professionals who make the system run 

and have made it run for so many years in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that comes to my attention is 

the dividends that were paid from the members opposite when 

they were in government.  Now how many would know that in 

the years 1989 and 1990, how many members in the House 

today would know what the Tories made SaskPower declare as a 

dividend in those two years? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hundred per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Hundred per cent, one members says.  

But do we have a dollar figure?  In those two years combined I'd 

want to inform the House today that the total dividend declared 

by the Tory administration into the Crown Investments 

Corporation from SaskPower totalled in those two years, $882 

million -- $882 million over a course of two years.  What game 

is it they're playing in this House today, Mr. Speaker?  What 

game is it they're playing? 

 

A cruel, cruel joke on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan is what the members of the opposition do, Mr. 

Speaker, not the fact of a utility rate increase that's in line with 

the rate of inflation. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to strive for efficiencies in the 

best possible utility in the world, at SaskPower.  The employees, 

the people that make the electricity flow every day, are 

committed to that.  They're committed to making SaskPower 

what everyone wants it to be.  And they've done that as 

employees for a number of years. 

 

In order to do that, you have to keep pace with the rate of 

inflation on your utility rate increases.  Hopefully some day we 

can get to a point where we won't have to have further utility 

rate increases, but that day is not here yet, Mr. Speaker.  But we 

want to strive for that day. 

 

Going back in history, up until the '70s, Mr. Speaker, electricity 

rates continually came down in Saskatchewan.  It's just a new 

situation whereby our infrastructure needs to be updated, life 

extensions have to be done; that rate increases now need to be 

increased within the rate of inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I feel this rate increase is 

justified and it's fair.  If you look at the average utility bill, it's 

not a great deal of money, but I understand the frustration that 

Saskatchewan people feel at having to 

pay increased utility costs. 

 

To respond to that, SaskPower can save money by having 

customers use less electricity through efficiencies.  You'll find 

over the coming months we'll be launching a program of energy 

efficiency through SaskPower that will show the consumers in 

the province of Saskatchewan, whether they be business or 

residential or industrial or farm, how they can use less 

electricity.  And by using less electricity, it'll cost them less on 

their utility bill.  It'll also cost SaskPower less because we don't 

have to increase the generating capacity to any great extent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it's a win situation for the province; it's a win situation for the 

power corporation; and it's a win situation for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That's where we're going with our 

electrical utility, Mr. Speaker, not some hidden agenda that's 

talked about by the members opposite.  I ask them not to 

discredit the people of the province in that way.  Come clean and 

be above board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will also say today in regard to utility rate 

increases, that as I stand here speaking on behalf of SaskPower 

today, is that people should in future years, at least for the 

foreseeable future, plan in their budget expenditures or their 

budgeting process at home or in their business, that there will be 

future rate increases at SaskPower in line with the rate of 

inflation. 

 

Now we've mentioned that a few times and members opposite 

chirp that it's not in line with the rate of inflation.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if we just review the real record, I want to look at the 

period from 1991 to 1994, the Saskatchewan consumer price 

index, the indices that gives the rate of inflation that's used in the 

province -- not our figures; these are figures that are compiled 

by independent sources or the federal government -- the rate of 

inflation over that period of time was 11.8 per cent.  During that 

same period of time, the rate increases for our electrical utility, 

Mr. Speaker, were 11.3 per cent -- one-half per cent lower than 

the rate of inflation.  And members opposite stand up and say: 

oh, no, it's not within the rate of inflation. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They never understood numbers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well my colleague points out they never 

understood numbers.  And the longer we look at the books of the 

province and find out the horror stories, that statement was never 

any truer than what it is today.  They don't understand numbers 

on the debt side and they don't understand numbers on the 

revenue side, and that's why they'll never be the government in 

the province of Saskatchewan again.  That's the long and the 

short of that one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also want to put this into perspective, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the increases in other utilities in the western provinces.  

If you look at the period 1991 to 1994, Trans-Alta had increases 

during that period of time of 19 per cent; Alberta Power, 25.4 

per cent; 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1303 

B.C. Hydro, 12.6 per cent.  The only one lower, Mr. Speaker, is 

the province of Manitoba, Manitoba Hydro, which was 7.9 per 

cent.  Again we're the second lowest of the utilities in western 

Canada. 

 

And if you look at the situation with Manitoba, it's a very 

different situation.  Almost all their electricity in Manitoba is 

produced by hydroelectric dams -- very cheap source, the 

cheapest source of electricity generation you can have.  In 

Saskatchewan, 70 per cent of our electricity is produced by coal.  

It's more expensive to produce it.  And yet we're very close to 

what the increase was over that period, '91 to '94. We're closer to 

the utility that produces the cheapest electricity because they 

have the cheapest fuel -- water.  We're closer to them than we 

are to the people in Alberta, the Alberta utilities that are there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that some of this, I hope that some of this 

sets the record straight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I want to say that it is our judgement and, I think, the 

judgement of the people of Saskatchewan who listen to this 

debate today or read it tomorrow, is that it's better to have 

increases you can handle and understand the rationale for the 

rate increases, than to have the policy that the former 

administration had when all of a sudden, with no reference to 

anything, you'd have a 12.6 per cent rate increase in one year. 

 

We prefer consistency, we prefer the planning, and we prefer the 

professionalism that we have at SaskPower and within 

government to establish the rate increases which I earlier pointed 

out are lowest of anywhere in Canada when you take them as a 

package. 

 

And yet they want some kind of an expensive review process.  

To review what?  To review their sagging record is what we 

maybe could review.  But I'm not about to subject the consumers 

of electricity in Saskatchewan to pay for their political whims 

that they raise through this Legislative Assembly.  I am not 

prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to address also the issues of our fuel that we 

use at SaskPower.  We use water to produce electricity, we use 

coal to produce electricity, and we use natural gas to produce 

electricity, Mr. Speaker.  The cheapest of course is water, and 

I've already addressed that. 

 

But the majority of our electricity is produced from coal and 

natural gas.  And what did they do when they were in office, Mr. 

Speaker?  They sold off all the coalfields.  Ironclad contracts -- 

so ironclad that if the Department of Energy and Mines, my 

ministerial responsibility, was to increase the royalty on coal, do 

you know who pays the increase on the royalty on coal?  Not the 

owner of the coal.  SaskPower has to pay for the increase in the 

royalties.  Shame on them for doing what they've done to our 

utility, our Crown jewel in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Shame on them for what they've done on that. 

 

But that wasn't far enough.  They hadn't gone far 

enough with that, Mr. Speaker.  They sold the gas off too.  And 

so that now when we buy gas in Saskatchewan, we have to buy 

it from private producing companies to pay the full market price 

that anyone else would pay for it.  That's not a paper transaction.  

It's hard, cold cash we have to pay for natural gas to provide 

heating to the homes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

They sold our gas off -- shame on them for that.  All the gas is 

gone.  Enough gas, Mr. Speaker, that you could have heated 

every home in the province of Saskatchewan for somewhere 

between seven to ten years depending on how cold the winters 

are.  They sold it all off.  Left us with a legacy of debt. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need to set the record straight on a 

number of issues that have been addressed here today. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well then sit down and we'll do it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The member from Rosthern says I should 

sit down, Mr. Speaker.  I find that unacceptable.  They want to 

spread irrelevant, false rhetoric out to the people of the province 

but they don't want the factual information to be placed before 

the people that follow what happens in the Legislative 

Assembly.  They can give misleading information but they don't 

want to set the record straight. 

 

Do you think that they could be serious in wanting their LURC 

put into place, their legislative utility review commission put 

into place?  Why would we think they'd be serious about that, 

Mr. Speaker?  We don't believe they are serious about it.  We 

think they want to continue playing the cheap politics and the 

games that they played in opposition on the people of this 

province. 

 

The issues that we need to put on the record I think can be best 

brought out by just putting some straight factual information on 

the record here today.  This 3.8 per cent rate increase will 

provide about $20 million in additional revenue this year to the 

utility.  A typical residential customer, Mr. Speaker, will see an 

increase of about $1.95 per month.  A farm customer, your 

average farm customer, if we look at the average amount of 

consumption on the average farm, it's an increase of about $4.15 

per month. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hogwash. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- And if the member opposite says 

hogwash, the member from Rosthern, I guess he'd know all 

about hogwash.  If his bill is paying more than that, that's 

because he's a larger consumer of electricity.  And if he's a larger 

consumer of electricity, he must be doing something -- either 

generating revenue or wasting it maybe, I don't know what he's 

doing with it.  But we're talking about the average farmer.  

Maybe he's so large in his operation, he can't identify with the 

average farmer, Mr. Speaker.  And the small commercial 

customer will have an effect, the average customer, of about 

$6.68 per month. 



1304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

I want to put on the record here today that the total revenue at 

SaskPower in 1993 was some 9, 7 . . . pardon me, $790 million.  

This amount will increase by the amount I earlier mentioned, but 

the net income, Mr. Speaker, is only going to be marginally 

increased -- it's basically the same amount. 

 

So when they say it's a tax increase, it's not a tax increase.  If it 

was a tax increase, there would be more money on the net 

income line and more money through the process of dividends, 

which the members know full well is not a taxation measure, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1994, Mr. Speaker, the interest and depreciation expenses are 

forecast to be $333 million.  This is about a 4 per cent increase 

over the 1993 actual expense of $320 million.  So 3.8 is fully 

justified in that regard as well. 

 

The 1994 rate increase will be applied equally to all customer 

classifications, so no one is being centred out from the rest.  And 

I want to get into a little later, the cost of putting in electricity to 

rural Saskatchewan, and we're willing to share that equally 

across the board in the province because it's important that we 

don't charge people based on where they live.  If they live in the 

province of Saskatchewan, that's good enough for us.  They 

should have the service to our utilities. 

 

The current residential and farm customers, Mr. Speaker, pay 

significantly less than the cost to provide the service and we'll 

deal with that a little bit later in my remarks. 

 

Saskatchewan's rural underground distribution program 

continues to be an important part of upgrading the reliability of 

the electrical system and adding to the safety and efficiency of 

farming operations. 

 

The $46 million rebuild program has also contributed to some 20 

new manufacturing jobs through the expansions at Moose Jaw 

and Weyburn, where there is cable manufacturing plants in those 

two communities.  It has also generated some 82 construction 

jobs along with $15 million and 20 additional jobs in the 

economic spin-off. 

 

(1200) 

 

In 1994, Mr. Speaker, the projected profit, including this rate 

increase, will help to provide for a 10 per cent return on equity.  

And that's not bad; that's reasonable to expect that.  Without the 

rate increase it would be 8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fixed-cost component related to electrical 

distribution facilities, recovering only 34 per cent from existing 

costs for farm customers and 43 per cent for residential 

customers, as the rebuild program continues over the coming 

months, this ratio will even worsen.  And we're not complaining 

about that, Mr. Speaker, but I want to point out the cost of 

extending the system and the life extension of our 

system within the province so people can continue to expect 

good service for good people in this province. 

 

Let's look at some of the facts about the rural underground 

distribution program.  This RUD program began about 1986 and 

it's expected to take some 20 years to complete.  The goal is to 

replace 113,177 kilometres of rural service lines.  And as of the 

end of 1993, the program is some 24 per cent complete. 

 

The existing farm overhead system is approaching the limits of 

its ability to meet the present demand as well as the future needs.  

The system is ageing; 86 per cent of the farm overhead lines 

have been in existence for more than 30 years.  And this 

addresses some of the neglect that I talked about earlier by the 

previous administration.  There are power poles in 

Saskatchewan today that should have been replaced several 

years ago.  We have to address that situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under the farm rural underground distribution program, it 

enhances farm safety.  Between 1977 and 1992, contact with 

overhead power lines resulted in 24 fatalities and 69 injuries.  

Mr. Speaker, that's unacceptable.  With the rural underground 

distribution program that will no longer be an issue out there. 

 

We've enhanced farm efficiency.  The removal of the overhead 

lines from farm land makes the use of large farm equipment 

more productive.  And there isn't a farmer in Saskatchewan you 

could talk to that wouldn't tell you about the inconvenience of 

having power poles on their land.  In fact I think that we should 

go to the farming population of Saskatchewan and ask them if 

they want to participate to a greater extent in the rural 

underground distribution program.  Chances are they would.  

Chances are they would likely participate to get the poles 

removed from their land, Mr. Speaker.  The average distance for 

each farm service is about 1.5 kilometres, at an average cost, Mr. 

Speaker, of $11,126.  It's costly but it's worth the investment, for 

the reasons I earlier pointed out. 

 

And parallel to the replacement of service to individual farms, 

the RUD program includes the movement of a lot of the 25 KvA 

lines from cultivated land to road allowances.  Again we're 

responding to people in rural Saskatchewan who want those 

lines off their land, and we're responding to that. 

 

I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to some of the SaskPower 

cost-cutting initiatives.  SaskPower is undertaking cost reduction 

measures which will result in the reduction of $5.6 million in 

operating expenditures and $9.6 million in capital expenditures. 

 

The $9.6 million in capital expenditure savings will come from a 

couple of areas, but the basic thing is that they are deferments, 

the things we feel we can defer for a little while.  But 

nevertheless, they'll have to be updated at some point.  And the 

$5.6 million comes from operating expenses within the 

corporation. 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1305 

In addition the corporation has achieved savings through the 

reduction in the number of management positions and getting a 

flattening of the organization.  In 1992 the number of 

vice-presidents was reduced by six, Mr. Speaker -- not the 

heavy-loaded end that was there before under the previous 

administration. 

 

They talked earlier today about the bloated salaries over at 

SaskPower.  I'd want to just say for comparison's sake that there 

were years when their president, George Hill, made well in 

excess of $300,000 a year.  And I can assure you that the 

pension plan that was put into place was $1.1 million -- totally 

unacceptable in the dying days of their administration.  There's 

no such deal in there for the current CEO (chief executive 

officer); I assure you of that.  He's only eligible for whatever 

others are eligible for.  And the salary is less than half that paid 

to their man, George Hill. 

 

Now let's look at some of the questions as to why does 

SaskPower require a rate increase just one year after the last rate 

increase.  Well first off, it's been more than a year.  The last rate 

increase, Mr. Speaker, came January 1 of 1993.  This is April 1, 

1994 -- one year and three months after.  Why was it later than 

that?  It should have likely came in in January 1, but we wanted 

management at SaskPower to look at internal efficiencies.  And 

they did that and they delivered, just like the employees in the 

field for SaskPower deliver good service to the customers that 

they have throughout the province. 

 

Over the past four years SaskPower's debt has actually increased 

from 1.2 billion -- that's January 1 of 1990 -- to $2 billion as of 

January 1, 1994.  This primarily reflects the addition of the 

Shand power station, which in itself is $500 million, and the 

transfer of $226 million in debt that was transferred there from 

SaskEnergy so that SaskEnergy who they left . . . the 

Conservatives left when they left office with 100 per cent debt 

and no equity in it. 

 

The result of these substantial increases and depreciation of 51 

per cent and finance charges of 25 per cent, the corporation is 

trying to keep debt down to reduce future rate increases, and 

that's important.  We have to keep the debt down so that we can 

reduce the amount of future rate increases. 

 

But who in their right mind would ever think you can run a 

utility with never having a rate increase?  The Tories may think 

that, but it can't be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something else that has come up during the debate and during 

questions outside the legislature, is to . . . With a Canadian 

inflation of less than 2 per cent, why does SaskPower need 3.8 

per cent?  Well SaskPower's costs and operations are affected 

more by the Saskatchewan economic environment than the 

Canadian economic environment, so the rate of inflation in 

Canada is different than the rate of inflation in Saskatchewan.  

And we've documented that and I'll go through that again for 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

Rate increases have not kept pace with the debt or the interest 

growth costs.  In 1992 the rate increase only offset the debt 

transfer.  Rate increases for the period '91 to '93 have been less 

than the rate of inflation for Saskatchewan for the same 

three-year period.  Even including 1994, this rate increase we're 

debating today, we're within half a per cent of the rate of 

inflation over the same period of time. 

 

In Saskatchewan, between 1991 and 1994, the Saskatchewan 

consumer price index rose by 11.8 per cent.  During that same 

period, 1991 to 1994, the SaskPower rate increase went up 11.3 

per cent -- less than the rate of inflation.  And they stand in the 

House and criticize this? 

 

I pointed out between 1991 and 1994 a rate increase of 11.3 per 

cent.  In one year, Mr. Speaker, in 1983, in one year, they 

increased it 12.6 per cent.  And they stand to criticize us through 

this emergency?  What emergency? 

 

Well we want to look at also the concerns people have as to how 

the rate is allocated.  The rate will be allocated equally amongst 

all classes of customers who are served by SaskPower. 

 

Now how do we compare to other jurisdictions?  That's an issue 

that we have to look at.  In comparison to our neighbouring 

utilities in Alberta and Manitoba, our farm and manufacturing 

rates are quite comparable. 

 

The comparison in 1993 of the various jurisdictions is . . . sorry, 

I should say 1992 where you look at cents per kilowatt-hour, 

SaskPower is 5.56 cents; Trans-Alta 4.76 cents; Alberta Power, 

5.43 cents; Manitoba Hydro, who generates virtually all of their 

electricity by water, is 3.45 cents; B.C. (British Columbia) 

Hydro, 4.57 cents. 

 

So I think that we're in the ballpark, Mr. Speaker.  But what's 

even more telling is over that period, 1991 to 1994, what have 

been the percentage of rate increases in those other jurisdictions?  

In Saskatchewan, remember, during that period, 11.3 per cent; 

Trans-Alta, 19 per cent; Alberta Power, 25.4 per cent; B.C. 

Hydro, 12.6 per cent.  The only one lower than Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, again, for they use water to generate almost all of 

their electricity, Manitoba Hydro, 7.9 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to again address whether or not 

we'd expect utility rate increases from SaskPower each year.  I 

want to go on the record here today saying yes, we can expect 

that for the foreseeable future.  We want to make sure that 

there's rate increases that are consistent so that the bills at the 

utility can be paid, that were run up by the debt-ridden Tories.  

And once that's under control, Mr. Speaker, once that's under 

control, maybe there will be a day when we won't face rate 

increases at our utility, SaskPower. 

 

But people should now today budget into the future 



1306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

what those rate increases are going to be, because they will be 

there and they'll be in line with the rate of inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we should look at the operating 

maintenance expenses in 1993.  The operating maintenance 

administrative expenses in 1993 were some $234 million.  

Comparing that to 1992, a year earlier, it was $197 million.  

Now there was a 19 per cent increase there.  And I guess that 

begs the question, what is the nature of that expense increase? 

 

The increase of 19 per cent, some $37 million, was due 

primarily to additional maintenance expenses at the Boundary 

dam generating station, at the Shand generating station, and the 

Queen Elizabeth generating station; and to costs related to the 

enhanced retirement program; and PCB (polychlorinated 

biphenyl) disposal costs. 

 

The administrative expense component amounted to $61 million 

in 1993 and $41 million in 1992.  The increase in costs were due 

to the enhanced retirement program, PCB disposal again, and the 

cost of the  A.L. Cole clean-up, which the previous 

administration didn't address. 

 

Do you know what happened at the A.L. Cole building under the 

previous administration?  They sold it off to an independent 

private investor who was going to build condominiums in there.  

Well maybe it sounded like a good idea but they forgot that it's 

contaminated with PCBs and other waste contaminants. 

 

But did they clean it up?  No.  They closed a blind eye to it.  Can 

you believe that?  Closed a blind eye to the environment. 

 

Well I'm happy to say that now the A.L. Cole plant, in terms of 

the PCB and the dewatering in the basement, has been cleaned 

up.  We're in further negotiations to make sure that there's an 

environmental certificate issued so that if somebody wanted to 

build condominiums or something else there they could, and not 

deceive them in the way that the previous administration did. 

 

(1215) 

 

Now I want to say that in comparison to our neighbouring 

utilities in Alberta and Manitoba, I mentioned our rates are quite 

comparable.  But if you look at the efficiency of SaskPower, we 

can be proud to place the efficiency of SaskPower up against 

any other utility in either Alberta or Manitoba.  No matter what 

gauge you want to use, we will stack our utility, SaskPower, up 

to compete against any other utility that neighbours us, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

SaskPower rates, Mr. Speaker, reflect the high cost of producing 

electricity from low-quality lignite coal and servicing the 

sparsely populated area that we serve.  That's virtually 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

Because of governments like ours, virtually everyone who wants 

electricity in Saskatchewan has access to it, Mr. Speaker.  That 

wasn't the case in earlier years before the rural electrification 

program took place under Tommy Douglas's government. 

 

Governments prior to Tommy Douglas and the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) advised people to buy 

a windmill or buy a generator of their own.  They weren't 

interested in serving people of the province.  And I maintain 

they haven't changed to this day.  They're still not interested in 

serving the people of this province.  They're only out there 

perpetuating false rhetoric that they can't get away from. 

 

It also costs us more to produce electricity in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, than our neighbouring provinces.  SaskPower produces 

about 70 per cent of its electricity with lignite coal.  About 25 

per cent comes from our hydro plants, and the remaining from 

natural gas. 

 

By comparison, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba hydro which 

historically, by the way, has the lowest rates in North America, 

generates 98.5 per cent of its electricity from hydro, the most 

economical source of electrical production.  But if you look at 

efficiencies within the corporations, we can be proud to stack up 

our utility against Manitoba Hydro. 

 

Now while most of the costs are fixed within SaskPower, our 

corporation continually is reviewing its discretionary spending 

to its fullest extent and what we can do in dialogue with our 

employees to continually improve the efficiencies of our 

corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Now I want to turn to an issue that will 

save people in the province money.  And this is energy 

management and energy efficiency -- the conservation measures 

that people can take. 

 

Now how much can a residence or a farm or a small business 

save by actually undertaking some conservation or energy 

management measures?  Those customers can expect to save an 

average 5 to 7 per cent of their power bill with efficiency 

measures such as using fluorescent lights, which pay for 

themselves back within two years, and further savings are 

possible by taking other measures of energy efficient in the 

home.  We're going to try and provide people . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Eating cold food? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well some members opposite say by 

eating cold food.  I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members opposite would take this debate more seriously.  

Nobody in this government would expect people to eat cold 

food, but that's as much ingenuity and vision as the members 

opposite have is to say, Mr. Speaker, that they can save it by 

eating cold food. 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1307 

What kind of a hoax are they trying to play on people in the 

province?  Is that the new Liberal policy, Mr. Speaker? -- the 

cold food policy.  Is that what they want to put forward? 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the coming months, as I mentioned, either 

during question period or earlier in this debate, we'll be making 

the strongest effort ever by SaskPower to inform our customers 

how to save on electricity in their homes, on their farms, and 

their businesses. 

 

And I think that members opposite should get on side with that 

and help put out information as to how we can save money -- not 

giving misleading information about the money that it's costing 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now is this rate increase a tax?  No, it's not a tax.  We've 

addressed that earlier.  I want to say that the practice of 

dividends, Mr. Speaker, has been a long-standing practice of all 

governments in the province, whether it was Ross Thatcher's 

Liberals, or the member from Estevan's Tories, or the CCF 

government of Tommy Douglas, or the government today. 

 

Corporations in Saskatchewan that are under public ownership 

that make a profit, pay a dividend to the Crown Investments 

Corporation each year, Mr. Speaker.  What happens to that 

money once it gets there?  And the members opposite don't 

understand it because the member from Maple Creek was 

talking about putting money from the corporation directly into 

coffers of the government. 

 

One of the members opposite from the Liberal Party is hollering 

across about building up a war chest for the election.  There is 

no war chest for the election, so obviously they don't understand. 

So I'm going to take some time today just explaining it. 

 

In 1994 there will likely be about four Crown corporations, 

maybe five, that will pay a dividend into the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  Now what happens with that money from there, 

Mr. Speaker?  A couple of things.  There are some Crown 

corporations that don't make a profit so they need to be 

subsidized.  Those that are subsidized are subsidized because 

they provide a service to the people of this province. 

 

One of those is the Saskatchewan Transportation Company; very 

worthy company with a social mandate to provide transportation 

and express service to people in the province regardless of where 

they live.  Well I'm not willing to do away with Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, so some of that money that the 

wealthier Crowns have goes to subsidizing some of the others.  

Some of those Crown corporations -- like I used Sask 

Transportation Company as an example -- are working very hard 

to make themselves break even or make a profit. 

 

They're also left with the legacy of debt in Eagle buses that the 

members bought.  And I don't think we want to get into Eagle 

buses today, but that's how they spent 

the taxpayers' money, Mr. Speaker, buying Eagle buses and the 

great old kickback deal that they had going there.  But I didn't 

want to get onto that.  I want to talk about those Crowns striving 

for excellence in providing service.  And some of those Crowns 

in future years, will likely make a profit or at least break even. 

 

But there's something else at the Crown Investments 

Corporation that doesn't very often get talked about, and that's 

what they call CICIII (Crown Investments Corporation 

Industrial Interests Inc.)  Within there, Mr. Speaker, there are a 

number of investments made for the most part by the members 

of the previous administration; by the acting leader who's sitting 

here in the House with us in this debate today. 

 

What are they?  They're investments that have lost hundreds of 

millions of dollars for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Bad business deals, Mr. Speaker, bad business 

deals. 

 

And so money from the Crown Investments Corporation that 

comes in from the profitable Crowns goes to servicing some of 

that debt. 

 

What have we done since 1991?  We've restructured some of 

those deals that were made by the previous administration, so 

continually it costs us less.  It costs us less, Mr. Speaker, because 

we paid due diligence to the accounts of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and to the bad deals that were made 

by the previous administration.  Hundreds of millions of dollars 

have been saved there, but there is some debt that has to be 

serviced, because they can't all be turned around overnight.  And 

the ones that are still there, we have confidence in, will pay a 

return at some future point. 

 

There are others there that were contracted into by the previous 

administration, that we have a responsibility to uphold.  And 

then if there's money left over after all that -- and some years 

there isn't money left over after cleaning up all the Tory deals -- 

but if there's money left over, a small amount goes into the 

Consolidated Fund, Mr. Speaker.  And that's been the accepted 

practice of every administration since Crown corporations 

existed in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a business practice.  There's a reason we have 

commercial Crowns in Saskatchewan.  It's so that service can be 

provided.  Do you think for one moment . . . does anyone in this 

legislature think for one moment that if there was a private 

utility in 1944 in Saskatchewan that every farmer could have got 

electricity?  No.  That's why there was a public utility to start 

with, Mr. Speaker -- to provide the service. 

 

And we're now into competition with some of our corporations.  

And over the years, such things as the Free Trade Agreement 

and the North American Free Trade Agreement have changed 

the face of the North American economy and the market. 

 

We have to prepare our Crown corporations for the future, Mr. 

Speaker, because in the future we'll have more effect on us by a 

market driven economy than 



1308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

we've ever before had in the past.  And I would hope that some 

members in the opposition benches would understand that, 

because if they don't understand that they'll stay in the 

opposition benches for a long, long time into the future. 

 

The market driven economy is upon us by no wish of our own, 

but we can't close our eyes to the outside world.  We know full 

well that federal regulatory agencies such as the CRTC, the 

Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission, had said to our utility, SaskTel, that there's going 

to be open competition and we'll tell you how much you can 

charge for the infrastructure you've put in place to your 

competitors.  We can't set that rate.  It's affected by someone 

else far beyond our borders. 

 

So as we walk through this balance we want to walk together 

with the members of this Assembly and as we walk through this 

process, we not only have to provide the service to the people of 

the province, we have to do it at competitive rates because we're 

preparing for a market driven economy which will be foisted 

upon us whether we like it or not, so we'd better get prepared for 

it. 

 

And that's what we're doing.  We're getting prepared at SaskTel; 

we're getting prepared at SaskEnergy; we're getting prepared at 

SaskPower . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member 

opposite, the new member from Regina North West says, getting 

prepared for an election.  What a point she would make . . . 

what's the point she's trying to make, Mr. Speaker?  Is it the 

same thing that they talk about a war chest being built up for 

election time?  Is that what you're referring to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh, the member from Shaunavon said that too, 

and now he's training the member from Regina North West. 

 

You see there's no war chest for election time, Mr. Speaker.  

What we have there is some very dedicated, hard-working 

employees making the best . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 

the member from Shaunavon wants to keep an eye on me.  Well 

you're welcome to do that.  What I invite you to do is take us to 

the Crown Corporations Committee at your earliest opportunity, 

and there we can examine in depth.  So call me before the 

Crown Corporations Committee because I'm anxious to get into 

the debate about this war chest for the election.  There's no such 

thing exists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I was saying earlier, we have some very dedicated employees 

that are working in Crown corporations to pay for the most . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've listened very carefully for the last 

20 or 25 minutes and I haven't kept track the number of times 

the member from Shaunavon has interrupted, but it would be 

numerous -- numerous.  And I'll ask him to please stop 

interrupting and let the minister continue with the debate. 

 

(1230) 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't 

know who they're trying to fool when they talk about some 

election war chest.  I mean we have the public board of 

SaskPower.  Is the member from Shaunavon and the member 

from Regina North West really accusing these people of doing 

something illegal?  Is that what you're doing? 

 

I mean, are you accusing the staff at SaskPower of hiding money 

somewhere?  Are they accusing the members of the Crown 

Investments Corporation board, who have a duty to uphold to 

the people of this province, to pay due diligence to the work that 

has to be done, not only for the day-to-day business of the 

Crown Investments Corporation but to clean up the disastrous 

mess that was left there by the Tory administration. 

 

Is it those people that are being accused of hiding money?  Is it 

the cabinet that's being accused of hiding money?  The only 

place I found there was money being hidden recently was 

through the paper, where somebody, in his safety box, found a 

whole bunch of money. 

 

I mean is that, is that what the member from Shaunavon and 

Regina North West are accusing those people that I mentioned 

of?  Is he accusing them of that?  I find that hard to believe. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What about Ted Yarnton -- the old, instant 

Liberal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The hat's changed.  Ted Yarnton, isn't 

that the guy who used to deliver liquor to the Tory offices and 

now . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I'll ask the minister to 

please get back on the motion that is before us and not on . . . 

Ignore the comments that are made by members from their 

chairs.  That is not pertinent to the motion, so will the member 

please get back to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well if there was proper decorum, then 

the members wouldn't be chirping from their seats and I 

wouldn't be distracted by what they're saying. 

 

The Speaker: -- I would ask the member from The Battlefords 

to please withdraw that statement that he . . . reflecting again on 

the Chair and the decorum in the House.  I ask the member to 

withdraw the statement that he just made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I withdraw the statement I just made.  

May I proceed now? 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member doesn't proceed, I'll call upon 

another member to speak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I apologize.  I heard you say something, 

and I didn't know what you said . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I will ask the member . . . the motion is before 

us, and I ask the member -- he's got the floor 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1309 

-- to continue with the motion.  If the member does not continue 

with the motion, I'll recognize another speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The total debate here today on this 

emergency motion does draw to the attention of members of this 

House the need for a process whereby they can at least be 

informed, because it may be that they put out the information 

they do because they don't know any better. And if that's the 

case, I accept that and we need to change the process so that they 

can learn what the real facts are. 

 

But on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, if they know the real facts 

and then come in here and mislead this Legislative Assembly, 

then that's another issue.  And that's a destructive force . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Let's put some evidence on the record. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- That's a destructive force . . . Well I'm 

being asked to put evidence on the record.  I've put evidence on 

the record here this afternoon that counters any of the false 

presumptions that were being made by the members of the 

opposition.  I invite them to take me before the Crown 

Corporations Committee where this can be dealt with in greater 

detail. 

 

But maybe that's not what they want.  Maybe they just want to 

make political gain out of this charade that they come forward 

with. 

 

People within the province don't want the pure politics of the 

Tory Party.  They've seen what destructive force that is. 

 

Now I think that we need to address the future of our utility.  

The future of our utility is bright, Mr. Speaker.  But it won't be 

bright without some rate increases that are within line with the 

rate of inflation.  And we've documented that well here today.  

It's been documented very well. 

 

What are the options for us in terms of rate increases?  We could 

have a zero rate increase and we could have SaskPower go out 

and borrow the money.  That would be a Tory solution or a 

Liberal solution. 

 

We could have zero rate increases and have them borrow money 

for an extended period of years until their credit ran out or we 

could do like the previous administration did in 1983 and have 

one huge rate increase all of a sudden.  In this case, they raised it 

12.6 per cent when the rate of inflation was about half of that.  

That's what we could do. 

 

But that's not responsible.  In fact, that's irresponsible, Mr. 

Speaker.  And you'll find that, as we go through cleaning up the 

legacy that was left there by the Tory government, that we'll be 

addressing the issues of greater transparency; to involve the 

public in understanding rate increases from a factual basis, not 

from the basis of the information that's misconstrued by 

members in the opposition. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that when we talk about a topic that 

they bring before the legislature, that once it gets started in the 

debate they don't want to talk about that any more, they want to 

chirp about something else from their seats.  So maybe you 

should bring in another emergency motion on another day to 

address those other concerns.  But for the time being, I 

understood that the motion had to do with the emergency before 

us at the present time, not all these other things that members 

keeping interrupting with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact the motion, the motion -- I want to restate it so the 

members who are trying to listen here can focus on that. 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its 

decision to again increase power rates and urge the 

government to consider the harmful and irreversible 

impact of another utility rate hike to the less fortunate, to 

business owners, to school divisions and newly-formed 

health districts, as well as all other Saskatchewan 

organizations and individuals and further urge the 

government to immediately form an all-party committee to 

debate this and every other utility rate increase in the 

province of Saskatchewan from this day forward. 

 

So that's what we were here to debate in emergency debate 

before this Legislative Assembly here today. 

 

I think that we've gone through the reasons why this is not a very 

honourable motion.  This motion is not honourable from the 

perspective of the experiences this House has had with the 

Public Utilities Review Commission which the previous 

administration brought in and then they took it out.  It didn't 

work; it wasn't effective; it cost a pile of money. 

 

I've already pointed out in the debate, if we want to check back 

through the record, that the rate-setting mechanism is a good 

one.  We've looked at the factual side of it in terms of the rate of 

inflation versus the rate increases at SaskPower.  To have a 

PURC come back into place in Saskatchewan -- why would we 

want to go through that experience again just for the rhetoric of 

the opposition parties here in the legislature?  If it doesn't serve 

the people of the province, we're not going to do it. 

 

And how can we think that their intentions are honourable when 

they say they want some new kind of committee, the legislative 

utilities review commission, from the earlier PURC that they 

couldn't handle and did away with, to now LURC which . . . I 

don't think their intentions are honourable.  And I think that 

what hurts the people of the province of Saskatchewan is not a 

utility rate increase that's consistent and people know it's 

coming, what hurts the people of this province is the false 

information put out by the members of the Liberal and 

Conservative parties.  That's what hurts people in the province. 



1310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 1994 

People have for the first time in several years started to become 

optimistic about the future, Mr. Speaker.  Young people, people 

in business, the residents of our great province.  They're 

becoming more optimistic about the future because the future is 

brighter than it's been for several years. 

 

No thanks to the help of the opposition because they don't help; 

they hinder the process.  And when things are going well, they 

say they're going bad.  Do they say that to help the people of the 

province?  I think not.  They do it to bolster their own political 

image. 

 

Well I'll tell you what, the people of this province are more 

sophisticated than that, Mr. Speaker; they see through that.  And 

I'm telling you, members of the opposition, get onside with 

being helpful; don't keep spreading inaccurate information out 

there to try and harm the most optimistic time we've had in 

several years for our economy in the province.  That doesn't 

help. 

 

You see, people have come this far because of the confidence 

they have in this government being above-board, setting a 

direction, working within a plan, and being honest with the 

people of this province, and involving people in the province in 

the decision-making process. 

 

And there will be more of that.  We will continue to promote the 

optimism that people have within Saskatchewan.  We invite 

members opposite, whether they be Liberals or whether they be 

Conservatives or some new party they might form together, we 

invite them to get on board with us to increase the optimism in 

the province. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't undermine SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- That's right.  One of the members here 

today says, don't undermine SaskPower -- continually 

undermine the professionals and the members of the public that 

we have running those corporations. 

 

Do you know why I'm anxious to get into debate in Crown 

Corporations?  So we can have detailed information there, not 

by some spur-of-the-moment emergency debate on the floor of 

the Legislative Assembly.  You come there equipped with your 

accusations, your false accusations; we'll come there with the 

facts.  And we'll see what the proper story is. 

 

And the proper story is a bright one.  It's a bright story of the 

past, of loyal employees who provided service to people of the 

province; and it's a bright future story for employees in the 

public who strive continually to improve the efficiencies of the 

corporation. 

 

And when that's all said and done, and all those questions are 

answered, and all those falsehoods are put to rest that you 

promote, then will you come onside?  Do you think that they'll 

come onside then?  No, they want to play politics on the backs 

of the people of this province, just like they've done today here 

in this Legislative Assembly.  They don't want to 

deal with the statutes.  They don't want to deal with the laws of 

the province.  They want to make political hay to an emergency 

debate in this forum.  Well shame on you. 

 

This Legislative Assembly performs three purposes, serves three 

functions.  The people in our constituencies elected us to come 

here, first, to preserve democracy.  And that's something that I 

think is alien to the minds of members on the opposition 

benches.  To preserve democracy, that's the major function of 

this institution, and you abuse it by bringing here for your 

political gain issues which are better dealt with through the 

committee structure that's been long-standing to serve the 

legislative process. 

 

The second reason that people are elected to come here, that 

your constituents elected you to come here, is to deal with 

budgets.  Budgets deal with taxation, the expenditure and the 

accountability of funding government and its agencies within the 

province. 

 

And the third reason that we come here is to deal with laws, to 

bring in new laws, to change old laws.  If the law doesn't serve 

the people of the province, then you change the law. 

 

But there's three reasons people elect us to come here -- 

democracy, dealing with budgets, and dealing with laws.  That's 

the purpose of this Chamber.  And then you come in here today 

with an emergency debate instead of participating in the process.  

I pointed out earlier, the greatest thing that you can do is get 

together with us, and when the comprehensive energy strategy is 

tabled on my desk this summer, to look at what the 

recommendations are there from the professionals that put that 

document together. 

 

(1245) 

 

You try and paint this into a black and white situation of the 

review that's being suggested by your resolution here.  It's not a 

black and white situation.  The public need confidence and a 

level of comfort that they're being served well by the rate-setting 

process.  I believe that they are.  They don't want to take my 

word alone for that.  They want to see more information about 

this. 

 

That information will be available in the summer of 1994.  You 

can help add more information to it by calling the Crown 

Corporations Committee together and having me there to deal 

with the facts about the rate-setting process and where the 

money goes to and how it serves the customers.  The other 

extreme at the end is the full-blown Public Utilities Review 

Commission.  That's unacceptable.  It's a failed experience in 

Saskatchewan.  And I again remind you that Saskatchewan is a 

package of utility rates; has the lowest of anywhere in Canada.  

In the top ones, the most high are mostly Liberal provinces.  And 

they all have a Public Utilities Review Commission.  So we 

don't want that extreme of the Public Utility Review 

Commission because it's been a bad experience for 

Saskatchewan people.  And the members opposite full well 

know that, and we want more transparency than 



March 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1311 

what's there now. 

 

So get together with us through the established process that we 

already have to enhance the transparency of the rate-setting 

system instead of coming here and spreading inaccurate 

information before this Assembly.  You should be ashamed of 

yourselves for doing that. 

 

But whether you come onside or not, by the end of this year, the 

people who are customers of SaskPower will have the greatest 

access to information they have ever had in the history of the 

corporation.  And by having access to the greater amount of 

information they'll know how the rate-setting mechanism works; 

they'll know where the expenditures are done; they'll know why 

they're done, and we will have too a sense of public participation 

that's never been experienced before with SaskPower.  And 

that's what we're committed to doing. 

 

What I have to ask today:  does this motion accomplish that?  

Does this motion accomplish that?  No, because even the writing 

isn't done in a constructive way.  They talk about another 

committee, yet another committee, to debate.  Well this is the 

forum to debate, and that's what we're doing here today. 

 

But to debate . . . if the word even said, to review, or to 

construct, but no, it says, "to debate".  There's already all kinds 

of forum to debate -- this forum, the committees, through the 

media like you often do.  And then again they want another 

all-party committee to debate.  I could have taken this seriously 

had they said to review, to construct, to build. 

 

How can you expect people in this Assembly to take what you 

call an emergency seriously when you use wording like that?  I 

ask you, when are you going to come before -- when are you 

going to come before the Crown Corporations . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well the member from Rosthern says the 

phones are ringing.  The phones are ringing because people don't 

understand well enough -- and we've addressed that -- don't 

understand well enough the rate-setting process. 

 

I've tried to set that out here today, and I don't know whether I've 

done it adequately enough for the public to be informed.  But 

some of the reasons the phones ring when a utility rate is 

increased is because of the misinformation put out by the 

members in the opposition.  Stop spreading those things out.  It's 

not to the benefit of confidence in our province, and it's sure not 

to the benefit of you members, and I think you'll realize that 

when you decide that you're going to participate in the recovery, 

not the destruction, of the province, like you did over your 

10-year . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  According to the new rules that 

have been adopted by the Legislative Assembly, it's at this 

moment that the Speaker must interrupt the debate and the vote 

will be taken.  And for the edification of the members, I will 

read 17(8) 

No "Priority of Debate" motion shall be adjourned and unless 

sooner concluded debate shall end at ten minutes before the 

ordinary time of daily adjournment when the Speaker shall 

interrupt the proceedings and forthwith put every question 

necessary to dispose of the main motion. 

 

The motion that is before the Assembly is the motion moved by 

the member from Kindersley, seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:52 p.m. until 12:54 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Toth 

Muirhead D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Boyd McPherson t 

-- 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Flavel 

Wiens Roy 

Tchorzewski Scott t 

Lingenfelter Crofford 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Teichrob Stanger 

Johnson Knezacek 

Kowalsky Harper 

Cunningham Keeping 

Upshall Jess 

Hagel Carlson 

Renaud Langford 

Murray  

- 25 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 

adjourn, but before I leave, I just want to wish a very happy 

Easter to members of the opposition, all government members, 

and the staff who work here for us.  During this season I want 

you to all have a good, restful holiday. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- If I might, in the spirit of Easter, on a rare 

occasion I would like to concur with the Government House 

Leader. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 

 


