




















































Hansard: April 25, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1789 

 April 25, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to table some 

petitions today with respect to underground tanks, and I'll just 

read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the 

costs involved with digging up underground storage tanks 

and replacing them; and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or other alternatives 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Saskatoon and area, 

Blaine Lake, Waldheim, Rosthern, Hague, several communities 

between Prince Albert and Saskatoon, Landis, Kayville.  I do 

so table these. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

numerous petitioners on the same topic as the hon. member 

from Estevan just put down.  And these names come from areas 

. . . from Springfield, Saskatchewan; Theodore, Pambrun, 

Preeceville, Yorkton, Saskatoon, Sturgis, Prince Albert, 

Invermay, etc., Mr. Speaker.  And I would want to put these on 

the Table on behalf of these petitioners at this time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitioners who want to petition the Assembly, and it deals with 

underground storage tanks.  And they come today from 

Glaslyn, Regina, Chamberlain, Craik, Abernethy, Sintaluta, 

Balcarres, and various other places around the province.  And I 

want to present these petitions to the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

today -- people joining the many thousands who've already 

petitioned this legislature, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the issue 

of underground storage tanks and their feelings about it. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker I have petitions on behalf of people form 

communities such as Springside; Fort Qu'Appelle; Theodore; 

Yorkton, Saskatchewan; Insinger; Sheho -- people all over the 

province, Mr. Speaker, who would like this Assembly to listen 

to their concerns.  And I would like to table these on their 

behalf today. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

with respect to the underground storage tank 

issue, and the costs and the concerns surrounding them.  The 

petitioners come from the Springside, Canora, Yorkton, Moose 

Jaw, Sturgis areas of Saskatchewan.  I'd be pleased to present 

them on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to present some 

petitions to the Assembly from a number of petitioners in the 

Rocanville, Wapella, Moosomin, Tantallon, Sturgis, Kamsack 

-- even people from outside the province; there's one signed 

here from Calgary, Alberta -- Rosthern, and Regina.  

Individuals who are very concerned about the government's 

move regarding underground storage tanks.  I so present them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages of petitions from people in the Springside area.  They go 

over to Yorkton, and Rocanville, Theodore, and places like 

that.  And I would too, on behalf of those people, table these 

petitions.  It's to do with the underground tank situation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I too have a 

number of petitions today to present, dealing with the 

underground tank situation.  These petitions come from 

Springside, Yorkton, Jedburgh area -- along the eastern side of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This makes about 6,000 of these petitions that we've presented.  

I'd like to thank the people who presented them to us.  I'd like 

to lay them on the Table now. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

absolutely thrilled today to introduce to you and through you to 

my colleagues in the legislature, two very special guests seated 

in your gallery.  And I'm going to ask them to stand, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They are Mike Hall and his father, Larry Hall.  Mike, as 

members will know, represented Canada in the Olympic games 

in Lillehammer as a speed skater and did extremely well there.  

And not only are we very proud of that accomplishment but we 

also know how much work and effort goes into just achieving 

that kind of status.  So on behalf of all of us, I would ask all of 

you to join me in giving them a very, very warm welcome to 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 40 grade 4, 5, and 6 students from MacDonald 

School in Stockholm.  They are seated in your gallery on the 

west side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are accompanied by the following:  Ms. Sheryl Bueckert 

who is the intern teacher at MacDonald School, under the 

supervision of Ms. Laurie Johanson, and also Mr. Lloyd 

Tocher; this is his second trip here this spring; and also the 

chaperons Kathryn Brunskill, 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Luella Bernath, and bus driver Don Shivak. 

 

Accompanying Laurie is her mother, Phyllis Ecklund.  And I'd 

just like to mention that Laurie Johanson is the director of the 

dinner theatre that was held in Stockholm, very successful 

dinner theatre entitled "Hillbilly Heaven."  So she is the one 

that was responsible for directing these actors and actresses. 

 

I will be meeting with the class at 2:20 for pictures and also a 

discussion session after.  I'd like you to please welcome this 

class to the Assembly and wish them a safe trip home.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to 

you three visitors from Odessa, Ukraine, who are accompanied 

here by Liz Ivanochko, Regina. 

 

These guests are seated in your gallery.  They are members of a 

new agency of social psychological support for youth in the 

Odessa area.  It's a non-government, non-profit group.  And 

they are here on a mission organizing for a conference to be 

held . . . an international conference to be held in Odessa in 

May. 

 

I want to present to you, Mr. Speaker, Larissa Ponomarenko 

who's an educational psychologist; she's a director for the 

Odessa region; Dr. Micheal Lavinski who is a child 

psychiatrist; and Dr. Victor Karpyak who is an adult 

psychiatrist and he works with the university and with the 

mental hospital in the Odessa region.  And I want to say to 

them in Ukrainian: 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to 

present Liz Ivanochko, who is from Regina and who is their 

host here as well. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly eight Regina Toastmasters who are seated in your 

gallery here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If my recollection of history serves me correctly, in the early 

1920s, Dr. Ralph Smedley was a good friend of Dale Carnegie 

and the two of them talked about ways to train communication 

leadership skills.  Dale Carnegie went his direction and Dr. 

Smedley in 1924 founded the first Toastmasters organization in 

Santa Ana, California. 

 

These people today, Mr. Speaker, are Regina Toastmasters who 

are in district 42, the part of Toastmasters organization that 

includes Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, and they are here to celebrate the anniversary. 

 

I'd like to introduce them to you and to ask them to stand as I 

introduce them:  Marlene Keam is here, she's the division 

governor for southern Saskatchewan.  She is joined as well by 

past district governor for southern Saskatchewan, Robert 

Stedwill; from the Wascana Toastmasters Club, Irene May; 

from the Victoria on the Park Club, Paul deMontigny; and from 

the Daybreakers Club that meets at 7 o'clock in the morning, 

Carol Sakundiak Joanne Corbett, Patricia Bourgeois, Lorraine 

deMontigny.  And I look forward to joining with them for a 

visit following question period and ask all members to show 

them welcome here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Lieutenant Christopher Lunney 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just 

like to comment on a tragedy in the former Yugoslavia that has 

hit very close to home.  Lieutenant Christopher Lunney, a 

24-year-old member of the Royal Regina Rifles, suffered a 

fractured leg and facial injuries when the jeep he and a 

colleague were travelling in hit a mine.  Lieutenant Lunney is 

the second Royal Regina Rifle member to be injured in the 

peace-keeping mission in the past year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend Lieutenant Lunney and 

all the other Canadian peace keepers and reservists who risk 

their lives on a daily basis in efforts to monitor the cease-fire 

between Croatia and rebel Serbs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, incidents like this should make us all stop and 

think of those who are suffering, of those who fear for the 

safety of themselves and their families on a daily basis.  It 

makes us all realize how fortunate we are to live in a country 

like Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 800 Canadian soldiers, including 32 from 

Saskatchewan, are presently serving with the United Nations in 

former Yugoslavia.  Let us all hope and pray that their efforts 

and the efforts of the united forces from many other countries 

results in a peaceful ending of the crisis for all people in 

Yugoslavia at this time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Toastmasters International 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak today 

about the invaluable work done by a premier volunteer 

organization with a worldwide organization and reputation.  I 

am of course referring to Toastmasters International, which is 

celebrating its 70th anniversary as an international organization 

and their 40 years in Saskatchewan this week. 

 

There are 8,000 groups around the world with 23 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

active groups in Regina, with more than 350 members.  Last 

year one group in Regina was second in the world in the 

toastmasters competition. 

 

Toastmasters is a for-the-member, by-the-members 

organization.  And I'm very proud to have been a member of 

the Regina Pile 'O Bones Club. 

 

Members of toastmasters are numbered among the who's who 

in business, cultural organizations, service clubs and 

government.  And all of them are grateful for the skills they've 

learned in their weekly meetings. 

 

I would like to salute Toastmasters International and the Regina 

Toastmaster clubs for their contribution to communication 

skills in the world today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Toastmasters' Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, as it's been pointed out, this week 

Saskatchewan formally recognizes the most successful 

self-improvement organization in the world.  This is 

Toastmasters' Week in Saskatchewan and celebrating the 70th 

anniversary of Toastmasters International, and the 40th 

anniversary of district 42 which includes the 57 clubs and 1,047 

active toastmasters of Saskatchewan. 

 

Founded by Dr. L. Smedley, Toastmaster provides a forum for 

developing communication and leadership skills for men and 

women who learn by doing and offer each other constructive 

feedback using a very sound educational program. 

 

Although best known for helping people develop public 

speaking skills, Toastmasters in fact strive to improve their 

listening, thinking and speaking skills, in that order. 

 

Now many a Toastmaster first became involved, Mr. Speaker, 

because he or she was scared spitless by the prospect of 

speaking in public.  And many have gone on to use their 

communication and leadership skills, as has been pointed out, 

in service of their fellow Saskatchewanians, including some 

members who sit in this Assembly today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've long thought that Toastmasters' key to 

success is that it doesn't promise to get rid of the butterflies but 

rather to teach people how to get those butterflies flying in 

formation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to say congratulations to all Toastmasters 

in Saskatchewan for their anniversary and for their individual 

accomplishments and I ask all members of the Assembly to 

join me once again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Vision 20/20 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, for a strong community, one 

should get out and support his community.  And that's exactly 

what we saw today at 

the University of Regina less than one hour ago where they 

launched their Vision 20/20 leadership campaign to raise $21 

million for capital construction at the University of Regina. 

 

I want to congratulate Mr. Paul Hill and his associates in 

business for taking the leadership on this campaign; the 

University of Regina, Campion College, Luther College, the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College who are forming a 

partnership for this particular campaign. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the students' 

union and the faculty and staff who have contributed a large 

amount of money of the $7 million that has already been raised, 

the largest per capita contribution ever in Canada by a faculty 

and staff. 

 

You may wonder, Mr. Speaker, why somebody from Prince 

Albert is making this announcement.  I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that with a program like Vision 20/20 leadership you can see all 

the way to Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Regina Pat Canadians Win Air Canada Cup 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to report on the latest reason that we in Regina have every 

reason to be proud of ourselves.  Of course I'm referring to the 

Regina Pat Canadians under their head coach Kal Parenteau 

and assistants Dave Dunn and Drew Callander, who last 

evening won the Canadian midget AAA hockey championship 

symbolized by the Air Canada Cup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina Pat Canadians are the second team in 

history to have completed a hat trick or have won the Air 

Canada Cup three times since its inception.  The win last 

evening was at the 10-minute mark of double overtime in a 

very exciting game.  The Regina Pat Canadians defeated the 

Red Deer Optimist Chiefs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I very much look forward to the Regina Pat 

Canadians, perhaps as early as next year, winning title no. 4. 

 

I want to conclude by congratulating the players, coaches, 

parents, fans, and all who have been involved with the Regina 

Pat Canadians over the years.  I want to congratulate them all 

on a very fine year of hockey.  And again congratulations on 

winning the Canadian midget AAA championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Northern Business Directory 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Over the past several 

years there's been a great deal of talk about northern 

Saskatchewan resource companies and northern employment.  

Sometimes there's been more talk than practice. 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Lately however there has been a concentrated effort to increase 

the participation of Northerners at northern mines as well as 

with on-site contractors.  And that effort is starting to pay off.  

Now the participation rate is more than 40 per cent 

Northerners.  Nearly 600 residents are working either in the 

mines or in spin-off industries.  That's not enough but it is 

progress. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a new development will help to increase the 

participation of northern business in the resource industry.  A 

business directory has just been published that lists the 

capabilities, products and services of 500 northern businesses.  

This directory will be updated on a regular basis. 

 

Mining and other companies will be encouraged to use this 

directory when looking for goods and services in the North.  

This directory is one concrete way to help the people who live 

in northern Saskatchewan profit from the economic activity 

taking place in their home.  The resource companies, local 

businesses, and local workers all will benefit from this 

development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Advertising 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again today 

we have questions sent in to us by constituents and people 

across the province.  My question to the Premier today is from 

a gentleman by the name of Ron from Regina, who writes in: 

Why is SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) wasting tax 

money advertising no-fault insurance?  Why does the 

government have to advertise a law they know they're going to 

pass anyways?  Why should my money go to promote 

legislation that I don't agree with?  Why exactly does SGI have 

to advertise what it does?  They're a monopoly so they'll just do 

what they like anyways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to that question, 

democracy requires a lot of public education and public input.  

We have a 1-800 number, Mr. Speaker, as well we do have 

advertising so that people will know something about the 

program and respond to it on a constructive, critical basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are such things as saying yes to people that 

we have consulted before.  For example, we have consulted 

with the Paraplegic Association, Mr. Speaker, and we have 

raised, for example, the rehabilitation money from $10,000 to 

$500,000.  Mr. Speaker, that consultation, you know, has paid 

off in a good program that was concerning, you know, the Head 

Injury Association. 

 

We have also said yes to people who are concerned on the right 

to sue, Mr. Speaker.  We have kept that as part of the program, 

so the right to sue is there, Mr. Speaker.  There are people who 

have also . . . 

concerned with us in regards to the issue of an independent 

appeal.  Mr. Speaker, you can appeal to the Court of Queen's 

Bench, etc. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the consultation is required for public 

education and advertising is required for public education as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Police Policy on NSF Cheques 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

comes from Carol Buhari of Regina, and her question is: Mr. 

Premier, I am a business owner and I have recently been stung 

by NSF (not sufficient funds) cheques.  The police say that they 

won't look into it unless it is over $500 or unless there is a 

pattern.  If you get a judgement from Small Claims Court you 

have to enforce it yourself.  Why is it that a little crime is not a 

crime in the eyes of the police?  How can a small-business 

owner get justice in this system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I must say I'm not aware that the police 

are following such a procedure.  The member, or the questioner 

is quite correct, that a crime is a crime regardless of the amount 

involved. 

 

The best I can do, Mr. Speaker, is to look into the matter and 

report back to the Leader of the Opposition so that he can write 

to the person posing the question and advise as to the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Rentalsman Procedures 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question to the Premier comes from a Mr. Kitzul from Regina.  

And he's asking, Mr. Premier: Why has the appeal process for 

the Rentalsman been changed so that instead of going to an 

appeal board you have to spend money to go to court?  Also, 

why does a Rentalsman's office not have any inspectors any 

more? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Kitzul matter is a matter that I'm 

familiar with.  There were actually three separate applications 

that came before the Rentalsman. 

 

The procedures are procedures that were laid down by this 

legislature just within the last short while, and it has worked in 

all cases so far without any great degree of complaint at all.  

They are an efficient procedure and I think overall quite 

satisfactory. 

 

Although I realize that Mr. Kitzul did not accomplish all that he 

set out to accomplish when he made his applications to the 

Rentalsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

Automobile Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Paul Noubarian of Regina: 

 

One of the fundamental principles of democracy is that citizens 

have the right to make responsible choices.  We exercise that 

right when voting, purchasing food, house insurance, etc. 

 

With respect to auto insurance, I choose to insure with a 

reputable, fiscally prudent, private insurer.  Why have you 

denied me the right to choose a private insurer for basic auto 

coverage?  What are you going to do to restore that right and 

when are you going to do it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in the history of the province 

when the first public insurance system came in here though 

Tommy Douglas in 1946, 88 per cent of the people were not 

insured.  And through the process, we have had more or less 

universal coverage in regards to the insurance because of the 

private . . . because of the public insurance system that we have 

established in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that going back to mainly a privatization 

that these members went through -- that did not solve anything 

in this province and yet ended up in the tremendous debt of $15 

billion -- is not the solution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Tendering Policy 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question will be 

to the Minister of SaskPower, to the Minister of Labour, and 

the question comes from the owner of H K Plumbing and 

Heating in Estevan: 

 

When bidding jobs at SaskPower Boundary dam, why is it that 

the lowest tender is not accepted because we are not union, and 

jobs are awarded to union contractors at a higher price?  This 

indicates that union people have more priority than local 

people. 

 

If non-union people don't count, then why do we have to pay 

taxes?  Why don't they just collect from the unions for taxes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I thank the hon. member for his 

question.  As the hon. member would know, the policy at our 

thermal stations is that the contracts will be awarded with a 

preference to union bidders, and that was the same as it was 

under the previous administration in Saskatchewan. 

 

I don't know the specifics of the case that you ask me about of 

the independent contractor in Estevan, but there are many 

independent contractors that get work with SaskPower.  I don't 

know the size of the contract or the specific instance you're 

talking about, but I'd be more than happy to get back in touch 

with the contractor with the answer to the concerns that he's 

raised to you here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Court Commission Expenses 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

comes from a William from Regina, and the question reads as 

such: if the commission that was established to set judges' 

salaries is now going to be abolished through retroactive 

legislation, does that mean that the commission members will 

be required to repay all expense money and fees paid to them?  

If the members are not required to pay back the money, why 

not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't think there's any basis on 

which we can do that, Mr. Speaker.  They served in good faith.  

They served pursuant to a nomination procedure which this 

House approved.  One of the members was nominated by the 

judges, one nominated by the government; together they agreed 

upon a third.  They discharged their duties in good faith, 

according to their own consciences and their own sense of the 

situation. 

 

We don't agree with the award.  We're moving to do what we 

have to do in order to render it ineffective, but we can hardly 

penalize them by asking them to refund their fees and expenses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Board of Internal Economy Powers 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Board of Internal Economy.  

Mr. Minister, as reported in Saturday's paper, there is now a 

second instance of an MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) using his communications allowance to send out 

unacceptable material.  Still you and other government 

members from the Board of Internal Economy continue to drag 

your feet in dealing with this very serious matter. 

 

Mr. Minister, why the delay, and when can we expect to see 

these rules clarified so that we have a standard and workable 

procedure for dealing with such matters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for his question.  Difficult to answer in terms 

of the process that the Board of Internal Economy has 

established and the fact that we are in fact awaiting information 

that will be put together by the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly so that we can determine, based on the information 

brought to the Board of Internal Economy, and make a 

long-term decision with respect to amending this particular 

directive, if that be necessary. 

 

So I want to say to the member that he knows full well that we 

are awaiting that information. When that information is brought 

to members of the board and we are informed that the 

information is available, we will request, as I'm sure you will, 

that a Board of 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Internal Economy meeting be held so that we can deal with this 

issue in the appropriate fashion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would point out to 

the minister, Mr. Speaker, that the government has the majority 

on the Board of Internal Economy, and obviously, with the 

majority, have the ability to determine when that particular 

committee meets. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, issues such as that have been raised in the 

House, and we're told that it wasn't appropriate to deal with 

them in the House.  Those issues have been raised at the Board 

of Internal Economy, and we were told that the board lacked 

the authority to deal with these. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as you know full well, there's even been a 

Bill tabled in the House here to deal with these issues.  And as 

yet, at every step it seems that the issue is blocked from going 

forward to some type of a reasonable conclusion. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what we're asking you is when are the 

roadblocks going to be removed?  When is the Board of 

Internal Economy going to have a meeting to deal with the 

issues?  And I think it would be incumbent, Mr. Minister, that 

before another one of these issues hits the media, that we would 

want to sit down as an all-party committee and deal with those 

issues.  Can you give us some assurance today that that board 

will meet very soon, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To 

answer the member's question, I think he knows full well the 

process and he knows the type of information that the board has 

requested from an officer of this legislature.  The officer of this 

legislature has indicated quite clearly that her ability to put this 

information together is based on the workload of the 

Legislative Assembly Office. 

 

And I think he will also understand that while we're in session, 

there is a great degree of work that is put on that particular arm 

of government.  And I'm sure he will also agree with me that 

there is no sense meeting to discuss the issue when the 

information that has been requested is not before the board so 

that we can make a rational . . . and a decision based on 

information. 

 

Now if the member can expedite and speed up that process and 

has a method by which that information can be gathered sooner 

than we are told by an officer of this Assembly it can be made 

available, then perhaps he could explain to members, 

government members of the Board of Internal Economy, how 

in fact he might put that information together.  And when he 

does, we're more than willing to sit down and discuss it based 

on information that we have requested. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, if you 

would like to relinquish the 

chairmanship and pass that on to one of the opposition 

members on the board, I'm sure, Mr. Minister, that . . . Mr. 

Minister, there are issues that can be discussed including a 

current piece of legislation before this House. 

 

Mr. Minister, you may not agree with the legislation but the 

simple fact is that it is there and it would be a good starting 

point.  And, Mr. Minister, I think the members of the public 

who watch this institution and who are watching these issues 

raised in the newspapers would want us to sit down in full view 

of the public and discuss the issue before it happens again. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is incumbent that these issues be dealt with for 

the good of all members and for the good of the House.  Mr. 

Minister, would you commit to call a Board of Internal 

Economy meeting this week?  Would you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, perhaps before I 

answer I may clarify for the member who in fact chairs the 

Board of Internal Economy.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the 

member who has been around here for a number of years will 

recognize the fact that it is the Speaker who chairs the Board of 

Internal Economy.  And if he doesn't, perhaps he should 

acquaint himself with the board. 

 

Secondly, I want to say with respect to legislation that has been 

introduced before this House, I think the member will also 

recognize the fact that when legislation is introduced we have a 

process in this legislative Chamber whereby we debate 

legislation.  Now if he is aware of some rules that may have in 

fact changed where we would debate legislation perhaps he 

could share that with us also. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the member is being silly.  He 

knows the process.  And instead of political grandstanding, if 

he would work with this government to reform the directives 

and to reform the way those directives are developed, it would 

be much appreciated by government members on this side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Trade Union Act Amendments 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Labour today. 

 

Your proposed amendments to The Trade Union Act have 

major implications for people who are doing business in 

Saskatchewan and people contemplating doing business here.  

One of those changes will have a direct impact on the sale of 

businesses from one owner to another particularly where a 

national firm is being sold to local interests. 

 

Can you tell me whether new owners, under the proposed 

amendments, would inherit the collective bargaining 

agreements of the businesses that they 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

purchase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would say to the member opposite 

that detailed questions of that sort I think are best left for the 

Committee of the Whole where we can give you very precise 

answers.  You're asking a very detailed question. 

 

If the hon. member wanted to expand on the reasons why she 

voted against The Labour Standards Act on first reading, we 

might be prepared to get into that sort of a more general issue.  

But the more specific issues I think are best left for Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find it rather amazing, Mr. Minister, that 

you can't answer such a simple question as whether or not 

changes to this agreement would result in someone having to 

inherit the collective bargaining agreements of the previous 

owners.  Surely you know the answer to that.  It would be 

either a yes or no, Mr. Minister. 

 

Rail lines are being abandoned in Saskatchewan.  And to keep 

their jobs and a much-needed service many people, including 

employees, have been looking at forming smaller companies to 

buy and operate these small rail lines.  They think that there's a 

good chance of success, Mr. Minister, if they don't have the 

expenses of collective agreements and the overhead of the big 

companies that they're purchasing from. 

 

Will The Trade Union Act amendments force new owners to 

inherit existing collective agreements in the case of short-line 

railways? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member opposite that 

these are very complex issues.  The member looks so surprised 

to find that this is a complex issue.  The member is referring . . 

. I think the member is referring to the short-line railways.  It's 

a very complex issue.  We have entered into discussions and I 

believe the legislation which will be passed by this House will 

permit the . . . will protect the rights of all concerned including 

those who want to form short-line railways.  But it's a very 

complex issue. 

 

There's nothing new about successorship rights.  That's a part 

of every decent . . . that is a part of virtually every trade union 

Act; that's not new.  There is some refinement in the Bill and it 

is complex, and I would invite the member to attend Committee 

of the Whole and we may assist you in understanding some of 

the nuances of this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have been at 

Committee of the Whole, and besides which, Mr. Minister, if 

indeed I didn't have to meet with dozens and dozens of people 

who are concerned about your Trade Union Act and The 

Labour Standards Act, I'd be in here more often. 

 

Perhaps if the Premier himself would have even 

consulted his Premier's advisory committee on the economy 

prior to all of these proposed amendments, people in this 

province, the employers in particular, and the employees that 

are concerned, wouldn't have the kinds of concerns they have 

today; he would have had more wisdom than to allow you to 

bring these forward. 

 

The people with the greatest potential for buying up short-line 

railways in this province are railway employees, Mr. Minister, 

and these are the people who are threatened with losing their 

jobs.  This is very similar to Great Western breweries where the 

employees bought the brewery from Carling's and made a very 

successful company out of it.  Officials involved in the 

employee take-over say that they would never have been able 

to turn their company around and save their jobs if the Trade 

Union Act amendments you propose had been in place -- that's 

what they're saying, Mr. Minister. 

 

If the rail-line workers are prepared to let go of their collective 

agreements . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  

Order.  I want the member to put her question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- If they're willing to forfeit these things so 

that they could employ themselves and potentially create more 

jobs, Mr. Minister, how does your Trade Union Act protect the 

interests of employees in this situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say again to the member opposite, if 

you are able to attend Committee of the Whole when this is 

discussed in detail, I think you will find that the problem with . 

. . the problem that the short-line railways propose, if they 

emerge . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, if you can tear 

yourself away from your hectic schedule and attend the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the member 

knows full well he is not to refer to members' presence or 

absence in the House and I wish he'd -- order, order -- I wish 

he'd answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- When the member attends the 

Committee of the Whole, as I'm now sure she will, the member 

will know . . . the member will then find out that this legislation 

does in fact, does in fact enable the parties to proceed.  The 

legislation does not . . . I do not think will pose a problem to 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- People will be delighted that you finally 

answered a question, Mr. Minister, because C-40, Bill C-40 in 

Ontario brought forward by the New Democrats there in fact in 

1992 forced companies to inherit existing union contracts.  And 

that legislation, sir, very much affected rail lines in that 

province. 

 

In fact what it meant was prior to 1992 there were several small 

rail lines purchased, including by 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

employees, that have proven to be very successful.  Since the 

implementation of Bill C-40 in Ontario by the New Democratic 

government, none of the existing short lines have been able to 

be purchased.  That has resulted, Mr. Minister, in rail line 

abandonment. 

 

So do I have a confirmation, Mr. Minister, that your 

government is ensuring today that there will be no loss of 

service to rural Saskatchewan in their rail lines as a result of the 

trade union legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I must say, Mr. Speaker, when I see 

the member rise, I do indeed see the ghost of Ross Thatcher 

here, blindly reacting to any suggestion that anything should be 

done to improve the lives of working people, dredging up every 

conceivable scare tactic from far provinces to suggest that 

civilization is going to come to an end. 

 

There is however, Mr. Speaker, one difference between the 

present Liberal leader and Ross Thatcher.  As a general rule, it 

was my experience Ross Thatcher knew what he was talking 

about.  No one has accused the present Liberal member of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Employees Conference Attendance 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

answer a question that was taken notice of by the Minister of 

Labour, posed by the member from Kindersley on Friday, April 

22. 

 

I would want to confirm, Mr. Speaker, that 32 employees of 

SaskPower did in fact attend the Canadian Electrical 

Association conference in Toronto this year.  And that's where 

the accuracy of the member opposite ends. 

 

Of the five questions he asked, I'll go through these answers: 12 

of the 32 SaskPower people were either chairing or delivering 

papers to the conference.  According to the Canadian Electrical 

Association, Manitoba had 23 delegates attending the 

conference, not the four that the member from Kindersley 

spoke of.  British Columbia had 38 delegates attending; Nova 

Scotia, 34; Hydro-Québec, 58; Ontario Hydro, 84 -- all of those 

sent more than the 32 delegates from SaskPower. 

 

The combined total from the province of Alberta's utilities, Mr. 

Speaker, was 35 delegates.  Again, higher than SaskPower's 

attendance. 

 

In terms of the cost of the conference, Mr. Speaker, the total 

cost of the conference was $53,595.22.  That's about seven 

one-hundredths of one per cent of the total revenue at 

SaskPower. 

 

The conference, in terms of its content, Mr. Speaker, the 

conference is the largest technical conference and exposition in 

the Canadian electrical industry.  It is the most comprehensive 

utility conference, with over 800 delegates from Canada, the 

United States and abroad. 

This was advertised as the only conference that dealt with all 

aspects of the electrical utility, from power production to end 

use. 

 

It was a full week of technical papers, sessions, presentations 

and panels discussing related electric power systems.  The 

conference focused on the changing direction of the industry at 

both the technology level as well as the operating level.  The 

conference also offered opportunities to make contacts with 

suppliers of new, innovative products and technologies. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to chastise the opposition . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Consultant Hiring 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my question to 

the minister for SaskPower.  Mr. Speaker, he seems to take 

great delight in giving the answer to a question that his 

colleague took notice of.  Maybe he'd also like to give the 

answer to this question that he took notice of back on March 

11. 

 

On a number of occasions during this session members of your 

government have taken notice on questions.  This one was 

given to you, Mr. Minister, SaskPower minister, on March 11.  

No answer has been provided with respect to David 

Dombowsky's salary. 

 

The minister said, and I quote: 

 

 I don't have the exact dollar amount, but I'd be happy to 

provide that . . . (member with the answer).  I'll take notice to 

that portion of the question and respond to the House as soon 

as I have the information. 

 

Well maybe you could give us that information today, Mr. 

Minister.  Six weeks, six weeks seems like adequate time for 

you to have come up with an answer to the question, Mr. 

Minister.  Could you tell us today, Mr. Minister, how much is 

David Dombowsky being paid by SaskPower? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see how 

fast the member opposite wants to get off of the conference he 

thought was so controversial on Friday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I point out that where the hon. members 

opposite get their information from is sometimes suspect.  The 

information on the electrical conference -- Reg Downs, who I 

understand is the press secretary to the Acting Leader of the 

Opposition, passed himself off as an energy of Saskatchewan  



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

Environment and Resource Management to get information 

about SaskPower employees attending the conference.  Instead 

of identifying himself as being from the official opposition 

office, he misrepresented himself to Mr. Frank Bradley of the 

Canadian Electrical Association.  And that's what I wanted to 

chastise the members opposite for, is misrepresentation, not 

only in this case, but of the facts. 

 

David Dombowsky gets $500 a day for a day's work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 

Works Program Initiative 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to report to you and through you to hon. members, 

about an important Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works 

program initiative which was announced this morning by the 

provincial government, the federal government, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

This announcement of a major rural road project is an 

important commitment to rural Saskatchewan.  Over the next 

two years the program will allocate up to $30 million to 

upgrade an additional 650 kilometres of Saskatchewan's 

municipal rural road network.  This will effectively double the 

municipal road activity undertaken in the last fiscal year. 

 

A total of $13.2 million will be allocated for the rural road 

project in this year.  This is very good news for Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker.  Over 250 RMs (rural municipality) will be 

participating in this project this fiscal year and this means that 

the rural road project will create hundreds of important jobs for 

Saskatchewan people all across this province. 

 

It is estimated that the rural road project will create 

approximately 500 direct and indirect jobs over the next two 

years.  Because of the nature of the work involved in road 

construction, this translates into many more additional work 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people in road construction, 

technical and professional areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today's announcement represents only the 

beginning of the infrastructure renewal and activity and job 

creation that will result from the Canada-Saskatchewan 

infrastructure works program.  All Saskatchewan municipalities 

have now received their application packages and are 

reviewing their community infrastructure priorities to 

determine how they can best use their program allocations. 

 

A total of $85.7 million of program dollars will be directed to 

infrastructure renewal and development projects in 

Saskatchewan's urban and rural municipalities.  Altogether, 

infrastructure works projects undertaken in Saskatchewan over 

the new 

two years will total $173 million.  This activity is expected to 

generate over 3,400 direct and indirect jobs over the next two 

years, depending on the type of infrastructure projects that are 

approved for funding. 

 

It will provide business opportunities for Saskatchewan firms, 

revitalize local communities and rural Saskatchewan, and 

stimulate the whole economy of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the cooperative efforts of the federal, 

provincial, and municipal governments, the rural road project 

announced today and other projects that will be announced in 

the days ahead will help fuel Saskatchewan economic recovery, 

create jobs, and improve the quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to thank the 

minister for sending his statement over.  I'd like to commend 

the minister for finally getting this undertaking under way.  It is 

important that rural Saskatchewan finally receive something 

from this government in the way of assistance.  After two and a 

half years of downloading, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that rural 

people will appreciate some of their hard-earned tax dollars 

coming back to them. 

 

Mr. Minister, we'll be watching very closely to see that these 

projections on employment do in fact come through.  Because 

any projections that you have made in the last two years, as far 

as employment, simply have been a non-starter.  And the fact 

that 81,000 of our population are now on social services and 

that you've lost 12,000 jobs since taking office means that you 

now only have 11,500 to go in making up the deficit you 

created, sir. 

 

So good luck with what you've started, but we'll watch very 

closely to make sure you keep your word to Saskatchewan rural 

people. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like 

to make comment on the minister's statement this afternoon.  

And I am pleased that he did send his statement to me. 

 

I find it most interesting, Mr. Speaker, the comments that are 

being made across the floor, especially that all delays are the 

result of problems at the federal government level. 

 

I will make sure, as I have been over the last few weeks, that 

the members of the federal government do receive the 

comments of the members opposite -- the fact that all problems 

do lie at the federal level and that they are completely and 

totally unappreciative of the initiatives undertaken by the 

federal government.  I find that rather surprising, given that 

without the initiative at the federal level, that this would not 

have been really taken up at all. 

 

I do hope that the 3,400 jobs that are expected to be generated 

both directly and indirectly over the next 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

two years do happen.  The people of our province desperately 

need employment -- what has not taken place as a result of 

Partnership for Renewal -- primarily because this government 

has refused to really forge partnerships with the business 

community in any real and meaningful way. We should be 

thankful that this kind of initiative has been undertaken. 

 

I can only hope, and along with the Liberal caucus, that this 

proves to be highly successful.  Heavens knows that the people 

of Saskatchewan deserve it. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 -- An Act 

to amend The Trade Union Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

represents, I believe, an unwarranted intrusion by the 

government into the collective bargaining process. 

 

These amendments will significantly enhance the ability of 

unions to organize workers, obtain and expand certification 

orders and bargaining rights, and secure first collective 

agreements, Mr. Speaker. And this is an important problem that 

businesses believe to be given to the unions by the government 

opposite in payback time, as some of them have referred to it 

as. 

 

Some of the specific areas that the business community are 

concerned with -- an employer's ability to unilaterally impose 

changes to terms and conditions of employment once 

bargaining has reached an impasse, has been eliminated by 

removing the right of either party to terminate the collective 

agreement under the Act. 

 

Employers facing economic restructuring in competitive 

markets will have no alternative but to lock out their employees 

and suffer disruption of business in order to convince an 

unyielding or non-believing union executive of the merits of its 

economic situation. 

 

Another section provides for the continuation of a certification 

order, bargaining rights and collective agreements after the sale 

or acquisition of a business.  This section has been broadened 

considerably so as to apply in a much wider variety of 

circumstances. 

 

It will now be virtually impossible to spin off pieces of existing 

businesses by creating separate business units to perform that 

work at lower labour costs as non-union.  The  Act creates a 

new power of Labour 

Relations Board to deem that a sale of the purposes of 

successorship has occurred if contracted services, cafeteria or 

food services, janitorial or cleaning services, or security 

services provided by a unionized contractor are let to another 

contractor. 

 

The Act also gives the Labour Relations Board the ability to 

treat businesses, undertakings or other activities which operate 

under common control or direction as though they are one 

employer for the purpose of the Act.  There is a very dangerous 

provision which would result in businesses which become 

related after this section takes effect, having one certification 

order and one collective agreement.  This amendment would 

make it very difficult to avoid related business units from 

becoming unionized. 

 

Another section created a requirement for an employer who has 

insufficient work as a result of the labour dispute, to provide 

workers who are laid off as a result, with notice or pay in lieu 

of notice in accordance with The Labour Standards Act. 

 

This will be costly and will provide employees who have 

disrupted a business with a windfall.  Businesses who have 

experienced a labour dispute will incur unreasonable expense 

during a period of no revenue.  And I think this is something 

that businesses all over Saskatchewan are very, very concerned 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason is simple.  Should they be paying benefits to 

employees when those employees are out on strike?  And I 

think, generally speaking, across the province, business groups 

and employers all across the province are saying to us that they 

don't believe that if people aren't willing to work for them 

during a period of a strike, that they most certainly shouldn't be 

expecting benefits during that period. 

 

The Act has broadened considerably and will now require 

employers to negotiate workplace adjustment.  While 

employers will be required to negotiate once they have reached 

an impasse in negotiations with the union, they are able to 

unilaterally implement any change.  Also if your collective 

agreement makes similar provisions you will be exempt from 

this section. 

 

The Labour Relations Board is also given wide discretion to 

automatically grant certification or decertification without a 

vote by affected employees.  And that's a very significant and 

unfortunate provision that the government has seen fit to put 

together. 

 

Unions should not be exempt from the same rules and same 

things that everyone else works under in a democracy, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's the one-vote, one-person concept, and as 

well the holding of secret votes, Mr. Speaker, secret ballot type 

votes.  That's an important consideration in the formation of a 

sound democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Act also provides that a union may tender payments 

normally made by employees to provide benefits to employees 

on strike or if they're locked 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the concerns that 

Saskatchewan businesses have from all across our province.  

And we're seeing now, Mr. Speaker, that people all over the 

province are speaking out.  We've received numerous letters 

from business groups and employers all over the province.  I've 

received a number from my constituency, specifically raising 

the concerns of certification votes and how a union is certified 

or decertified and the reasons that this type of legislation is not 

necessary. 

 

(1430) 

 

And columns all over the province are also condemning this 

labour legislation, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd just like to quote from 

this column by Bruce Johnstone of the Leader-Post of April 

16, 1994.  I think he has some very good points that the 

government should keep in mind when it's bringing this 

legislation forward and hopefully bringing amendments 

forward to change this legislation to make it something that 

people in the province of Saskatchewan can live with.  And Mr. 

Johnstone says: 

 

 . . . it should be said that the current Trade Union Act is 

essentially the same bill the Devine government inherited 

from the previous NDP government in 1982.  It contains 

some of the most liberal rules for organizing unions in the 

country. 

 

 (In Saskatchewan, only 50 per cent of employees, plus one, 

must sign union cards to certify a union.  No secret ballot is 

required. 

 

And the Premier last week, Mr. Speaker, went into some length 

of a defence of that type of concern, that no secret ballot is 

required.  And he says that it isn't necessary.  But I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that people all across Saskatchewan believes that 

secret ballots are indeed the proper way to hold an election in 

every respect, and unions notwithstanding. 

 

 That compares with a minimum of 55 per cent in Ontario and 

B.C., and 60 per cent in Manitoba and New Brunswick.  

Several provinces require a secret ballot.  Arguably, only 

Quebec has a lower threshold, but in some instances a secret 

vote is required.) 

 

Why should Saskatchewan feel that they would want to reduce 

the number of people required to certify a union?  Mr. Speaker, 

that's an interesting question that I'm sure the government will 

take the time to answer. 

 

 What's wrong with voting by secret ballot?  It seems to be 

OK for elections.  Why not for unions? 

 

And I think that goes to the very heart of the question when you 

look at a union vote, Mr. Speaker, and how important people 

feel a secret ballot is and why that unions should be exempted 

from that same provision that the very MLAs that occupy this 

House operate 

under. 

 

 What's more, under the new act, the Labour Relations Board 

can unionize a business, even if the majority of its employees 

haven't signed union cards.  If the board finds the employer 

interfered with an organizing drive, it can "judge" whether 

the interference caused the organizing drive to fail.  If it does, 

then . . . the union is automatically certified (Mr. Speaker). 

 

And I think that's a significant concern that Mr. Johnstone has 

raised here.  When you look at the powers that will be given to 

that Labour Relations Board, they're extremely significant and 

strong powers that people I think across the province, once they 

become familiar with them, will realize that it's way too much 

power to be put in the hands of government appointees, the 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

 Once the union is certified, the new act says that there must 

be a first agreement.  If the two sides can't reach an 

agreement and 120 days of conciliation fail, the Labor 

Relations Board can impose a settlement. 

 

So we can see circumstances, Mr. Speaker, arising from that 

where the union and the newly formed certified union as well 

as the employer can't reach an agreement, and then after 120 

days, the Labour Relations Board would step in, Mr. Speaker, 

and impose a settlement.  And I can't help but think that that 

isn't going to be what business they'll be concerned about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When you have an independent -- supposedly independent 

board, but it will be made up of political appointees, Mr. 

Speaker -- coming in and saying to an employer what they're 

going to have to pay their employees, both in terms of salary 

and benefits and everything else, Mr. Speaker, what that 

settlement is going to be will be an extremely difficult thing for 

employers all over this province to deal with and to manage, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Why would any union, or employer for that matter, make 

reasonable demands when they can make unreasonable ones 

and still end up with a contract? 

 

So of course you can see that might be a concern, Mr. Speaker.  

When the union . . . if a union, or an employer for that matter, 

decides that they don't want this collective bargaining 

agreement, they'll make a whole bunch of very, very 

unreasonable demands, the 120-day conciliation period will 

elapse, and then we're into a situation, Mr. Speaker, where the 

Labour Relations Board will impose a settlement.  And I don't 

think that's in the interests of the business or the employees in 

that respect. 

 

 In the event of a strike, the new act will force employers to 

pay all benefits and guarantee jobs to all unionized 

employees once the strike is over.  If there's not enough work 

(and there frequently isn't after a strike), the employers  



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

must give notice of layoff or pay in lieu of notice. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that's a significant concern as well that 

people all over this province, and businesses, groups, 

particularly, have -- that they'll be paying benefits and 

guarantee jobs to unionized employees, even though they're on 

strike, Mr. Speaker.  So you could be looking at a significant 

period of time. 

 

You look at circumstances like the packing plant out in Moose 

Jaw where they've been off work for something in the range of 

two years plus, Mr. Speaker, and the employer would still be 

responsible for paying benefits during that time period.  And 

it's simply a provision that is unwarranted and an extremely 

expensive provision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Since benefits can make up as much as 40 per cent of 

employees' total remuneration, the cost of the provision 

would be substantial. 

 

 Perhaps the most objectionable section (of this) bill deals 

with contracting out. 

 

 The new Act states that contracting out services amounts to 

the sale of a business to which the union retains exclusive 

bargaining rights. 

 

So even after an employer has sold a business, that same 

business will have to . . . the new owners, whoever they are, 

would have to retain the bargaining agreements that were under 

. . . the previous owners were faced with. 

 

 This section effectively prevents provincial and municipal 

governments, hospitals, universities, even mining camps from 

contracting out cleaning, security and cafeteria services.  It 

even prevents the contracting out of "any other services that 

are designated by the board." 

 

So once again we see the Labour Relations Board with very 

significant powers, Mr. Speaker, with respect to deeming of 

what services should be under this provision. 

 

 This government, which has offloaded hundreds of millions 

of dollars of spending cuts onto third parties, like 

municipalities and hospital boards, is now preventing those 

same third parties from cutting their own costs by contracting 

services out to more effective private sector companies (Mr. 

Speaker). 

 

 Given the one-sided nature of this legislation, one has to ask 

the following question: why is the government doing this? 

 

Bruce Johnstone, and I quote, says: 

 

 Shillington has stated that he's merely "centring the 

pendulum" that has swung too far to the right under the 

Devine administration. 

 In reality, he's pushed the pendulum so far to the left that it 

will destabilize labour management relations for years to 

come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I think that sums up the concerns that 

business groups all over this province has, as well as employees 

all over this province.  It will destabilize labour relations for 

years to come, Mr. Speaker.  And that's an important thing that 

the government, I think, has overlooked, that they have swung 

way too far to the left on this very significant concern, and the 

people all over the province are reacting to that. 

 

We see business groups, Saskatchewan business groups, taking 

out full-page ads in newspapers all over Saskatchewan, 

outlining the concerns that they have and outlining the reasons 

why they believe everyone should be concerned, Mr. Speaker.  

And I'd just like to quote from this advertisement that they have 

taken out: 

 

 Everyone should be concerned!! 

 

 -- non-union employees should be concerned about new laws 

that could force them into a union and to pay dues from 

their wages to that union . . . when no employee has 

been taken or even if the majority of employees reject 

unionization. 

 

 -- newly unionized employers should be concerned about 

new laws allowing the Labour Relations Board to 

impose a first union agreement 

 

 -- employers with existing union contracts should be 

concerned about new laws which will strengthen the 

union's hand in refusing to negotiate changes to a 

non-competitive agreement 

 

 -- taxpayers should be concerned about new laws that will 

prohibit Crown  Corporations and governments at all 

levels, including municipalities, hospitals, and school 

boards, from ever lowering costs by contracting out 

services. 

 

That means higher taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 -- all citizens should be concerned about massive changes to 

the labour standards through bureaucratic regulation . . . 

than through the scrutiny of democratically elected 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of those are the types of concerns that we're 

hearing from groups all over the province of Saskatchewan -- 

the reasons why they believe that the government has gone too 

far with this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there's lots of groups from all over the province that have 

had input into the discussion so far, Mr. Speaker.  It's important 

that we can hear from as many 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

as possible.  We have heard from a lot of groups across the 

province.  Unfortunately the government as well has heard 

from those groups and yet they still have decided to proceed 

with this very important piece of legislation, and a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that I don't believe is necessary.  And 

I'm hopeful that the government will see that as well and decide 

to back off from this labour relations as well as The Trade 

Union Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this time I take my place and allow other members to 

enter the debate with respect to this. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

my colleague in speaking to these amendments to The Trade 

Union Act and Bill No. 54.  Mr. Speaker, many of the 

comments that we have made in the legislature are similar to 

the concerns that we have raised with respect to other pieces of 

legislation that is before us.  The Labour Standards Act, Bill 

No. 32, is now before us as well. 

 

And it seems like the government is pushing both of these very, 

very hard at the same time.  And we've got to ask ourselves 

why this might be the case.  And if we look at the objective of 

the government we are finding as we talk to the general public, 

that they, the general public, can't seem to follow the 

justification for pushing these two pieces of legislation through 

the House. 

 

Let me give you some examples as we've seen in other 

jurisdictions and now in the province of Saskatchewan.  When I 

raised this with the Minister of Labour, I asked him, Mr. 

Speaker:  will this do anything to create economic activity and 

jobs in Saskatchewan?  And he says, that's not what it's about.  

I said:  will it do anything to make it more difficult to create 

economic activity?  What will the business community think 

about that?  And he says, oh this is just to correct past wrongs 

that have been there for some time. 

 

I asked the minister: isn't it the business community that creates 

most of the jobs, and particularly small business?  He was 

reluctant to acknowledge that, although the Premier's 

acknowledged that, the Minister of Energy, and the Minister of 

Economic Diversification have acknowledged that. 

 

Well if it is small business in towns and villages and cities that 

create most of the work and they don't like this legislation and 

they say it's going to hurt the relationship between business and 

labour and it's going to discourage money from coming into the 

province -- and those are facts; those are true; that's the case -- 

then why are they introducing these two Bills at the same time 

that will discourage investment and make it more difficult for 

small business to carry on successful and profitable operations 

here in the province? 

 

Now the government hasn't answered those.  No minister has 

stood in his place 

and said, this is what it's going to do to business and economic 

activity and justify it.  And no minister has now stood in his 

place and said, but this will improve economic activity and 

create jobs.  None have defended it on that basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the public are concerned, 

your constituents and mine and several others with respect to 

these Bills, is the fact that we have 81,000 people on welfare in 

Saskatchewan.  The numbers on welfare are growing and 

growing and growing under an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

administration.  Under a socialist, left-wing administration, the 

numbers on welfare are growing leaps and bounds. 

 

And the business community across North America will tell 

you, whether it's in Ontario or B.C. (British Columbia) or any 

place else, that if you get a socialist government in, the 

business community sort of just sits; minds its p's and q's; 

hopefully they won't bring in some strange legislation, and kind 

of cope until they're gone. 

 

Well we have 81,000 people on welfare and no new jobs and 

no new businesses talking in an excited way about 

Saskatchewan.  And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, we have 31 or 

34,000 people unemployed.  Now that's over 110,000 people in 

Saskatchewan that either are on welfare or unemployed.  And 

they're saying, what about me? 

 

So it's not just the business community, and it's not just those 

that could invest.  It's all those people that are unemployed are 

saying, well it's fine to talk about a longer lunch hour break or 

some other benefits if you're working, but what about all the 

people that are not working in Saskatchewan?  If it's over a 

hundred thousand people, Mr. Speaker, that's 9 out of the 12 

cities in the province of Saskatchewan are unemployed.  It's all 

of the city of Yorkton, all the city of Estevan, Weyburn, Swift 

Current, the Battlefords, Prince Albert -- nine of the major 

cities in the province of Saskatchewan are unemployed.  And 

the government brings in legislation and amendments to 

legislation to make it more difficult to create jobs and put 

people to work. 

 

(1445) 

 

And none of them, not one in this legislature, can stand up and 

tell us why they're doing this.  Is it for their children, the 

unemployed, those on welfare?  Clearly not.  Is it for the 

business community, to invest here?  Clearly not.  Is it for 

better relations between the business community and labour?  

Clearly not, although the minister says this will make it a lot 

more comfortable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it wasn't. 

 

What he really admitted was the pendulum swung on the side 

of labour and organized labour, so if you are organized you 

have more power, and if you're not organized it's easier to get 

organized so you can have that kind of power and put 

management in its place.  That's what he said; the pendulum 

has now shifted over to union leaders. 

 

Well in good conscience, Mr. Speaker, why in the 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

world would a government who cares about people, who say 

they care about people -- that's the terrible part of this -- 

socialists who say, I really care about low income people, I care 

about the unemployed, I care about those in food banks, I care 

about those that are on welfare, if they really cared, why would 

they do this at a time when we have the highest numbers on 

welfare, the highest numbers in the food bank, and the highest 

number of unemployed that we've had maybe ever in the 

province of Saskatchewan's history? 

 

And the NDP bring in legislation to make it more difficult to 

employ people -- country, cities, farms, businesses, agriculture, 

oil, manufacturing, pulp, paper, timber -- and they bring in 

changes to The Trade Union Act and changes to The Labour 

Standards Act that absolutely change the balance and the scales 

of economic justice to put much, much more power in the 

hands of union leaders. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask that because all the public are asking.  

And then if you give them the answer, as we know in this 

House, Mr. Speaker -- you've been around long enough and 

certainly the government members have, some of them - 

_ when you really get to the real answer of why they're 

introducing it, is that they have a priority.  And that priority is 

just a little different than the people.  That priority is not the 

81,000 on welfare; that priority is not the 30-some-thousand 

unemployed; that priority is not the small-business 

entrepreneur, man and woman, who are putting together these 

companies; that priority is not creating economic activity and 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan.  Well if it isn't any of 

those, what could this . . . what justification could they come up 

with? 

 

Now if you say to the public, well really this legislation, 

changes to The Trade Union Act and changes to The Labour 

Standards Act, is here for one reason only, and they say, well 

what's that? Why would they do this to the people of 

Saskatchewan?  Well they hope that it will muster support 

among labour so that the NDP can get re-elected. 

 

And the general public that's unemployed or the small business 

or others who thought that the NDP might be reasonable would 

say, ah, they'd never do that; are you serious?  And they said 

no, they couldn't be that cynical, that unfair, that uncaring.  

These so-called socialists, these people who are the mother's 

milk of the political spectrum, were there for the little guy; how 

could they ever do this?  They'd never do it. 

 

And we say, well fair enough; if you don't think that's the 

reason, tell us what it will do for you if you're on welfare; tell 

us what this legislation will do if you're unemployed.  Find a 

business person who endorses it; find a middle-of-the-road or 

NDPer who's in business, who says, yeah, I guess they have to 

do it, I guess they must do it to kind of get their political 

support up, but I don't like it.  That's what they'll tell you. 

 

Find businesses, investors, and if you talk to politicians across 

the country, they'll say, well it looks like the old sort of NDP 

strategy -- I'll one-up you no 

matter what jurisdiction you're in, or from -- is now alive and 

well in Saskatchewan.  And this administration which stemmed 

from the Blakeney administration that lost so badly, says, we're 

going to keep ahead of Bob Rae; we're going to keep ahead of 

Bob Rae. 

 

Bob Rae's introduced legislation that have made him so 

unpopular that there are people in Ontario, if you survey with 

them, or survey them, they'll say, I'm not only not going to vote 

NDP this time, I will never vote NDP again -- ever in my life.  

Why?  Because they've introduced legislation that has brought 

that great industrial heartland, Ontario, to its knees.  People 

have left Ontario -- that's why Crown Life, in part, said the 

atmosphere in Ontario is terrible. 

 

And the NDP in the province of Saskatchewan are now 

copying that.  For what, Mr. Speaker?  Did the legislation 

introduced in Ontario help the Ontario economy?  No.  Why 

was it introduced?  Well people are still shaking their head, Mr. 

Speaker.  And then to see an administration, a new government 

in the province of Saskatchewan, copy Bob Rae, copy NDP 

Bob Rae, who may be just one of the most unpopular premiers 

in Canada, and bring in legislation that puts more people out of 

work at a time of crisis in terms of those on welfare and those 

on unemployment, is unbelievable. 

 

So we go back to the public, Mr. Speaker.  And the public says, 

but the NDP wouldn't just do that, just to get re-elected or just 

to try to get re-elected and to shore up union support.  And we 

said, well yes they would.  They've broken the legislation; 

they've broken their word.  With great respect, Mr. Speaker, we 

could go on here at length of how they've broken their word.  

They said no new taxes and they said no PST (provincial sales 

tax), and they said we will change legislation and we will 

eliminate food banks and we will help farmers with the cost of 

production.  We will do all these things -- and they didn't do 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they found out that governing is just a little bit more 

difficult than they might have thought, or certainly more 

difficult than they campaigned as.  And what do they do?  Well 

we don't have much to give our union friends that were 

responsible in good part to get us elected and certainly will be 

responsible for getting us re-elected, so I'll tell you what we'll 

do, we will give them power -- that's what it's about. 

 

This legislation, amendments to the Act and The Labour 

Standards Act, are about power -- they're about the NDP 

government having the ability to get re-elected and stay in 

power.  And the way they're going to do that is give power to 

union leaders so that they have power over management and 

power over the business community, and then the two of them 

can have power over Saskatchewan people. 

 

That's what it's all about.  Not about helping Saskatchewan 

grow; not about entrepreneurial economic activity -- it's 

shameful.  I don't know how members over there can look at 

their families and look 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

at their communities and say this is good for Nipawin or this is 

good for Melfort or this is good for Regina or this is good for 

anything in Saskatchewan -- because it's not.  And the members 

can chirp from their seat because they don't like to hear it but it 

is the absolute truth.  This does not create work; it puts people 

out of work, and it destroys Saskatchewan's reputation as being 

a professional, middle-of-the-road political place to be.  It's 

taken us way back to the left. 

 

As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, you know what it will do in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Well what this really is, Mr. 

Speaker, is the behaviour of an NDP government that's in 

trouble -- in big trouble, not only in rural ridings all across 

Saskatchewan but, as we saw in Regina North West, in urban 

ridings. 

 

The member from Shaunavon didn't just cross the floor because 

he was worried about . . . this was prior to labour legislation.  

He says what the NDP are doing not only in legislation, but in 

health care and agriculture, is awful.  And here's the former 

NDPer who crossed the floor and said, away with you; you 

don't care -- you talk with a forked tongue.  And that's in a rural 

seat. 

 

And in an urban environment, Mr. Speaker, what do we see?  

An NDP stronghold goes down.  They fail because they're in 

trouble.  They didn't tell it to the people. 

 

They campaigned -- just imagine, Mr. Speaker -- they 

campaigned on the big debt and they all promised tax cuts at 

the same time, as if that's responsible.  And when they do win 

and they can't do it all and obviously have to break their 

promises, guess what's happened?  They start to lose. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the nub of this is clearly as a result of the 

NDP trying to shore up the centre of their support in downtown 

urban Saskatchewan.  No more, no less.  If urban Saskatchewan 

would continue to vote as they did in the by-election, that is to 

say to heck with these socialists, I'm going to vote Liberal or 

I'm going to vote Tory or I'm going to vote something else, 

then the NDP are in trouble. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, clearly this is the result of a government 

that has a great deal of worry about its success.  It's a one-term 

government as a result of the things that they have done.  And 

they said, we have to shore ourselves up provincially, right here 

in the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon, particularly.  

Because they look at Shaunavon, they look at Regina North 

West, and they know they're in big, big trouble. 

 

So what should they do?  They run the risk, Mr. Speaker, of 

putting more people onto unemployed -- and there's 30-some 

unemployed; putting more people on welfare -- 81,000 on 

welfare; upsetting the business community and the investment 

community if they can only save their hide in downtown urban 

Saskatchewan.  And that's what this is about. 

 

Who speaks for this legislation?  Barb Byers, union leaders.  

That's it.  How many jobs have union leaders created?  Could 

you give me a list?  How many jobs have union leaders 

created anywhere?  That's not their responsibility.  They don't 

create jobs. 

 

And if we're in an economy where we have a lack of jobs, why 

turn more power over to somebody who has never created any?  

Not one.  Maybe for themselves.  Not one.  There is no historic 

evidence that union leaders anywhere, have you ever created 

work.  Once you've got some work, then they'll tell you how to 

look after the employees, but they do not create economic 

activity. 

 

So now we have in the province of Saskatchewan under these 

despicable conditions of 80-some thousand people on welfare 

and 30-some thousand out of employed, 9 out of the 10 cities of 

Saskatchewan -- 9 of the 12 cities of Saskatchewan -- totally 

unemployed or on welfare.  Imagine that.  Entire cities out of 

work and you're bringing this in.  And why?  To give more 

power to the union leaders. 

 

Well you're in trouble.  But the jig's up because people know 

why you're doing it.  They'll know all over Regina, they'll know 

all over Saskatoon, and they'll know every place else that 

you've put all these people out of work.  You've now been in 

government a couple years.  All this is yours. 

 

You're adding to the debt every day.  You don't talk about the 

debt any more, we don't hear you talk about the debt.  It's about 

your little deficit plan.  But you've added to the debt, and added 

to the debt, added to the debt, added to the unemployed, added 

to welfare, and you have no economic activity and you're 

introducing legislation to put more people out of work which 

will add to the debt. 

 

What do they tell you in caucus?  How do they justify this?  

How do they justify it?  Who's this good for?  Riding after 

riding after riding must stand up and just say well, if I just be 

quiet we'll get it through this session and then it will be done 

and then all those labour leaders and organizers will be out 

there in my riding to help me get it done.  Well believe me, the 

public will see through it. 

 

If this Act, changes to The Trade Union Act, are the result of a 

government in trouble, this behaviour alone is reason enough 

for this Assembly to defeat this Bill.  And in good conscience 

every single member of this Legislative Assembly, if you cared 

about unemployed or jobs or economic activity, should defeat 

this Bill.  Don't just vote the party line, don't just vote because 

someone in caucus said well we better do this because we're 

losing support. 

 

You've lost support in by-elections, you've lost support, rural 

and urban, and you've got big trouble.  And your predecessors 

in Ontario and in British Columbia are paving the way for you 

to go to oblivion.  One-term government -- one term and people 

will say well, you know, good riddance. 

 

What did they do?  They retroactively changed the law.  They 

broke their own laws.  They didn't create 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

any jobs.  They gave a lot more power to union organizers and 

managers to try to stay in power and set the province back 10, 

15 years in terms of reputation again.  You might as well have 

gone out and nationalized some more potash mines. 

 

Why didn't you just buy up a bunch of farms or take over a 

bunch of companies and tell the rest of the world how good you 

are in Saskatchewan?  It took us decades to get over those silly 

moves of the Blakeney administration -- decades. 

 

And they laugh at the public, Mr. Speaker.  Imagine, they laugh 

at people who are unemployed. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're not the public. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well the member says I'm not the public.  Go 

listen to the public.  Go to the public in Regina North West say.  

What did the public in Shaunavon say?  Try another 

by-election anywhere, try some by-elections. 

 

They chirp, Mr. Speaker, because they know in their 

conscience they should defeat this Bill and the changes to this 

legislation because the public out there is saying what is the 

NDP doing for me? -- diddly.  That's what they're doing.  

Nothing. 

 

So now they are going to pay off.  They said no patronage.  

You know what this Bill is about, Mr. Speaker?  This is about 

pure, unadulterated, political patronage.  Pay-off to those who 

helped them win an election.  That's what it is because there's 

no other justification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no Bill conceived in such an atmosphere of bad 

faith can possibly hope to achieve a public consensus that such 

a major piece of legislation requires in today's legislature. 

 

The NDP government loves to typify the approach of anybody 

that speaks out against them as to divide and conquer.  If we 

speak out against this legislation, or anybody else does, they 

say oh, but you're just splitting management against labour.  

You don't care. 

 

Well that won't wash any longer.  We care, and the public 

cares, about creating jobs.  The truth is it's the NDP 

government that are trying to divide and conquer, as they did in 

Ontario and it didn't work and as they're trying to do here and it 

won't work. 

 

Enhanced powers of arbitrators and mediators that reduce 

direct communication between workers and management -- 

what will that do?  Nothing but divide and conquer.  Split the 

different between management and labour.  That's the plan.  It 

doesn't make it more cooperative, more productive.  And they 

are the ones that are doing it.  It's their divide-and-conquer 

strategy.  They will have outlawed communication from 

employers while not addressing problems of threatening 

communication from unions.  So one side can communicate 

and the other side can't 

communicate.  Well isn't that nice. 

 

How's that fair?  What does that do for Saskatchewan's 

reputation?  Well if you're in management, you can't 

communicate to the employees, but if you're a union leader, 

you can.  Is that fair?  Is that fair in Kelvington?  Is it fair in 

The Battlefords?  Is is fair in Swift Current?  It's not fair in the 

Soviet Union for Heaven's sake, or what was left of it.  It's not 

fair anywhere.  At a time particularly when we got all these 

people on welfare and unemployed, why would you introduce 

something like that and stick your head up and say, well this is 

really going to make it nicer for everybody. 

 

How in the world did you get it by caucus?  Were you asleep at 

the switch?  Did they say, oh we're bringing in the Bill?  Don't 

you have a legislative review committee in the NDP caucus to 

go over all this stuff?  What were you doing?  Where are all 

these back-benchers that got some heart and soul?  This may be 

your only time in this legislature; you got two years left; are 

you going to go down and say, well I'll just follow along; our 

claim to fame was that we brought in changes to The Labour 

Standards Act and The Trade Union Act. 

 

Well I'd say you'd better go back and read it.  You have an 

executive meeting at home; you go talk to your constituents 

and see what they say about this legislation.  They'll tell you, 

what are you smoking; why didn't you bring this up earlier; we 

can't defend this.  No honest-to-goodness working man, 

woman, family, person . . . How about your children -- they 

want jobs, they want work.  How does this help them?  You 

can't say to your wife, your kids, your husband, anybody, that 

this is a good idea. 

 

They've outlawed communication from employers while not 

addressing problems of threatening communication from 

unions.  This is an affront to rights of free speech.  In the 

workplace, you don't have free speech.  I know you've muffled 

it in here.  You've even voted without the opposition in the 

legislature -- first time in Saskatchewan's history.  Didn't seem 

to bother you.  You did it on GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program); you'll do it again on judges; you'll do it on whatever 

you like -- real authoritarian dictatorship.  But now you can't 

have free speech in the workforce, as if that's good for 

somebody. 

 

Again I say, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is divide and conquer.  

Any communication regarding the individual worker's rights in 

labour negotiations must now be referred to the bureaucracy, 

which is not well known for supplying clear, helpful, or timely 

information.  So if you do want to communicate, you got to go 

through bureaucrats now; you can't do it face to face, except 

under the conditions laid down by the NDP, who were in power 

and giving the union leaders this power to stay in power, and 

that's the people you've got to communicate to if you want to 

talk to somebody else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have created new areas of potential 

resentment between employers and employees; for example, in 

requiring management to supply benefits 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

to striking workers.  If the business offers day care, the 

employer will have to benefit the workers' kids while they walk 

the picket line.  This is hardly helpful in creating an atmosphere 

of harmony. 

 

They have just turned a blind eye to common sense.  They are 

going to make it so difficult to get along between management 

and labour that it will . . . You could just give a barn burner of a 

speech on this legislation and amendments to this legislation 

any place in North America and they'd shake their head.  It 

takes you right back to the crazy days of the NDP when they 

were full of power and they said, well we'll just do whatever 

we like.  And they lost miserably.  This is just reminiscent of 

those days. 

 

We heard in question period today, SGI, Mr. Speaker -- and 

you'll recall this -- is advertising again what a nice monopoly it 

is.  Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you and I and others in this House 

can remember going to movies when SGI advertised -- before 

you could watch the movie -- how good they were, and people 

booed it from here to La Ronge.  What in the world is the 

government doing?  They have a monopoly, they're the only 

people in town, and they're spending government money to tell 

us how good the monopoly is. 

 

And the minister got up in question period today -- and I 

couldn't believe it -- he says, well the government, in a 

democracy, has the obligation to inform the public and 

therefore monopolies can advertise.  At random, with no 

constraints?  That's why you got into trouble before.  People 

said, never, come on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they have set up Draconian penalties for 

unfair labour practices that can be based on nothing more than 

hearsay which have no avenue for appeal.  The government is 

also undermining the competitive business atmosphere in 

many, many ways, slowing down needed technological change 

by throwing up time constraints on how quickly they can be 

implemented. 

 

Now imagine that.  Technology is changing very, very rapidly 

and ever more quickly, and under this legislation you can slow 

up technological change in the business community in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  So if you're not unionized and you 

run a high-tech company and you're changing very rapidly, 

they can bring in a union to make sure you are organized, and 

then they can slow up your speed of technological change.  

Doesn't make any sense, but they got it in here just to give 

more and more and more power to labour leaders. 

 

They also have hampered the ability of business, Mr. Speaker, 

to achieve cost savings by restricting the ability of unionized 

businesses to tender out services.  So now they're going to 

manage the tendering business.  The Minister of Labour swears 

that this is not happening, but given the undue speed with 

which this legislation is being pushed, we certainly haven't had 

anything from him to clarify it.  All the more reason that this 

legislation should be pulled until the issue 

can be studied and looked at very clearly, and clarified by the 

members.  They're just pushing these two pieces of legislation 

as fast as possible. 

 

The legislation not only fails to address the ongoing problems 

with workplace democracy, especially regarding the 

availability of secret ballots, it actually makes these problems 

worse.  Certification and decertification have now become even 

more undemocratic.  So here it is, the New Democratic 

government bringing in undemocratic law and principles to 

govern yourselves in management-labour situations; you are 

introducing undemocratic principles and standing in here and 

voting for it. 

 

Can you imagine what you're doing and the atmosphere you're 

creating for the next administration that comes in here?  They 

are going to say well, we're only here for a little while, we'll 

just do all this stuff as rapidly as we can.  We don't care about 

the consequences; we'll just get it in.  Hopefully, we'll make it 

one more term and the devil take the hindmost 

 

Well the problem is you've poisoned the atmosphere and the 

reputation of the province.  You've put people out of work for 

years, you disheartened the business community, you put more 

people on welfare, you add to the debt, and the combination of 

all those just makes Saskatchewan stick out like a sore thumb, 

blessed with resources but stuck with an administration that is 

so politically hidebound by it's political philosophy they have 

to do this anyway, and it makes no sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make one more comment and beg leave 

to adjourn debate.  A business can be certified if a related 

company anywhere in Canada has been certified.  A 

decertification vote can be annulled if a small minority of 

workers claim that unfair labour practices have been followed.  

In both cases, the wishes of the majority of workers in the 

businesses are ignored. 

 

It is hard to see, Mr. Speaker, how this will serve to build a 

consensus and goodwill between management and labour. 

 

If you look through the entire provisions of these two pieces of 

legislation, and today The Trade Union Act, there is over and 

over and over and over again amendments to those Acts, and 

this Act particularly, that will make it more difficult to 

communicate, more difficult to cooperate, therefore more 

difficult to have new business come in. 

 

And remember, Mr. Speaker, unions don't create new 

businesses or jobs.  Everybody agrees it's small business that 

creates two out of three jobs.  So if it's more and more difficult 

for people to get along, then they won't create the work. 

 

So what do we have here?  A small number and smaller 

number of unionized businesses in Saskatchewan, and we'll 

have a shrinking, as the media says, a shrinking and shrinking 

and shrinking economy 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

despite the bountiful resources that the good Lord gave us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are certainly going to encourage people 

to defeat this legislation, and similar kinds of legislation.  And 

we have a great deal more to say about it, but I beg leave to 

adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6 -- An Act 

to amend The Community Bonds Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

going to make a few brief comments on Bill 6, and then we'll 

move that this Bill go to committee, because I think that's 

where we need to properly deal with it. 

 

Certainly the issue of community bonds is one that isn't new to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  It was an initiative of the 

former administration and one, I think, that was fairly 

wholeheartedly endorsed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember the comments that came out in the media during 

that period in time in 1990 when the concept was developed.  

And I think, by and large, it was recognized as a potentially 

very valuable tool, especially for the smaller communities, the 

rural areas of the province, which traditionally have had trouble 

accessing capital for projects and new business concerns. 

 

It has been an ongoing problem in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

to get lending institutions to back initiatives in communities 

that don't have large infrastructure -- areas where you don't 

have a lot of collateral, for instance, to put up to obtain new 

loans. 

 

And certainly, we've seen over the last number of years with 

the economic situation as it's been in Canada, particularly when 

the high interest rates were a problem, that people did have a 

great deal of problem in accessing capital. 

 

The concept in community bond, as we all know, Mr. Speaker, 

is so that local citizens can put up some risk capital, have the 

understanding that there's some backing there from government 

and from local municipal jurisdictions, and use that capital then 

to entice businesses, factories, value added concerns primarily, 

some tourism potential, into those areas.  And I think 

Saskatchewan communities have wholeheartedly adopted that 

principle. 

 

(1515) 

 

What we are seeing today in this particular piece of legislation 

is to allow the regional economic development authorities, the 

REDAs, to incorporate as community bond corporations.  And 

REDAs I think 

are being endorsed in the province; we've seen three of them up 

and running now, Mr. Speaker, that weren't there previously.  

They took another initiative of the former government and have 

basically expanded it out to a larger area. 

 

And I think ultimately, Mr. Speaker, the strength of rural 

Saskatchewan will be that as we see consolidation -- we're 

seeing it in health care.  I think we'll see it somewhat in 

education.  We'll see it in municipal government -- that people 

have the tools at hand to do what is necessary. 

 

This Bill also has an exemption of the Securities Commission 

process included, and that's one that will certainly need some 

discussion in here in Committee of the Whole, because I think 

we all have to be very clear on how that process is going to 

work.  Obviously if you're going to invest your hard-earned 

money in something like this, you want the assurances that the 

proper checks and balances and due process are there, and also 

there's some other housekeeping amendments that we think 

we'd like to discuss there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's interesting that as one looks around the piece in Canada, 

that other jurisdictions are beginning to look at adopting this 

format.  I recently obtained an economic blueprint from the 

province of Ontario, as put forward by the Progressive 

Conservative Party in Ontario, and it appears that the 

community bond program is going to be a major plank in their 

election platform there, in the election that is expected quite 

soon. 

 

They have similar problems in Ontario as to what we've faced 

here.  The government there has initiated a number of programs 

which have resulted in very high unemployment, large welfare 

rolls, have tinkered with the labour legislation to such an extent 

that rural Ontario in particular is finding a crying need for 

investment capital and some way to start re-employing people.  

And it appears that the issue of community bonds will be one 

that will be hotly debated in the province of Ontario during the 

next provincial election campaign there. 

 

One thing that we must be aware of, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

same process that community bond corporations have gone 

through in the past have to be done as far as the REDA 

initiative.  And instead of having one town in a municipality or 

a couple of municipalities now involved in selling shares, 

you're going to have much larger districts involved.  And I 

think you will have some overlap. 

 

And I think it's very important as this legislation proceeds, that 

people in these larger areas who may not necessarily know the 

individuals involved with the prospectus or the initiative 

because they're in a much larger economic unit, have that sense 

of security that is necessary for people to put up their money, 

and also that government have the security.  Because as we all 

know, Mr. Speaker, community bonds have got the backing of 

the provincial taxpayer. 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

And certainly that will be an issue, as has been the question of 

what happens when bonds come to maturity in some of the 

existing community bonds corporations. 

 

Those are issues that I think any potential investor needs to 

clearly understand, and clearly needs to understand sort of the 

direction that the government's taking because once that bond 

comes to maturity, obviously the corporation has to be able to 

either pick up the slack as far as that investor goes or be 

prepared to issue shares, do those things that are necessary to 

maintain confidence in the initiative. 

 

And it was a criticism that was levelled by the past opposition 

in this House, about what's going to happen when these things 

comes to fruition.  And not very many of them, Mr. Speaker, 

have actually been in place long enough for that to happen. 

 

Those are the kind of questions I think people want answered 

and they probably are dealt with better in committee than in 

general conversation in this House.  So, Mr. Speaker, I would 

move that the Bill then proceed to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 5 -- An Act 

to establish the Tourism Authority be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

particular piece of legislation obviously encompasses a much 

larger area than the topic which I just previously addressed.  

This is a fairly dramatic change in the way that the province of 

Saskatchewan delivers and works with people in the tourism 

industry. 

 

As those of us who live here know, Mr. Speaker, this province 

has got a lot to offer in the way of tourism.  We have a very 

large province with a very small population.  We have a lot of 

area in this province, Mr. Speaker, that would be considered by 

many in North America to be fairly pristine and in its natural 

state, compared to many other areas of this continent and 

certainly around the globe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have not probably been the best at marketing.  I look 

around at jurisdictions on either side of us and certainly to the 

south of us, and the job that they've done as far as selling 

themselves to outsiders, I think is one that we should look on 

with some envy. 

 

I noticed yesterday in my mailbox in Moose Jaw, a flyer that 

came from the state of South Dakota.  And South Dakota was 

busy marketing all of the attributes that they have.  And I must 

say, Mr. Speaker, that it was an impressive piece of work.  

Certainly the people in South Dakota know that tourism is a big 

part of what 

they do in that state. 

 

And I think the province to the west of us, Alberta, have also 

done a remarkable job in telling outsiders about the things that 

they have there to offer to people.  Certainly Alberta has 

mountains which we don't have, and a few other things, but I 

don't think we've really explored in this province all of the 

avenues that are available to us.  And one of the reasons I think 

that that hasn't occurred is that we have had a very bureaucratic 

approach, Mr. Speaker, to solving some of these issues here. 

 

What the government is proposing here is that we have a major 

decentralization of the tourism initiatives in this province.  That 

there will be a tourism authority established; it'll be a general 

council, at present made up of 39 members, 6 appointed by the 

government, and roughly three each from a variety of interest 

groups.  This council, this tourism council, then would be 

charged with meeting at least twice a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think it's a good concept. It's a starting point that is 

absolutely necessary to put some of the initiative and some of 

the responsibility in the hands of those who are directly 

involved.  Approximately a third of the council would serve as 

the board.  The day-by-day, if you will, administration, Mr. 

Speaker, of the council then would be in the hands of a segment 

of the council. 

 

This particular board then would also have the ability to hire 

employees and they would be able to set certain policy 

parameters.  I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that this board would 

encompass people from the aboriginal community, people from 

existing organizations like TISASK (Tourism Industry 

Association of Saskatchewan), perhaps our northern outfitters.  

Certainly the larger cities have fairly extensive tourism-related 

departments within the city administrations to deal with. 

 

Among other things that the Bill would achieve, Mr. Speaker, 

according to the government, is that it would allow groups that 

are directly concerned and have the most experience in policy 

areas to actively formulate their own affairs. 

 

It also would make groups partly responsible for financing their 

own initiatives and coming up with their own solutions as far 

as money goes, therefore breaking the mentality and the 

dependency on taxpayers' dollars. 

 

It potentially is supposed to reduce the size of government 

bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker.  It is supposed to depoliticize the 

process surrounding tourism in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We hope, Mr. Speaker, that with this initiative that we're not 

reinventing the wheel.  And there has been some concern that . 

. . And I'll outlay how that concern comes about, Mr. Speaker, 

as far as reinventing the wheel.  Because the last thing we need 

to do, I think, is rehash some of the previous marketing 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

strategies, public awareness strategies that have been employed 

in the past, in the fact that the tourism industry should develop 

those things on their own. 

 

It also lays out, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the minister is not 

directly answerable to the decisions of the Authority. And I 

think that's one that is going to necessitate further questioning 

in Committee of the Whole.  Because at some point here, with 

any expenditure of public dollars, you have to have 

accountability. 

 

And as we've discovered with the issue of health, Mr. Speaker, 

where we've gone to the third-party groups, we now are 

involved in an ongoing discussion with the auditor who is 

having trouble discerning what is his role in auditing these 

independent or quasi-independent groups according to 

provincial legislation and what the government's view is of that 

audit. 

 

And I think that we will find some of the same issues here, Mr. 

Speaker, as we're finding in health, where there are direct 

public dollars going in, even though it is removed, at arm's 

length. You are going to see the need for accountability 

because the minister, by order in council, has the ability to 

appoint people to the board. 

 

And because there is that direct involvement of appointment by 

the minister, I think the issue of accountability will have to be 

addressed.  And in my reading of the Bill so far, Mr. Speaker, I 

see nowhere does it clearly define what will be the accounting 

procedures and who ultimately will be responsible for 

answering for those dollars expended. 

 

We hope, Mr. Speaker, that like municipal government and 

health boards, that we will not see this as simply another way 

of offloading.  As I pointed out earlier, a number of the 

municipal jurisdictions in the province already have significant 

money, time, and people involved in promotional activities 

surrounding tourism in their communities.  And if this is 

simply a method to offload more provincial government 

responsibility in those areas, then I don't think it's going to be 

appreciated. 

 

There are a number of issues, Mr. Speaker, that are around this 

that I think are going to have to be addressed, and I'm not sure 

the government has thought out all the answers. 

 

One thing that the Bill suggests is that the new group, the 

tourism council of Saskatchewan, is going to be responsible for 

all of the employees which currently work for the provincial 

department, i.e., anyone that is there currently will have to -- 

they and their current salary, Mr. Speaker, and their current 

arrangements -- will have to be picked up by the new 

Authority. 

 

And I think the feedback I'm getting is, Mr. Speaker, that 

people would have liked a little more latitude because there is a 

fairly high cost associated with that type of a lateral transfer.  

I'm not sure that people involved in the tourism business in this 

province want 

some of the employees that previously they didn't agree with as 

far as policy directions. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, if this wasn't a caving in by 

the government to people within the public service unions who 

were demanding that before this be allowed to proceed to this 

House that there would be some quid pro quos in place that 

would mean that there would be no effect on the membership 

of that particular public service union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of the tourism industry, as we know -- and 

I'll get into that in a minute -- is delivered by students, by 

people who are part-timers, by people who don't rely on the 

tourism component as their main source of income.  And I 

think when you look at some of the people involved in here like 

the hoteliers and others who do employ large numbers of 

people either at minimum wage or close to minimum wage, 

who do rely on a lot of part-time and seasonal help, you can 

understand their concern where they would agree to buy into 

this new council and be told that they have to take all of these 

full-time employees, the office space that goes along with 

them, and they'll have to include that in their budget. 

 

(1530) 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, and I've been told this directly by 

people, that there was significant pressure by the groups 

involved in this to remove the Authority, for instance, from the 

city of Regina.  Not that any of them have specific concerns 

with the city of Regina; it's just that they felt that the delivery 

mechanism would be more autonomous if it was removed from 

the seat of government, that they would have more ability for 

input if that Tourism Authority existed somewhere else. 

 

And it wasn't a case of Swift Current bidding against Saskatoon 

or Melfort bidding against Yorkton or anything like this; it was 

simply an honest desire I think, Mr. Speaker, to sort of have 

this Authority removed from the milieu of a government town, 

if you will.  They felt that they would have more ability to 

influence and implement than if it was directly tied here.  And 

there is some sympathy, Mr. Speaker, for that type of initiative 

because so much of the tourism in this province occurs 

obviously in some of our rural areas and outside our two major 

cities. 

 

I hope that as the body is up and running -- and it's projected to 

be I think about October of this year -- that that autonomy will 

allow them to start making some of those kind of decisions, 

that that autonomy will allow them to seek out the lowest-cost 

delivery mechanisms that are available to them to make a 

success out of this. 

 

Another thing that does cause concern, Mr. Speaker, in this 

particular legislation, as it has with the two pieces of labour 

legislation which we've seen, is that the various interest groups 

have been left out of the regulations process.  So once again, 

we'll see a Bill proceed through this Legislative Assembly, but 

the regulations that will define a lot of the actual 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

day-by-day implementation have not been put in place yet. 

 

And I think a lot of people involved in tourism would have 

been a lot more comfortable, Mr. Speaker, if they could have 

had those regulations brought in along with the legislation.  

And then there would have been a lot more comfort with what 

is going on and exactly what will be their requirements 

vis-a-vis unions and those types of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while I'm on that topic, I think something I've heard from 

the people in the tourism industry is that they are quite 

perturbed with what they've seen the government bring forward 

in relationship to both labour standards and The Trade Union 

Act. 

 

In my speech last week, Mr. Speaker, I asked the government 

members how this particular piece of strategy worked in with a 

number of others that were ongoing.  And certainly this 

particular Bill is no different than the initiatives in agriculture, 

the initiatives in industrial development, the initiatives in 

health, the initiatives in education and others which the 

government are saying are the foundation of our economic 

renewal in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And obviously there has been a great deal of talk and 

consultation, I believe, on the tourism side to see how that 

component can be strengthened and beefed up.  If that is the 

case, Mr. Speaker, then why would we bring in legislation that 

is counter-productive to that industry doing well?  My 

information and the information I received from the groups 

involved in tourism is that this legislation will make us 

uncompetitive in competition with those areas around us.  

There's so many tourism dollars available in North America, in 

western Canada, and that our share of those tourism dollars will 

be influenced by the cost of delivering service. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we're going to have to have a lot of private 

sector people involved here.  Obviously government isn't going 

to be the engine that delivers tourism potential.  If private 

sector people in competition with someone in Alberta or 

Manitoba or North Dakota or South Dakota cannot price 

themselves . . . they can have the best product in the world but 

they're going to have a great deal of difficulty in selling it, Mr. 

Speaker.  A great deal of difficulty. 

 

If a person or a family says that we're going to take a holiday 

this July or this August and we would like to go some place 

and we would like to do certain things, what they're going to do 

is they're going to look around and say, where am I going to get 

the best bang for my buck?  The economy hasn't been that 

vibrant; a lot of people have cut back on holiday time.  A lot of 

people have found other things closer to home for they and 

their children to do.  So they're going to look around and 

they're going to analyse exactly what is available for them; 

what kind of a recreational opportunity do they want on their 

limited dollars. 

 

And if the Saskatchewan entrepreneur, Saskatchewan 

community, Saskatchewan city who are actively soliciting that 

dollar can't provide the same cost of service as someone in 

another jurisdiction, my guess is people are going to go where 

they're going to get the best bang for their buck. 

 

And it's very clear to me, Mr. Speaker, that what the 

government is proposing here with the two particular pieces of 

labour legislation will make Saskatchewan people 

uncompetitive compared to other jurisdictions just by the 

nature of the type of people that are employed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you consider some of the benefit packages that 

people are looking at, with potentially having themselves 

certified, Mr. Speaker, when their competition in Alberta or 

Manitoba or in the States isn't, they obviously are going to have 

second thoughts about spending a great deal of money to try 

and expand their business opportunity. 

 

And we can have the cleanest water, Mr. Speaker, and the 

clearest skies and all of those things, but we simply aren't going 

to draw people to this jurisdiction if you have uncompetitive 

labour rates, if your taxes are too high, if the things that people 

look for in a holiday cost more than they do anywhere else. 

 

So I say to the government, why would you bring in legislation 

that is counter-productive to what obviously is a major 

initiative, a major initiative in a very important part of our 

economy?  And so far, Mr. Speaker, no one has answered those 

questions.  No one has answered those questions at all. 

 

And it will be interesting to listen to the comments of the 

minister in committee when we talk about specifics, when we 

talk about the hoteliers, when we talk about the aboriginal 

groups, Mr. Speaker, in this province who obviously have a 

very ambitious agenda in front of them. 

 

We see the minister of gaming talking about two major casino 

operations in partnership with aboriginal groups in the 

province.  There's some pretty strong indications, Mr. Speaker, 

that there are going to be jurisdictional disputes.  The 

aboriginal community are in court right now in one case, saying 

that we have jurisdiction over this particular entity on reserve; 

the government has said no, you don't.  But the fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, these people are going to be partners with the 

government, and they clearly are staking out some 

jurisdictional ground. 

 

Now the minister has indicated and the aboriginal groups have 

indicated that they want to be part and parcel of the council.  

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I can see problems arising 

when people like the hoteliers -- who so far, Mr. Speaker, have 

been excluded from casino gambling -- and others who have 

very strong vested interest in tourism in this province, run up 

against these jurisdictional disputes.  Because those issues 

haven't been sorted out. 

 

And I wonder how closely the minister responsible for 

gambling and liquor in this province is going to react 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

on his initiative to raise funds for the government if people in 

the tourism industry say: just hold on a minute;  we're not 

happy with your locations, we're not happy with your 

partnerships, and we're not happy with the way that you're 

running things, because you are excluding us. 

 

And the legislation, Mr. Speaker, clearly excludes capital 

projects from the legislation.  In other words, we form the 

council and we ask them to hire all of the government 

employees that are currently there, and we start to ask them to 

take on the responsibility.  But at the end of the day, they have 

no control over capital expenditures, i.e., major casino 

investment; and they don't probably have jurisdiction over a 

number of the things that will be defined, for instance, between 

aboriginal groups and the government as potential gaming sites, 

as casinos, or other things, Mr. Speaker, that may in fact 

impinge on aboriginal responsibility and aboriginal 

jurisdiction.  And I see nothing in here that would give me the 

comfort, Mr. Speaker, that those things are being defined -- 

nothing at all. 

 

I think the government so far has gotten people to buy into the 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, but there are a number of pitfalls out 

here that haven't been answered.  And I think it is going to be 

very, very incumbent on the government to answer those 

questions and make people feel at ease.  Otherwise, Mr. 

Speaker, there's no reason for the many stakeholders involved 

with this particular piece of legislation to put themselves in a 

position of having to haul all of the government's baggage 

around. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, we would be sadly mistaken as a 

province if we simply used this as some sort of a tool to pass 

off failures off onto people in third-party groups.  I haven't seen 

any roaring successes, Mr. Speaker, from this government in 

the last two and a half years as far as tourism goes.  None at all.  

If we are going to achieve what we can in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, then we are going to have to come up with a better 

system than we've had in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we have to come up with a clear definition 

for the two bureaucracies involved.  I think we're going to have 

to understand very clearly where the demarcation limits are as 

far as wielding of power in this initiative.  Because the 

provincial government, on one hand, is going to maintain some 

bureaucracy and the new tourism council, on the other hand, is 

going to have their share of the tourism bureaucracy. 

 

I think at some point those two are going to come into conflict, 

Mr. Speaker.  There's no question that we have to allow, in my 

view, the Tourism Authority to veto government 

capital-spending projects, because that's the only way that I 

think any of us are going to be assured at the end of the day that 

our tax dollars in this initiative are going to be protected. 

 

If this Authority has the power to veto a proposal, for instance, 

by the minister of Gaming on a casino location because it 

doesn't fit in with what the bigger picture is trying to prove, 

then we will have achieved something, Mr. Speaker, that is 

truly beneficial to the 

province of Saskatchewan because people, local people, will be 

able to make decisions in conjunction with a larger strategy 

across the province. 

 

I know the minister is wont to say that that's what he's 

attempting to do here.  But if that basic and fundamental right 

is not given to the Authority, then I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, we 

will have achieved nothing except allowing the minister to 

offload and use pressure tactics to achieve what the government 

has defined as policy. 

 

We have to have a leaner delivery mechanism in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and we have to have more private sector 

involvement than we've had in the past.  And if we do that and 

if we can have the government recognize that things like The 

Trade Union Act and labour standards do impact a great deal 

on things like tourism and on things like agriculture and on 

whole segments of our society, and back off and modify that 

legislation so that it does fit in with the whole, then I think we 

can sell our potential, Mr. Speaker, as we have never sold it 

before. 

 

(1545) 

 

I hear people all over this province talking about initiatives that 

are possible; many people in the farm community being 

prepared to sell their farming operation to outsiders as a 

tourism potential -- people that have been in the ranching 

business, people that have been in specialized endeavours for 

years and years and years who have been approached by others 

and say that you have a unique experience here; why not share 

others. 

 

And there are people all over the world, Mr. Speaker, who 

come from very crowded, very urban, very congested situations 

that I think would find that very appealing -- that they can 

come with their children into a situation that is hospitable, 

that's friendly, that provides them an experience that they can't 

get at home. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that when you combine that with the 

wonderful northern half of this province, when you combine 

that with friendly people in our cities and towns, that we 

haven't even begun to scratch the surface of what the potential 

is.  You know you only have to walk down the streets of places 

like Banff and Jasper these days to realize that there's an awful 

lot of money from other parts of the world that likes to come 

and reside here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we can design mechanisms that allow 

each and every one of us in this province to be part of selling 

that strategy, we will have accomplished something. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it will be incumbent upon the minister 

during later discussion of this Bill to be prepared to answer 

some of those questions and to bring forth to this Assembly the 

third-party endorsement that is so necessary to make this work. 

 

And certainly I've had a lot of concerns expressed to 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

me, Mr. Speaker, as have my colleagues and others across the 

piece, about the way this is going.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, at 

this time I will allow others to enter the debate and talk about 

some of those concerns that others have brought to this 

Assembly -- so that we can clearly say to the government, yes, 

we like the concept -- but some of these matters are very 

troubling as far as the implementation goes -- of Saskatchewan 

becoming a tourist mecca in the province or in the western 

Canadian context. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Court of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1988/Une Loi modifiant la Loi de 1988 

sur le Tribunal de la sécurité routière de la Saskatchewan 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to please introduce the 

official who has joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with me 

Madeleine Robertson, who is a Crown solicitor with the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, and 

your honoured guest here today -- Madeleine. 

 

Just a couple of comments.  I believe this Bill is somewhat 

straightforward.  It's not a lengthy Bill; it's fairly short.  I 

understand that the present appeal section of this legislation 

provides that when a matter is appealed from a traffic justice, 

the appeal is by retrial, if I understand correctly, but before a 

Provincial Court judge, and then there is a further and a final 

appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench.  And I understand that 

this has created some problems. 

 

One of the problems I guess that arises is retrial, as a standard 

appeal provision, has been found by the Supreme Court of 

Canada to be unconstitutional because of the possibility of the 

Crown bringing in new evidence at the second trial while all 

other appeals in Saskatchewan are now appeals on the record of 

the original trial. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I guess the first question I would have -- 

and it goes back to a concern that's been raised and a concern 

that probably we'll be addressing a little further on when we 

talk about the whole mediation process -- I guess the concern 

that's raised here is the fact the Crown could bring new 

evidence in.  I'm wondering: if the Crown can do that, does the 

defence have the same opportunity to bring new evidence to a 

trial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes. 

Mr. Toth: -- On that basis, Mr. Minister, if in changing the 

legislation as we're proposing then, would it then take away the 

ability . . . Let's say a matter has come before the court and at 

the end of the day a judgement has been made and the 

argument could possibly arise on both sides where the Crown 

could maybe say no, maybe we missed something here and 

some evidence comes up and they feel that a possible verdict 

wasn't appropriate because they didn't bring in appropriate . . . 

or some of the evidence that they had, they didn't introduce.  

Whereas on the other side, say a defendant could say no, I feel 

that I've been dealt with unfairly by the courts because my 

defence lawyer, my lawyer didn't bring some of the appropriate 

information forward. 

 

What happens in a situation like that?  Now with us changing 

this court Act, it's going to take away that ability.  And what 

redress then would an individual or the Crown have under the 

new circumstances or the new formula that's going to take 

place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, the idea 

of an appeal by way of a new trial is one that is fast 

disappearing from our system.  This Bill and the next Bill that 

this committee will consider, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, will remove this procedure from Saskatchewan 

law as it has been previously removed from the Criminal Code 

and from other provincial statutes; and indeed the laws of other 

provinces have pretty much gone the whole route on this. 

 

The Supreme Court has found it to be unconstitutional because 

it is in effect a kind of double-jeopardy situation as far as an 

accused person is concerned.  And as the member has noticed, 

it creates the possibility of the Crown bringing new evidence at 

the second trial.  That's unusual.  In my knowledge that has not 

been the case -- the Crown simply calls the same evidence over 

again and they have the same trial.  But the possibility exists 

that the accused could be put through a double-jeopardy 

situation, being tried twice for the same offence and indeed 

new evidence being called at the second trial, and that's what 

brings it into conflict with the charter. 

 

I want to say this.  The courts of appeal now have the ability, 

have always had the ability, to listen to an application by either 

the Crown or the accused for a new trial on the basis that new 

evidence has come to light.  And in such circumstances, the 

courts, if they're satisfied that the evidence is new evidence and 

could not by the exercise of reasonable diligence have been 

discovered in time for the original trial, will order a new trial at 

which the new evidence will be considered.  The courts have 

that ability. 

 

They also have the ability to receive evidence on appeal if they 

decide to go that route rather than a new trial.  And as we 

speak, there is a case in front of the Court of Appeal for 

Saskatchewan where the Court of Appeal, as I understand it, 

has agreed to accept affidavit evidence on a new matter; that is 

a new piece of evidence that wasn't available or wasn't tendered 

at the time of the original trial. 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

So they still have that ability to deal with new evidence so that 

the situation is not . . . we're not eliminating the possibility of 

dealing with new evidence by making the changes that we're 

proposing in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So that, Mr. Minister, the defendant would have . 

. . basically face the same . . . or have the same ability, if they 

feel that possibly their counsel may have overlooked something 

in the trial, that they would have the ability to have this 

addressed before the appeal process. 

 

Now I understand specifically this is dealing with the traffic 

safety court, so that there really is not much point in getting 

into questions that are really ranging out of the traffic safety 

court. 

 

So what you're saying is the reason for the Bill is, number one, 

to address the constitutionality of the original Bill in the first 

place.  And I also . . . if I'm not mistaken, you talked about it 

would bring in a more uniform appeal procedure for traffic 

offences everywhere in the province.  Is that true, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's exactly the case.  Right now the 

appeal process is different in Regina and Saskatoon than it is in 

Moosomin or Sturgis or Swift Current.  And that's not fair and 

not appropriate, so we're taking care of that problem at the 

same time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that it's possible if 

you went to the proper jurisdiction you could get a better 

hearing on your behalf? 

 

Mr. Minister, the problems we're addressing here, are these 

unique to the province of Saskatchewan, or are other provinces 

facing the same type of problems and will be addressing them 

in the same manner? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We're not aware of any jurisdiction 

having exactly the same kind of traffic safety court as we have, 

but there are analogies.  Most of the other provinces have 

already done what we're proposing to do here, so we're playing 

catch-up in that sense. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess that basically may be a response to the 

next question I want to raise with you, Mr. Minister.  And 

number one, I would like to know how long has the present 

legislation been in effect?  And why the changes you are 

making . . . why are they being made now?  Has there been 

something brought before us or a problem that has arisen that 

has exacerbated this problem and the reason that we're 

addressing this issue at the present time, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is a piece of old business actually 

and could have been done, and probably should have been 

done, some five or six years ago.  The decision of the Supreme 

Court that I refer to and that the hon. member has referred to, 

was decided in 1988, and it was not a . . . you know, there was 

no 

immediate need to act on it because nobody within the system 

was complaining or petitioning us very hard.  In setting our 

priorities and, indeed, the previous government in setting its 

priorities just didn't get to this.  It's late coming, but it's a piece 

of unfinished business that we should tidy up and regularize. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you've basically indicated then is the 

reasons for the changes is something that's basically been 

coming and possibly should have been addressed a while back, 

but because it would seem to be so insignificant at the time I 

suppose possibly ministers prior to or the government didn't 

really take the time to bring it forward. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, then the fact that it's here today, 

was there a specific request from any individual or just a matter 

of the department deciding it's time to get on and get this piece 

of legislation cleaned up?  And secondly, are there any costs 

associated with the legislation, and if there are, please outline 

to the Assembly where some of the costs may be incurred. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Dealing with the second part of the 

question first, there are no costs associated with this.  Dealing 

with the first part of the question, this bit of law reform has 

been on the department's agenda for years.  And as you prepare 

for the next legislative session, you draw the line at some point 

and the line has always been drawn above this one until this 

year; we were able to get to it this year. 

 

But as I indicated earlier, there was no reason why this 

shouldn't have been done in 1988, '89, '92, whenever.  You 

know, it ought to have been done before now and it's high time 

that it was amended. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One other question.  

Coming back to the scenario I placed before you just a few 

moments ago about the fact that a Crown, through a retrial, 

could bring in new evidence, or the defendant could possibly 

introduce new evidence.  When we look at changing the Act, at 

the end of the day what I'm just wondering, the question I 

would have, Mr. Minister, is, will there be any major 

beneficiaries through this Act? The legal community, or the 

general public?  Is it major or is it just a matter of simplifying 

the process? 

 

The concern I would have in changing it is if someone did have 

a position whereby they felt they weren't . . . all the evidence 

wasn't laid out.  Now you had indicated just a moment earlier 

that it could go through the appeal process.  But in one instance 

that I've been dealing with, or asked to look into, it seems that 

even though the person felt the proper evidence wasn't laid 

forward, or not all the evidence was laid out when they went 

through the appeal process, the understanding I had is that the 

appeal process looks at the original trial and indicates if the 

proper conduct was followed, that there is really no other 

avenue then for the appeal.  The judiciary would just see and 

just take a look at whether justice was served effectively.  And 

if there is evidence, do they indeed have another avenue of 

raising evidence that may have been 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

omitted at the original trial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The approach of the appeal courts at 

whatever level, whether it's an appeal to the Court of Queen's 

Bench or to the Court of Appeal, are restrictive.  The kind of 

new evidence that they will listen to is evidence that was not 

available at the trial.  It just wasn't known about.  If I as a 

defendant, I and my lawyer, decide not to call a piece of 

evidence -- just deliberately decide not to call it -- then the 

Court of Appeal will not entertain that evidence, because they 

will say you could have introduced that at the trial. 

 

To put it in its technical terms, the Court of Appeal will ask the 

question: was the evidence available or ought it, by the exercise 

of due diligence, been available.  In other words, is it really 

new evidence?  And they apply that test. 

 

Now if it is new, they will take it into account one way or 

another, either through a new trial or through admitting the new 

evidence in the form of an affidavit.  But they will only do that 

after applying the test that I indicate. 

 

So they'll ask: was the evidence available, or should it have 

been available if you had done your job properly as a defence 

counsel or as a defendant? So it's not an open sort of thing; it's 

a restricted kind of idea, has been for many, many years, and 

there's nothing new in that area. 

 

The new trial procedure which was with us for many years used 

to be under the Criminal Code, whereby on appeal you would 

have a new trial all over again, would have permitted the new 

evidence to be called, although in practice it did not work that 

way, at least not so far as the Crown is concerned.  The Crown 

called the same witnesses and gave the same evidence as they 

had presented in the courts below, as a matter of procedural 

fairness.  In either case, they operated from a transcript of what 

had happened in the original court, and that's still the case.  

When you ask me about additional costs, there are no 

additional costs because that transcript was prepared in any 

event.  So from a cost point of view, it's neutral. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In other words then, Mr. Minister, it's up to the 

client or defendant -- because the Crown prosecutor would 

basically have his or her information there -- it's up to the 

defendant to possibly make sure they've got a lawyer who's 

quite familiar with the circumstances they're dealing with, to 

make sure that all the information is laid out before the court. 

 

One other question just before we leave this.  We've got a 

mediation process that's coming forward in a Bill shortly, that 

we'll be dealing with.  Would there be an area or an avenue 

where mediation could possibly play a role in the traffic court 

Act at the same time, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, it's not intended that that would 

apply to traffic court.  There is disclosure and the Crown's file 

in effect is open for all practical 

purposes, so the defendant can see what evidence there is 

against him or her.  And sometimes that will lead to the kind of 

discussions that may result in some other charge being laid or 

the charge withdrawn or a guilty plea entered instead of a not 

guilty plea or vice versa even.  It has opened up the system and 

made it work with a lot more knowledge all the way around 

and therefore work better. 

 

The system is set up -- and this refers to the first part of the 

member's remarks more than the second -- the system is set up 

in such a way that nobody gets two kicks at the can.  That's 

very much the case on the criminal side, and it's also the case 

on the civil side.  You've got to get your case in front of the 

court.  And if you don't get your case in front of the court you 

have nobody to blame but yourself. 

 

That's the attitude that the law has pretty much always taken 

with only a few rather restricted exceptions.  That's very much 

the case here, and it is one that is practically dictated by the 

charter. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- It will also be deemed that the parallel clauses in 

Canada's other official language will be approved. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairperson.  Number 

one, Mr. Minister, my question is:  I'm wondering if you would 

outline why these amendments are being made at this time to 

this piece of legislation, and what the amendments are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the members, this has 

been another item of business that has been on the agenda of 

law reform generated by the Department of Justice.  It has been 

around for some years and is in the same category as the 

previous one as a piece of business that . . . this has never 

reached a high enough placing on the priority scale to make it 

to the legislative agenda before now. 

 

So it is generated by the department and, as the member will 

have noticed, it addresses a number of different ideas to tidy up 

this particular Bill and to make it a bit more practical. 

 

Again, as in the case of the previous Bill, we were faced with 

different appeal procedures for by-law offences in different 

parts of the province.  And the parallel between this and the 

traffic court situation is almost exact.  If your proceeding was 

in Regina or Saskatoon, you followed one route; and if your 

appeal was in Moosomin or Sturgis, you followed another route 

in respect to exactly the same offence.  So it was 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

really an intolerable situation when you think about it, and 

ought to be cleared up. 

 

While I'm on my feet, I just . . . The member raised a point in 

respect to the previous Bill that also arises under this Bill, and 

it is why we would do it from a public point of view.  And I 

might take the opportunity to answer that now while I'm 

thinking about it. 

 

There's been a lot of confusion about appeal procedures.  I 

mean nobody understands this, or at least very few people do.  

And if they do understand it, they tend to forget it because it's 

so extraordinary that you would have a different appeal 

procedure in different cities.  So this is going to eliminate a lot 

of confusion and give us a process that everyone will easily be 

able to remember and won't have to go back to the books and 

study the particular provisions of the statute in order to figure 

out how to handle what should be a very simple appeal 

procedure.  So it does have that advantage too. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I notice 

one part of this Bill authorizes police officers to . . . gives them 

the ability to allow or give interim release of a person who's 

been arrested on a bench warrant. 

 

Now in our discussions the other day with the department in 

Justice estimates, I raised a concern that an individual had 

come across or been involved in where there was an 

outstanding warrant for his arrest on a charge that was laid that 

was never really followed up, and at the end was basically a 

technicality, whereas that charge should possibly have been 

dropped from the books.  But because it had been retained, this 

individual certainly ended up in . . . some of the circumstances 

that I'm not sure. 

 

Now maybe this Bill will address that fact where he was taken 

in, it was late in the evening, and was facing the fact of 

possibly spending the night in jail, other than they were able to 

find a justice of the peace who could come and at least grant 

bail. 

 

Now what I am wondering, Mr. Minister, is that the section that 

we're dealing with here, giving that authority. 

 

I believe what it does is it gives the police officer the ability to 

use some discretion to look over the warrant and to possibly, in 

consultation with the defendant, arrive at an agreement or 

discussion whereby the police officer then could grant the 

interim release of the person versus calling a justice of the 

peace -- which in rural Saskatchewan may mean your justice of 

the peace is maybe in a community 10 or 12 miles away -- to 

come over and give his signature to that release form.  It would 

seem to me that it's appropriate as it would certainly simplify 

the processes and I'm not exactly sure how many situations 

would arise.  Maybe you could inform us if this is what it 

would apply under and how many times it may happen where 

police officers would find it more convenient. 

 

(1615) 

And I guess the other question that arises there too, while I'm 

asking, is the fact that the consultation with the police forces 

across the province regarding this particular piece of legislation 

-- the consultation that has taken place -- are they in agreement 

with it and are they quite well aware of the provisions the Act 

will allow them once it comes into effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member.  We have 

not yet sorted out the situation that the member arose the other 

night, so I can't speak specifically to that one. But we think it is 

exactly the kind of case that's contemplated in these 

amendments. 

 

Clause 5 of the Bill before us deals with the situation where a 

defendant has been arrested under a warrant and the officer 

may release the defendant without calling in a justice of the 

peace.  The defendant has to fill out a recognizance and the 

matter is dealt with without having to bring in a justice of the 

peace or a Provincial Court judge or anyone. 

 

That applies to all warrants that fall under the summary 

offences Act.  That power is already present in respect of 

Criminal Code offences.  And so with these amendments the 

police will be able to deal with both those situations on the 

same basis.  That is a very desirable thing.  And for that reason 

this procedure that we're putting forward has the support of the 

police departments. 

 

The exception is a warrant of committal which is on a different 

footing and similarly it is under the Criminal Code as well, on a 

different footing, because of course the warrant itself is to 

commit the defendant to custody and is a different sort of 

procedure than a warrant requiring the person to face a certain 

charge or to appear in court.  It is therefore not any radical new 

idea but simply bringing our law in line with the procedures 

under the Criminal Code and in other provinces. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I believe you also indicated in your 

second reading speech that this Bill will repeal the municipal 

by-law appeal procedure.  And I wonder if you could explain 

the rationale behind that and what's the reasons for changing 

the repeal, or repealing municipal by-law appeal procedure 

process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The present appeal procedure for by-law 

offences in Regina and Saskatoon, or municipal by-law 

offences, allow the matter to be heard by a justice of the peace, 

and the appeal is then to a Provincial Court judge.  And if 

unsatisfied there or dissatisfied there, a further and final appeal 

can be taken to the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

Now outside of Regina and Saskatoon the by-law offences are 

heard by Provincial Court judges and the appeal is then taken to 

the Court of Queen's Bench, with a further and final appeal to 

the Court of Appeal.  The difference is quite obvious and quite 

dramatic, and there's no reason for it.  So we are making the 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

amendment that the member refers to in order to regularize the 

appeal procedure right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What types of offences would we be talking about 

here?  Are they specifically related to traffic offences like 

parking tickets, or what other offences would be involved in 

this, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Parking would certainly be a good 

example.  Dogs, zoning infractions, fire regulations, and the 

like.  These are the kind of by-laws that are referred to. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- When we're changing the appeal procedure, we're 

specifically . . . what we're doing, what you're saying is that the 

defendant, if a person is handed a traffic ticket and they're not 

happy with it, they have a process to follow where they can 

appeal the ticket that is handed to them.  What I'm 

understanding is how that process will change under the new 

legislation that we're introducing, where that will be brought 

forward and passed under this Bill.  What avenue does a person 

have to follow in appealing say a traffic violation like a parking 

ticket? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Under the procedure that will be in 

effect if this Assembly passes this legislation, a municipal 

by-law case in Regina or Saskatoon will be heard either by a 

justice of the peace or the Provincial Court judge, either place.  

Both are possible.  And then the appeal goes to the Court of 

Queen's Bench and a further appeal may be taken to the Court 

of Appeal.  That will be different now where all these cases are 

heard by a justice of the peace, and then the appeal is to the 

Provincial Court and then to the Court of Queen's Bench as the 

final level. 

 

We will be bringing Saskatoon and Regina in line with 

Moosomin and Sturgis, to use the examples we've been using 

all afternoon. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, if what you're saying then, if a 

person ends up with . . . and I'm just using, for example, most 

people understand traffic tickets and certainly parking 

violations.  If a person receives a parking ticket and they feel 

they've been unjustly served that ticket, it doesn't take away 

from their ability to, say, go to the city hall and present their 

cases or their arguments as to why they should not have 

received this ticket. And if city hall agrees, they can come to an 

agreement on it.  However if they feel they've been unjustly 

served and haven't received a resolve, then through the Act 

they have an appeal process to follow.  Is that what we're 

basically facing here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's correct.  That's exactly correct. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I think, Mr. Minister, we're quite well aware of 

the fact that both, especially the major centres, as they face a 

problem that arises from traffic violations, especially parking 

tickets, I think both Saskatoon and Regina certainly have a 

number of outstanding tickets and a fair bit of revenue that 

would be  

available to them.  And I'm wondering, does this legislation 

affect their ability to collect on that revenue? 

 

And as well, Mr. Minister, when we're talking of revenue, 

regarding parking violations, do the cities that have the parking 

tickets available on the violations, do they receive all the 

revenue or does some of that come into the provincial coffers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer to the first part of the 

question is, not in the slightest; and the second part of the 

question, the cities get all of the fine revenue. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not sure if we've addressed all 

of the housekeeping amendments that you've raised in the Bill.  

And if there are any others, I was wondering if you'd just bring 

them to light and indicate the other areas that might be of 

significance which we should be discussing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, there are 

two very minor matters that are of a very technical nature that 

are being made in this Bill. 

 

The first is in section 3 of the printed Bill and it is to make 

clear that the information and the summons are not required to 

be issued by a justice of the peace.  So the words "and 

summons" are added so that not only the information doesn't 

have to be signed by a JP (justice of the peace) but the 

summons doesn't either.  And the documents are one; they are 

an information and a summons.  So that's one of the technical 

things. 

 

The second clarification is in the next section, section 4 of the 

Bill, which deals with the service of summons or offences.  

And the clarification is that the provision provides not only to 

the Criminal Code but to this legislation as well, so that both of 

these, or at least summons or offence notices issued under 

either the Criminal Code or this Act, are served in the same 

manner. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when it comes to summons -- 

and I'm not sure if I'm totally clear, and I'm just looking over 

some of the explanatory notes -- it talks about delivering a 

summons and it can be under . . . I believe it must be section 8, 

the existing provision, where it talks about delivering it 

personally to the defendant: 

 

 (ii) if the defendant cannot conveniently be found by leaving 

it for the defendant at the defendant's residence with a person 

at that residence who appears to be at least 18 years of age; 

 

Then at the same time it goes on to explain about delivering the 

summons to, if it's a municipality, it's delivered to the mayor or 

the reeve, or it can be delivered: 

 

 (c) in the case of a defendant that is a corporation other than a 

municipality: 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

 (i) by sending it by registered mail . . . 

 

And I think, going on, you talk about the fact that if that . . . 

like in the province of Saskatchewan there are major 

corporations, but most of the corporations have their offices 

outside of the province other than they have a representative.  If 

I'm not mistaken, a summons then, under this new Act, would 

then be delivered to the person responsible or representing the 

corporation within the province rather than sending it registered 

mail outside of the province? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you to the member, Mr. Chair, 

for that question.  The municipal by-law offences follow the 

same procedure as under the Criminal Code, which requires 

service upon an officer of a corporation.  The problem in 

Saskatchewan is what do you do if there is none.  For example, 

in the case of Xerox for example, they would not have an 

officer in Saskatchewan as such, and so we permit service upon 

the registered office.  And that will always apply . . . clear up 

that problem. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, at this stage I want to change 

officials, so I would like to thank Ms. Robertson, on behalf of 

the members of the Assembly, for her attendance today and her 

assistance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And thank you, Mr. Chair.  I'd like to extend my 

appreciation to the minister and Ms. Robertson for their 

response to the questions I've been giving, and thank you very 

much. 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

provide for Mediation 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Justice to introduce the 

officials who have joined him for this consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Seated beside 

me is Brent Cotter, the deputy minister of the Department of 

Justice.  Behind Brent is Ms. Barb Hookenson, who is the 

executive director of court services.  And behind me is Ms. 

Susan Amrud, the Crown solicitor in the public law and policy 

section.  And to my right, Doug Moen, who is the executive 

director of public law and policy. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I want to welcome you and your officials to the debate and the 

discussion we're going to have this afternoon.  First of all let 

me begin by sending my appreciation to Doug for taking the 

time to come over, and your extension of your office and the 

department to come and take some time to sit down and discuss 

a 

number of pieces of legislation, and in specific, the Bill that we 

have before us. 

 

As we've had discussion previously, Mr. Minister, I want to 

indicate that mediation was something that's been on the back 

of my mind for the past little while.  I appreciate the fact that 

your department is taking the time to look at the process and 

look at the problems that arise, namely the effect that a marital 

break-up can have on a family, and certainly the problems that 

couples can have in trying to sit down and rationalize where 

they are in their relationship, the fact of whether or not the 

relationship should be discontinued; and when they make they 

make that final choice, how they go about in coming to some 

kind of compromise in that relationship, especially when it 

comes to property and family members. 

 

I think one of the major problems we have in our society today, 

and I think it's unfortunate, Mr. Minister, is that we have so 

many couples choosing . . . or to make that choice of deciding 

to end a relationship rather than looking at a way in which they 

can, as adults, look at the relationship with some responsibility 

to trying to build on the relationship, and even thinking of 

children that are involved. 

 

Because I think, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it doesn't 

speak well of our society when our families are being attacked 

day in and day out, and that it seems to be a lot more 

convenient for couples to decide to end a relationship or to 

terminate a relationship simply because they find it more 

convenient; when at the end of the day I'm sure if you talked to 

a lot of people who . . . and couples that have terminated a 

relationship, the relationship they've left and maybe the new 

one they've entered into down the road, they may find that what 

they were looking for -- the Utopia that they were possibly 

looking for just by walking away from one -- wasn't necessarily 

there.  That maybe there were a lot of good points in either/or 

partner that possibly should have been looked at. 

 

And I think when we're looking at mediation we're talking of 

how do you simplify the process?  How do you get couples to 

sit down and rationalize their decision?  How do you get them 

to look objectively at dividing up what they've accumulated as 

far as equity they have in the home or assets that have been 

built up?  I think when we look at the process before us and 

look at the Bill before us, Mr. Minister, I think it's appropriate 

and it's fine and it's positive to be developing a mediation 

process. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, number one, is there 

anything in the mediation process that would allow for and 

maybe encourage couples to take a look at or sit down and 

objectively to view their relationship as to a way and means of 

maybe continuing or -- could I use the word -- accepting some 

responsibility of looking at the alternatives; and then deciding 

that maybe it would be more appropriate for couples to look at 

continuing to build or to renew a relationship rather than look 

at totally disbanding that relationship? 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

Does the mediation process that we're talking of in this piece of 

legislation, sit down and work on rebuilding; or is this 

specifically just a means of addressing how do you divide up 

the assets after the final decision has been made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I have had the advantage of 

several conversations with the member about these kinds of 

issues, and so I feel that both he and I are on familiar ground 

and we share many of the same concerns. 

 

I have in my own experience known of situations where young 

people who have married, run into some of the early problems 

that are frequently encountered during the first months of 

marriage and adjusting to marriage, suddenly decide they're not 

made for each other and they want a divorce.  And that 

becomes their whole focus, to get rid of this relationship and go 

back to being single again.  Sometimes there will even be a 

child, or at least a pregnancy.  And these are heartbreaking 

situations, and society is certainly not the better when they 

occur. 

 

It is difficult to say a lot of good things about our society in 

terms of dealing with a problem like that.  We don't have good 

mechanisms in our society, first of all to teach people about 

marriage before they go into it, to prepare them for marriage, to 

give them the opportunity to become educated in how to 

successfully live with another person in marriage. 

 

Now I pause to say, Mr. Chair, that we're a lot better at it now 

than we were years ago.  There are counselling sessions that are 

offered by many of the churches and by other organizations to 

prepare people for marriage, but on the whole, we don't do a 

very good job about that.  Nor are we very well equipped to 

deal with the couple, in my earlier example, where they just 

simply decide after a relatively short trial at this marriage 

business that they should remain committed to it and should 

stay married.  And that's one of the situations that the member 

is speaking of when he asks his question. 

 

The procedure described in this Bill will introduce an element 

into these unhappy situations that will give them a good 

opportunity to review their situation and review whether or not 

they should actually go ahead with their plan to divorce. 

 

Now it is important to keep in mind that when they reach the 

orientation and screening process in their divorce action, they 

have already gone through a lot of evaluations, a lot of 

consideration of their position, and they have . . . at least one of 

them has decided to commence a divorce action. 

 

So one wishes you could catch them at an earlier stage, but we 

have no control over that.  But at least when they have just 

begun the action we introduce this requirement, that they sit 

down with the mediator and they talk about the mediation and 

they talk about whether their particular situation is appropriate 

for mediation.  Very often it isn't, as we will no doubt get into 

in this exchange.  But they will, particularly if they 

continue on with mediation, have an opportunity to review 

whether or not they really want to go ahead with their divorce. 

 

And that, I think, is an improvement.  We have no mechanism 

in the law now to deal with that.  The only mechanism that we 

have is a pre-trial conference, and that's not bad but it's very 

late in the day.  By that time they have already closed their 

pleadings, they have exchanged their documents, they've gone 

through an examination for discovery which can be very 

difficult and very disruptive, very alienating in some 

circumstances. 

 

So it's better than not having a session, but it is late in the day. 

And one of our hopes is that by having the mediation session 

early on in the civil action, in the court action, in the divorce 

action, there will be an opportunity to have a discussion on a bit 

friendlier basis or less combative basis than the kind of 

discussions that might take place at a pre-trial hearing. 

 

By that method, we're quite hopeful that many of these actions 

won't go forward; that there will be reconciliation.  It is in the 

interests of society that situations that can be reconciled, should 

be reconciled; and that marriages that can be saved, should be 

saved.  Where they can't of course, then the system should 

operate with the least amount of pain and with the least amount 

of ill feelings, with all that that involves. 

 

(1645) 

 

Just to close my remarks, as I've said earlier, this kind of 

action, divorce action and the issues that surround divorce, can 

be very difficult and very emotional, and these are not one-time 

events that once they're over are over.  These are just one step 

along a relationship that continues after the divorce action in 

many, many cases -- in the majority of cases involving the 

custody of children and the access of children -- and they have 

to live together in a relationship.  So the process should be as 

painless as possible. 

 

Having by those remarks really gone beyond the member's 

question, I want to go back to the member's question and say 

that he and I are of one mind: if a marriage can be saved, it 

should be saved; if reconciliation is possible, it should be 

achieved.  And this process that we're proposing in this Bill 

would, I think, be a good step in that direction. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, regarding 

the mediation process, is the Department of Justice now going 

to appoint a number of people that will form a mediation 

committee or commission? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The department now has a cadre of 

mediators under contract that have been providing mediation 

services in respect of other programs.  These people will be 

conducting the first session.  In the case of divorce actions, 

which is what we had been talking about, they would conduct 

the original orientation and screening session. 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

The orientation part of it is so that people will know what 

mediation is all about and how it would work in the context of 

their particular case.  The screening process is extremely 

important particularly in family law, because in some situations 

mediation is just not appropriate. There are in many of those 

situations, such an imbalance of power as between the husband 

and wife, that mediation doesn't serve any useful purpose and 

we shouldn't kid ourself about it, so that the screening process 

up front will sort out those cases. 

 

If the parties decide to proceed with mediation beyond that first 

session, it will then be up to them whether they want to involve 

a private sector mediator, and there are quite a few of them in 

this province, or whether they want to continue with the 

department staff. And that will be up to them.  In either case, it 

will be on a fee-for-service basis, but the choice will be theirs. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, is that 

you're going to utilize personnel that are already in place in a 

number of other areas of mediation to begin the process. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is what process then, or 

what format would couples use in calling the department?  Is 

the process initiated by the department or will it be initiated by 

the couples involved?  How we're going to inform individuals 

that there is a mediation process that they should possibly look 

into and take advantage of before they proceed even further 

along in their deliberations towards divorce and possible court 

action. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The mediation procedure will be 

initiated by officials in the court-house, and the local registrar 

or one of the staff will see the triggering point.  They'll be 

familiar with this legislation of course and they'll see the 

triggering point, and they'll set up the original mediation.  And 

after that it depends upon the circumstances and the choices 

that are made. 

 

I might mention that this process does not prevent earlier 

mediation, which is not uncommon in family law situations.  

Mediators are often involved earlier on, and we expect that that 

will continue as lawyers and as parties try to sort out their 

differences without ever starting a divorce action.  We have no 

control over those, nor should we, because they're a matter for 

private individuals.  But once these actions are started, then the 

process will be triggered by officials of the court. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, a 

couple can choose . . . and I take it that once the legislation is 

passed that the department is going to make every effort to let 

the public know that there is a format in place, that there is a 

mediation process in place, should you seek or should you want 

to follow recourse and seek some advice in a marital breakup. 

 

If the couple doesn't happen to choose that and goes to the 

court, the court then has the ability to sit down or to indicate to 

the couple that maybe they feel that it 

would appropriate for them to review this process of mediation 

before they would go further in the litigation.  Is that what I 

understand, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There will be, Mr. Chair, a way to bring 

this legislation to the attention of the public.  The exact shape 

of it hasn't been determined yet, but we're in consultation with 

the bar and with the private mediators to establish an 

implementation plan.  But the member is quite right, we need to 

be able to . . . we need to tell the public that this is available 

and that this will be part of the process. 

 

That leads to the second part of the question.  My response is 

that the first session, either in family law disputes or in 

ordinary civil disputes, the first session is mandatory -- the 

parties have to come to it.  If they don't come to it, as the 

member will have seen, the legislation is . . . you know, the 

process can be quite drastic.  If they deliberately flout it, the 

court can go so far as to strike out their pleadings.  And in the 

case of a . . . if it's a defendant that refused to come, the 

plaintiff wins -- the plaintiff wins his or her claim.  And if it's a 

plaintiff who refuses to come, the claim is dismissed, and it can 

actually go that far.  So that first attendance is required. 

 

Now where they go from there depends on them.  The system is 

not compulsory in the sense that they have to stay in it.  If they 

go and they listen to it and they think, well that's not for me, 

then that's not for them.  You can lead a horse to water but you 

can't make it drink.  And that's the governing principle here. 

 

It's interesting to note that the process is working already.  The 

private mediators tell us that the mediation load is starting to 

pick up and it's as a result of people reading about it and 

hearing about it, and they're interested in seeing whether or not 

that can help them in their situation.  So it's beginning to work 

already. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm glad to hear that 

there are people actually looking at this process because I think 

at the end of the day it has the potential to at least create a 

situation where couples will at least part with amiable 

objectives and make it somewhat agreeable. 

 

Does the Bill . . . one of the major concerns that arises in a 

separation is the determination of assets that are included and I 

think you would argue that it's what people bring into a 

relationship.  Is that included in the assets, or is it assets and 

what's ever accumulated during the relationship that should be 

really addressed as far as how you would part those assets or 

divide those assets? 

 

And the other thing is something that would be passed on say 

from a family, through a family relationship or an estate, let's 

say in the circumstances of a farm where maybe a mother 

would pass on to her son something that had been in the family 

for generations, and that's due to a will.  Is that then all of a 

sudden included as part of a division in a court procedure 

regarding divorce settlements? 



April 25, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member raises very important 

questions that I'm not able to answer as I stand here.  The issue 

of what assets are shareable and what are not are issues that are 

governed by The Matrimonial Property Act and the sort of 

complex of law that is grown around that Act.  And I don't 

know the answers to the . . . or I don't know the general 

principles that apply because I have not practised matrimonial 

property law, and I don't know the rules. 

 

But I do know that those questions are the very questions that 

are before the courts in all kinds of cases involving matrimonial 

property.  And that applies also to estates and what is the status 

of estate property.  Again, that's determined by a judge in 

accordance with the provisions of The Matrimonial Property 

Act. 

 

I can say, though, that those questions are the very kinds of 

questions that will be mediated under this legislation if the 

parties elect to proceed past the first session with mediation in 

order to try and unravel their various issues.  It will be very 

much in the centre of many disputes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you and your 

officials for the work you've put into the process of bringing 

forward this piece of legislation.  I think it's appropriate that 

we've taken the initiative and brought it out in the open.  

Because I'm sure that at the end of the day we may find we may 

be able to save some relationships simply by getting people to 

sit down with a mediator, whether it means one or two people 

or three people just to sit down and converse with them.  On 

the other hand too, I think that it's imperative that we take this 

time to sit down and have this discussion with individuals. 

 

Now I know it's not going to address all the situations out there.  

There's no doubt there will be certain situations that would 

come up where mediators may just look at the end of the day, 

even from their first discussions may determine that it isn't in 

their best interests.  They really don't have a lot to gain.  And 

I'm not sure, do the mediators or the individuals or the court, 

can they make that decision as well, just to say to a couple: 

well I'm sorry, we've gone as far as we can; we're going to have 

to leave it up to you.  Do they make that or is it just left up to 

the couples to determine whether or not they proceed with an 

extended mediation format? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mediation is a very dynamic process 

involving the mediator, who is at the end of the day only a 

facilitator for communication and only someone who can 

encourage the resolution of issues.  At the end of the day 

though it's up to the people involved to determine whether 

they're prepared to make the compromises that they have to 

make, and at the end of the day it's up to them to decide 

whether they're going to keep on. 

 

We would expect the mediators to do everything reasonably 

possible to keep the process going and to achieve agreement or 

resolution of the issues.  But at 

the end of the day it's up to the people involved to either fix it 

or let a judge decide to either settle it or let the ordinary 

processes of the law take over and have a decision made to 

resolve the issues. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one more question before we move 

on, and that is, we've been discussing mediation in the process 

between couples in a marital breakup.  Would this same 

process apply . . .  Let's say you've got a family business and 

you're trying to determine how to divide and settle a business 

that . . . say partners want to part ways, would the same process 

apply there?  Would there be a mediation process available 

under this format? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The provisions apply to all civil 

disputes.  It applies to family law type disputes in a slightly 

different way, but it applies to all disputes.  If your business 

issues arose between people who are not married, again they 

would go through the kind of mediation that's provided in the 

Act for ordinary civil cases.  The only difference is that in a 

family law proceeding the first session is the orientation and 

screening process.  Otherwise they embark upon the same 

process of mediation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to take a moment to 

thank the minister and his officials for having taken the time to 

come and address the questions we've been raising, and also 

thank you to the officials for their time and effort and the 

consultation we had even prior to the introduction of the Bill in 

the House.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I appreciate those remarks from the hon. 

member, Mr. Chair, as does the department, and I would add 

my own thanks to my officials for coming to assist us today. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Court of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1988/Projet de loi no. 49 -- Loi 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur le Tribunal de la sécurité 

routière de la Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 1994 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

provide for Mediation 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It now being past the hour of 5 o'clock, 

the Committee of Finance stands recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


