




















































Hansard: May 04, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2033 

 May 4, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we begin with introduction of guests, 

we will take the introduction of guests of all those except for 

those who were special guests this morning.  So could we take 

the introduction of all those except the special guests that will 

be introduced a little later. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 56 grade 7 students from W.F. Ready School in 

Regina.  They're in your west gallery today and I'm looking 

forward to having them watching the proceedings, look 

carefully at what is occurring in the Assembly, and be ready to 

ask me some very interesting and informed questions when we 

come together and meet in room 218 after for a photo and 

drinks as well. 

 

I'd ask all members of the Assembly to give a warm welcome 

to the students from W.F. Ready School today.  They are 

accompanied by Heather Gosselin and Karen Howard. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 

to you and the other members of this Assembly, 22 grade 11 

and 12 students from Blaine Lake.  And they are accompanied 

by their teachers, Pat Sonntag and Gerry Tkachuk.  I will be 

meeting them in a few minutes for pictures and a few easy 

questions, I expect.  I'd like to ask you to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce through you to members of the Assembly and to you 

three ladies in your gallery on the top row.  They are Kami 

Frasier, Vicki Lissel, and Gloria Blake, all from Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, and together they form a support group for adult 

survivors of childhood sexual abuse.  And they are here this 

afternoon to proceed and watch the proceedings in this 

legislature.  And I would ask all members to help me welcome 

them this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

take this opportunity to join with the member from Redberry in 

welcoming the students from Blaine Lake.  I grew up in 

Marcelin which was the very next town and we had quite a 

rivalry in high school playing football and other sports.  My 

mom lives in Blaine Lake today and my sister also lives in 

Blaine Lake.  So I would like to take this opportunity to 

welcome the people from Blaine Lake here today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's quite 

a surprise.  I certainly too want to take this opportunity to 

welcome one of my favourite 350 cousins, Pat Sonntag, here 

today.  It's nice to see you, Pat.  I hope you enjoy the 

proceedings here today.  So welcome, Pat. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Earlier today at Government House tribute 

was paid to nine Saskatchewan recipients of national and 

provincial honours.  These nine recipients and their guests are 

seated in the Speaker's gallery today.  We want to recognize 

them in the Legislative Chamber today. 

 

I want to call upon the Premier, then the Leader of the 

Opposition, to make a few brief remarks.  MLAs (Member of 

the Legislative Assembly) will then have an opportunity to 

introduce their constituent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, some of your colleagues, some of our colleagues, 

and certainly myself, we had the privilege and the pleasure of 

congratulating our special guests at the special ceremony at 

Government House. 

 

At that time this morning I said -- and I repeat for the benefit of 

the House this afternoon -- that the recipients of these honours 

in your gallery are exceptional people who have given of 

themselves in service to others.  Whether in an official 

capacity, in a professional role, or simply from their goodness 

of the heart and community spirit, each of these individuals can 

take pride and satisfaction in the contributions that they have 

made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the historian Barbara Tuchman wrote the 

following, quote: Honour wears different coats to different 

eyes.  End quote. 

 

Well I think, if I may be permitted, that notable quotation can 

be put in this context.  The notable accomplishments of those 

whom we honour today have been recognized by many 

different eyes -- the eyes of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  This fact leaves absolutely no doubt that they 

are indeed some of the finest citizens to be found in our 

province and in our country.  And I want to personally 

congratulate them and welcome them to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed an 

honour once again for me to rise and join the Hon. Premier in 

welcoming our special guests today to the Legislative 

Assembly.  As the Premier said, we're honouring people from 

all different walks of life today who have contributed in so 

many different ways to the fabric of our province.  It . . . are 

careers of long standing, careers dedicated to helping 

individuals, 



2034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

and also careers that by their job daily interact with putting 

one's life on the line for others. 

 

And in the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, we certainly have a 

collection of such people who have done it all.  And it behoves 

us as legislators in the province of Saskatchewan to recognize 

people who have contributed so much. 

 

So welcome to our Assembly, ladies and gentlemen, and your 

spouses and friends; and it is indeed an honour for me to be 

here today to honour you.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure on behalf of 

the member from Greystone to introduce to the Assembly the 

Hon. Dr. Stephen Worobetz, Officer of the Order of Canada 

and recipient of the Military Cross. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to the 

Assembly, Mr. Edmund Alexander Sebestyen, Member of the 

Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, it's my honour to introduce 

Mr. Douglas Thompson from Assiniboia and Mrs. Thompson; 

they're up in the gallery there.  Mr. Thompson is the Member of 

the Order of Canada, and I'd like you to join me in welcoming 

them to our Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce 

to the Assembly, Mrs. Marjorie Sinclair Butterworth, 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's my pleasure to introduce to all assembled here, Mr. David 

Greyeyes, Member of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and 

Member of the Order of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure and honour 

to introduce Corporal Daniel Joseph Smith, Star of Courage. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce 

Mr. Kevin Gelinas, recipient of the Medal of Bravery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

it's my pleasure to introduce on behalf of my colleague, the 

member from Rosemont, Constable Marlin Kroeker, recipient 

of the Medal of Bravery, and his wife, Susan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague, 

the member for Regina Albert North, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to the Assembly Mr. Todd Sorensen, Medal of 

Bravery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet, one 

of the recipients earlier this year of the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit was Ruth Pawson of Regina.  She had hoped to be here 

but passed away a short time ago. 

 

Ruth Pawson was a well-known, well-respected, and 

well-loved educator and artist.  We are joined today by her 

sisters, Ms. Hattie Pawson, Mrs. Shirley McIntosh, Mrs. Searle 

Dufour.  And we would recognize the memory and wonderful 

contribution made to Saskatchewan by Ruth Pawson by 

extending them a warm welcome today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of this Assembly, 24 grade 6 

students from Shaunavon, on behalf of my colleague from 

Shaunavon.  They are here today to see the workings of the 

Assembly and I will meet with them after question period.  I'd 

ask the members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Garden Month 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

in the House today to draw to the attention of all members that 

this month, May, is National Garden Month.  This is an annual 

observance by the Canadian Garden Council, the Saskatchewan 

Nursery Trades Association, and all ministers of Agriculture 

and Food throughout Canada, federal and provincial. 

 

The designation of May as National Garden Month is most 

appropriate because spring is a time of renewal and hope.  It is 

the time of year when we all take great pleasure in witnessing 

change and growth. 

 

In Saskatchewan, spring is the time of year when almost 

everyone's thoughts turn to gardening in some fashion.  And 

whether it be a market garden, kitchen garden, or a variety of 

pots sprouting geraniums and a few carrots on a high-rise 

balcony, the benefits of the activity accrue to the gardener. 

 

We are told that it is uplifting mentally and spiritually to plan a 

garden, to put those plans into action, and to 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2035 

reap the results.  We are also told that it is good physical 

exercise.  In many ways gardening of any type contributes to 

the environment and the economy. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the horticultural industry which includes 

nursery, greenhouse, fruit farms, market gardens, and 

commercial vegetable gardens, creates about 1,000 jobs during 

the growing season.  Activity in the industry results in sales of 

about $100 million annually in plant products alone. 

 

The rewards of gardening are many -- nutritious food, a 

summer of sunshine, the joy of creating beauty and bounty, a 

pantry of preserves in the fall.  May is National Garden Month 

and I encourage everyone to participate in this annual 

celebration of spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Champion Curlers Honoured 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like 

to take a few moments to talk about a topic that I'm getting 

pretty good at and that's curling -- talking about curling, not 

curling itself, I hasten to add. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few short weeks ago all of us in this Assembly 

had the pleasure of congratulating Saskatchewan's own Sandra 

Peterson's curling rink for their victory at the world curling 

championship in Germany.  And I think we all felt a great deal 

of pride on that occasion.  Tonight, Mr. Speaker, we will have a 

further opportunity to congratulate Ms. Peterson's team and 

thank them for acting as first-rate ambassadors for 

Saskatchewan to the entire world. 

 

Tonight we will be pleased to join with hon. members from 

both sides of this House in attending an Evening With 

Champions, a public dinner held in honour of our curling 

superstars.  And indeed, Mr. Speaker, superstars they are. 

 

We will not only be enjoying distinguished company at this 

event, we will also, Mr. Speaker, be enjoying the newly 

renovated facilities of the Regina's old VIA Rail station, which 

I understand are quite spectacular. 

 

The proceeds from tonight's dinner will be donated to the Marj 

Mitchell Curling Foundation, which will help ensure that 

Saskatchewan's hard-fought, well-deserved curling reputation 

is preserved for the future. 

 

I would like to ask all members to join with me in extending 

our best wishes to the organizers of this event, and in once 

again congratulating these outstanding citizens of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SIAST Accreditation 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, today I rise to congratulate the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 

SIAST, for recently receiving accreditation for several 

programs at three campuses. 

The decision for the endorsement came from the Ottawa-based 

Canadian Technology Accreditation Board.  What makes it so 

special is the fact that it is very rare for technical institutes to 

receive this accreditation.  Only a handful of technical schools 

in all of Canada have accreditation.  The accreditation will 

allow students with diplomas in those programs to have their 

diplomas recognized Canada-wide.  This is of great importance 

for Saskatchewan students looking for jobs beyond our borders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the newly accredited programs at the SIAST 

Palliser campus in Moose Jaw include architectural 

engineering, civil engineering, computer-aided design and 

drafting, electrical engineering, surveying engineering, and 

water resources engineering. 

 

The Wascana campus in Regina was accredited for the 

electronic communications program and the Kelsey campus in 

Saskatoon for CAD/CAM (computer aided drafting/computer 

aided mapping) engineering, industrial electronics and 

mechanical engineering. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to acknowledge in this 

Assembly the national accreditation SIAST has received for 

many of its programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Spinal Health Care Week 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I want to 

draw to the attention of the members of the Legislative 

Assembly that the week of May 1 to 7 has been designated by 

the Chiropractors' Association of Saskatchewan as Spinal 

Health Care Week. 

 

Spinal Health Care Week is an annual undertaking of the 

chiropractors' association and endeavours to educate students 

and the public in general about the health and economic 

benefits of preventing spinal injuries.  Back pain is a common 

ailment and affects a significant portion of our population.  In 

cooperation with the province's school boards, various means 

such as posters, booklets and interactive exercise sheets are 

used to encourage students to develop good spinal health care 

habits at a young age.  I know most of us who suffer from back 

pain wish we had had more opportunity for education and 

physical fitness to prevent our troubles and maintain good 

health. 

 

The worthwhile efforts of the CAS (Chiropractors' Association 

of Saskatchewan) in this regard support our government's move 

towards a more wellness-oriented approach to health care.  

Over the years the chiropractic profession has played an 

important role in the maintenance of a high quality health 

system in the province and will no doubt, through initiatives 

such as Spinal Health Care Week, continue to make a 

significant contribution to new directions in health.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

Goodluck Ventures Tire Fences 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would 

like to inform the Assembly about a very resourceful and 

innovative farm family from the Biggar area. 

 

The past few years have been tough for Ken, Marie, and their 

son Wes on the Gidluck farm.  Poor economic conditions and 

bad luck with the weather has made it hard for the family to 

make ends meet.  Wes was forced to spend eight winters in 

Alberta working at the oil patch in order to help the family 

income. 

 

But things may be turning around for the Gidluck family -- 

Goodluck Ventures, an innovative fencing company that the 

Gidluck family created with the help of Dean MacDonald last 

year.  Fences here are not made of traditional wood or barbed 

wire but instead are produced from steel-belted radial tires.  Six 

hundred tires are needed to make a mile of five-strand rubber 

fencing.  Each strand is 1 inch in width. 

 

The idea was born when Ken was visiting a horse-race track in 

the United States.  He noticed the fences around the track were 

lined with tires, so if the horses went off the track they would 

not be hurt. 

 

Goodluck Ventures was quickly formed and tire fences were 

being produced. Word caught on about these fences and many 

people, especially those who raise livestock, have purchased 

this new fence product so they can no longer have to worry 

about their livestock being badly cut by fences made of barbed 

wire.  Today the family business is doing better than ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel the Gidlucks are a prime example of 

imagination and fortitude that all Saskatchewan farmers 

possess.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

questions that I have today are directed to the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Madam Minister, Vicki Lissel, whom I introduced earlier, was 

diagnosed with hepatitis C in 1992.  Hepatitis C, as you know, 

is a terminal form of hepatitis which attacks the liver.  Even 

more unfortunate, Madam Minister, is that Ms. Lissel 

contracted this deadly disease from tainted blood she received 

during a transfusion after complications in an operation in 

1984. 

 

Madam Minister, could you tell us how many individuals have 

contracted hepatitis C through tainted blood in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I don't have the details of that 

information; I'd have to take notice. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  My 

information, as supplied by the lady, is that in 1992 there were 

59 cases, 59, of hepatitis C in Saskatchewan as a result of 

tainted blood and close to 1,000 across Canada.  That, Madam 

Minister, is a much higher total than those individuals who 

contracted HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) through the 

same tainted blood. 

 

Madam Minister, you were willing to develop programs, 

compensation and other forms of help for 29 Saskatchewan 

AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) sufferers and 

their families, yet hepatitis C is just as deadly and people are 

four times more likely to contract hepatitis C than they are 

HIV. 

 

In the AIDS package, claimants received $20,000 immediately 

and $30,000 until they die.  In addition, spouses get $20,000 at 

the time of death and $20,000 for four years thereafter. 

Children, dependent children, get $4,000 for four years. 

 

Madam Minister, is your government willing to work towards 

compensation for the over 59 Saskatchewan families who are 

dealing with hepatitis from tainted blood from that same 

source? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I would certainly be 

prepared to meet with the people who are suffering from this 

affliction.  I of course cannot say at this point in time that there 

is compensation in that regard, but I would certainly be 

interested in looking into the matter further and hearing what 

they had to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 

Madam Minister, for that commitment. 

 

Now while waiting for a liver transplant to fight this disease, 

Vicki Lissel is paying $140 per week for Intron A, which is the 

only drug that has been proven successful in treating her 

condition.  In addition, she's paying over $100 per month for 

other medication to fight hepatitis C.  All totalled, 59 

Saskatchewan families are paying high drug costs each month 

to combat this terrible disease with no financial help from the 

provincial or federal governments. 

 

Vicki and her husband paid the majority of $12,840 last year in 

medication and supplies, and they only have a gross income of 

$30,000, Madam Minister.  Your government is willing to 

increase monetary privileges it seemed to people who drive 

drunk and cause accidents.  But Vicki and 58 other 

Saskatchewan families are not at fault for contracting hepatitis 

C through tainted blood, yet your government has offered these 

people no help, no assistance.  Vicki has contacted your office 

and your department to no avail, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, what steps have you taken, and will you 

commit to take steps, to help individuals deal with 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

the exorbitant costs of getting a supply of this life-giving drug? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

opposite for bringing this matter to my attention.  I think that 

the way we should handle it at this point is for the individuals 

involved to contact my office.  I will tell them that I should 

have a meeting with them; we will talk about the 

circumstances; I will talk to the Department of Health about it.  

And that is the commitment that I can make at this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, will you further commit to 

meet with this lady this afternoon? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Sure. 

 

Judges' Salaries Legislation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, this 

morning as I was grabbing a quick bite of breakfast, I happened 

to pick up one of our national papers; in fact it was The Globe 

and Mail.  And it relates a story of how you as Attorney 

General and chief prosecutor implemented and then broke your 

own law.  The article said that judges are beginning to go to 

court to determine their constitutional rights.  And that appears 

to be where you are headed, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you claim when you overruled the law, when you 

changed the law, you did it because you were trying to save 

money, that you needed to save money.  I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if you could tell us what type of costs you may be 

facing should the judges go to court.  I'm sure that your 

department has done a review of this, what may happen.  And 

could you give us what those costs may be, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I read the same article, Mr. Speaker, and 

although my name was mentioned near the end of the article, 

most of the article was about the rather dramatic action that 

Premier Klein from Alberta took with respect to the judges of 

that province. 

 

I understand that he is going to be sued by judges.  I don't know 

that we are going to be sued.  As far as we know, we're not.  If 

we are, we'll just have to cross that bridge when we come to it, 

but right now we're not anticipating that to happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I find it 

interesting that you would continually refer to the Premier to 

the west of us and I guess that's one way of dodging the bullet. 

 

Mr. Minister, we've seen on numerous occasions where your 

government has been taken to court; in fact I would think 

you've been taken to court more times than the National 

Enquirer.  And I would assume that you would have an idea of 

what the court costs 

should be should you end up in court because I would think, 

Mr. Minister, in view of the circumstances we've been facing . . 

. and just let's look at an example.  Your Department of Justice 

was quick to release the cost of the Martensville trial and then 

you used cost as one of the reasons, one of your reasons, to 

refuse an inquiry into the case. 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Minister, that your department also has a ballpark 

figure of what we and the taxpayers of the province may be 

facing should the provincial court judges challenge the rulings 

of this House.  Could you give us those costs, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, the department has not made any 

such estimate because frankly we don't expect to be sued.  We 

don't understand on what ground we would be sued and we're 

not expecting it. 

 

So far as the Martensville case is concerned, we assembled 

those figures as a result of a freedom of information request 

which was made to us, and as is required we produced that 

information.  But we have made no calculations at all 

anticipating what we don't expect to happen so far as the judges 

are concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, your no-fault legislation is coming 

out of nowhere and has left people bewildered.  No-fault 

insurance was not an issue in the 1991 election.  It wasn't even 

mentioned in the throne speech.  Changes to our public 

insurance system should not be made without that mandate. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you believe that you have the mandate to 

change the insurance system without public debate on the 

issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, as a member of the 

government, most definitely we do have a mandate.  We made 

it very clear that fiscal integrity was an important part of this 

government.  When those members are talking from across and 

the Liberals, maybe they want a 24 per cent increase for the 

people of the province to pay for their insurance.  On 37 per 

cent for the Leader of the Liberal Party. 

 

Over a year we don't want to see the 24 per cent increase for a 

lot of people who are living in this province.  We want to see 

something with better benefits and so on.  I think that it's very 

important that we had a two-year process in this, we had a 

Sobeco report with members from the legal profession, from 

the medical profession, from the consumers association, and 

also from the brokers who sat in and examined the situation. 

 

We have looked at this report, we have heard consultation from 

the people of the province on the 1-800 number, etc.  Yes, we 

do have a mandate, and 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

yes, we do have a good program for the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, obviously you believe in 

no-fault.  You are spending $150,000 of taxpayers' money on 

an ad campaign to present your side of the argument.  Part of 

the democratic process is recognizing and respecting the other 

sides of an issue.  There are credible people with legitimate 

concerns about no-fault, but you have denied them the 

opportunity to present these concerns in a public debate. 

 

Mr. Minister, if no-fault is the right system for Saskatchewan, 

shouldn't it withstand the scrutiny of a public debate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, we've had excellent 

representatives from the province of Saskatchewan who have 

sat in and listened to the people of this province.  They have 

come out with a program . . . maybe the Liberals are against the 

seniors.  The seniors in the province of Saskatchewan are going 

to have the best, not only in North America but in the world.  

Right now the existing system discriminates against the seniors 

after four years, after they go right now in terms of receiving 

loss of income.  In this program the seniors will be receiving 

something for the length of their injury or for life.  Maybe the 

Liberals are against the seniors of this province. Maybe that's 

what it's all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you had dismissed the 

opinions of the legal community on no-fault as self-serving.  

You have ignored the calls of the consumers' association and 

the Saskatchewan Head Injury Association for public debate 

and public hearings.  I have here a letter from Dr. Michael 

Rushton, department of economics, University of Regina, an 

authority frequently quoted by government members. 

 

Professor Rushton says, and I quote: In addition to questionable 

value judgements the empirical analyses of the current system 

are also faulty.  He asks the government to delay the 

implementation of no fault until the policy has been assessed 

with the care it warrants. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you listen to these concerns and involve 

experts in a public debate with you or your officials on this 

issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, we are not only involving 

expertise in this province, we are involving the public in this 

province.  People can phone in at any time on the 1-800 

number.  And they have done so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they have said, yes you have a tremendous program in 

regards to home-makers; yes you have a tremendous program 

in regards to seniors; and for the 

first time youth have been recognized in this province up to 

$13,000 a year.  And yes we have listened to the lawyer and 

legal community as well. 

 

We have the right to sue. The no-fault system in Quebec and in 

Manitoba does not have the right to sue.  In Saskatchewan we 

have the right to sue for loss of income. 

 

We also have, Mr. Speaker, the right to mediation independent 

from SGI.  I think that is tremendous.  We also have over on 

top of the mediation, the right for the people to go to the Court 

of Queen's Bench.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think we have a 

tremendous program for the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you have been touting the 

study of Sobeco Ernst & Young.  Professor Gary Tompkins, 

head of the economics department of the University of Regina 

says: 

 

 The foundation for the no-fault legislation was a report by 

Sobeco Ernst & Young, which is riddled with unsupported 

claims, inaccuracies, and misleading statements. 

 

And that is from the head of the economics department of the 

University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Minister, before you plunge head first into the no-fault 

insurance, will you open the issue to debate in the public arena 

so that these experts can make their case to the public -- a case 

that you have obviously chosen to ignore. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, again the member 

concentrates strictly on . . . only on expertise.  Yes, we 

recognize the expertise in this province, but we also recognize 

the public at large who want a good program.  The public of 

this province don't want a 24 per cent increase.  Maybe the 

Liberal Party wanted a 24 per cent increase for the judges, a 24 

per cent increase in regards to the insurance rates, but we on 

this side do not want that 24 per cent increase.  And when 

people talk about consumers, that is exactly the issue that 

they're talking about, and the improved benefits that I have 

outlined. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Listening to 

the minister's response is kind of interesting.  He seems to 

suggest that he's the only one who has experts that have been 

more than 25 miles from home and that they're the only ones 

that are valid.  There are others, Mr. Minister, that are equally 

valid. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's become increasingly apparent that your 

no-fault scheme has many serious flaws and that you personally 

lack a thorough understanding of what the problems are, let 

alone what to do about them.  For the past two days you've 

been . . . we've been treated to the spectacle of you defending 

drunk drivers in this 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

legislature.  Then after one of your officials apparently 

explained the issue to you, you tell reporters that you will make 

amends . . . make amendments in this Act although you still 

have no idea what these amendments will look like. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't it time you simply admitted this Bill is 

seriously flawed, that you don't understand it yourself, and that 

it should be pulled from the legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I think there's a basic flaw in 

that person's thinking.  He did not listen to the tremendous 

advantages in regard to the seniors.  Maybe the member, 

including the Liberals, are against the seniors of this province.  

Maybe there is a flaw in his thinking that he is against the 

home-makers in this province.  Maybe that he's against . . . that 

both the Liberals and the Tories are against the youth in this 

province.  I think that there is a deep flaw of course in the 

person's overall questioning. 

 

I said yesterday in regards to drunken driving -- and I would 

add in that regard on criminal offences -- we are examining and 

getting input from the people; the people are phoning.  The 

thing that you have said no to in regards to the 800 number, we 

are providing and getting good input from the people of the 

province and they are saying good ideas to us.  And we will be 

introducing amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It seems the 

minister's idea of consultation is after you've passed the 

legislation, you tell people what's happened to it.  Your 1-800 

number, Mr. Minister, you must be listening to your own 

propaganda. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the most serious flaws in this Bill is the 

discrimination against low income people, including seniors.  

At the beginning of question period, Mr. Minister, I provided 

you with another real-life example that we received from the 

Yorkton bar association. 

 

In this case, a home-maker with two teenage children was 

permanently injured in a car accident in which the other driver 

was at fault.  She received a settlement between 130 and 

$150,000 plus medical expenses, plus interest.  Under no 

_fault, she would get $15,000 plus medical expenses.  And 

because she has no income, she would not have had the right to 

challenge this settlement in court. 

 

Mr. Minister, why isn't the right to go to court income tested, 

income tested under this no-fault scheme?  Why should high 

income earners have access to the court system when low 

income earners are denied that right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

has not been reading the Bill.  Everybody who disagrees can go 

to a mediation and they can go to the Court of Queen's Bench.  

I don't think that member has been reading the Bill properly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the member who 

talks to the people who phone in and provide excellent 

information to us, for that member to say that the people are 

propaganda is, I think, is a complete disrespect to the people of 

this province. 

 

I think when you look at the idea of home-makers, 

home-makers in the new plan will go anywhere up to 300,000.  

I think the information you've got is completely faulty again.  

You say 15,000.  You're looking at the existing plan on part II 

benefits and it's not even 15,000 -- the maximum they can get 

is $16,100. 

 

The new plan on home-makers will not only be $300,000; we 

will be paying them $550 a week in regards to personal care, 

$400 a week in regards to dependants -- $950 a week.  I think 

that is a winner for the home-makers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

home-makers get an income settlement if they have an income.  

If they have no income, they get nothing.  Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the members just get 

everything out of their system and then I'll recognize the . . . 

Order, order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

I'll repeat what I said.  If home-owners have no income, they 

receive nothing under your no-fault scheme. 

 

Mr. Minister, we've heard of the letter from Dr. Michael 

Rushton, the professor for economics at the U of R (University 

of Regina) and the head of a committee which is investigating 

the motor vehicle insurance system.  And he concluded that the 

Sobeco Ernst & Young study which you use to defend this 

policy contained insufficient analysis -- insufficient . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it is the same letter and it's a 

very important letter. 

 

With regard to the settlement for home-makers, Dr. Rushton 

says, and I quote: 

 

 Some recent changes on the basis of awards, such as making 

appropriate awards for lost home-making services, are taken 

by the authors of the study to represent an upward trend in 

awards which will necessarily continue.  This has not 

adequately been demonstrated. 

 

It's not been demonstrated that home-makers are going to 

receive adequate awards.  Mr. Minister, why 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

are you basing your handling of home-makers' awards on this 

faulty and insufficient analysis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, just in case he didn't listen 

last time, home-makers right now can get on part II, 

approximately $16,100.  If you go to court, you may get up to 

33 to $104,000, from the calculations that I have received.  We 

will be getting up to 300,000 in this new plan.  This means, on 

a specific weekly basis, we're looking at $550 on personal and 

home care; we're looking at $400 a week for dependants. 

 

We value the children of this province, along with the 

home-makers, because that is the dependants.  That is where 

we are putting our money.  The existing system is 

discriminatory to home-makers and we are improving that on 

the new personal injury protection plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, home-makers without 

children and no income receive nothing in that compensation 

package, not a thing.  Not a thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talk of $300,000, and I haven't seen that in 

the Bill either.  But the lady I gave you the example of did 

receive between 130 and $150,000 under the existing system.  

And the analysis shows that she would receive $15,000 under 

your current system. 

 

Mr. Minister, we mentioned the committee that is studying the 

insurance review, basing their review on what Sobeco and 

Ernst came up with in saying that it was faulty. 

 

Mr. Minister, Gary Tompkins, the head of the economics 

department, said that the foundation . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Yes, and it's a valid letter also.  The foundation of the 

no-fault legislation in the report from Ernst and Sobeco was 

inaccurate and misleading statements.  This policy is based on a 

poorly done study and more investigation needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you follow these recommendations that more 

investigations be done?  Will you do what this committee and 

many other people are asking -- delay this legislation until it 

can be properly assessed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, on the one hand, they say 

they speak for the poor people of this province.  They 

devastated this province for 15 billion in 10 years in a row.  Mr. 

Speaker, they asked experts from the university on how to run 

government at that time and they put us in debt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- They continue to look at expertise.  Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, we will listen to expertise and we will listen to the 

people of the province as well. 

 

I think one of the things in regards to facts because a person . . . 

these people never knew anything about fiscal facts.  On top of 

what I have said on the home-maker, the home-maker right 

now would only get 10,000 on rehab.  What we will be getting 

is 500,000 -- half a million dollars on rehabilitation for the 

home-maker as well. 

 

So I think this member should read the legislation and read the 

facts before he gets up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

you talk of consultation.  You should have done your 

consultation before you brought this Bill in -- not through 

1-800 number.  Will you pull this legislation, take it to the 

public in real public consultation, and listen to what the public 

have to say -- not only listen but act on their concerns? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, what the Liberals and the 

Tories are saying is that the seniors have to wait.  They've been 

waiting for years, Mr. Speaker, for a good program, and this is 

a program that will pay them for life.  Same with the 

home-makers. 

 

I think that's very important to look at that.  Maybe that you are 

saying no to the home-makers.  You are saying no to the youth 

who are for the first time recognized. 

 

I think that the Tories and the Liberals are only looking at 

themselves and trying to make an issue of delaying this thing 

without recognizing the needs of the people of this province. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read for a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- By leave, to make a public statement, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is this a ministerial statement? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- A statement of interest to the members. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

Establishment of Memorial Scholarships 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At this time I 

would like to pay tribute to three employees of the Department 

of Municipal Government who lost their lives serving the 

people of northern Saskatchewan.  We honour and celebrate the 

memory of Brian Goffin, Tom Fraser, and Darren Gatrell. 

 

Brian worked as a manager of the northern development branch 

of Saskatchewan Municipal Government.  Tom worked as a 

manager of northern community planning in the community 

planning services branch of Saskatchewan Municipal 

Government.  And Darren was a community planner with the 

northern community planning unit of the branch. 

 

Their work took them to many northern communities and it 

was during one of these trips that the plane in which they were 

riding crashed, taking their lives and the life of their pilot, 

Robert Glass.  The tragic accident occurred on October 12, 

1993. 

 

Friends and colleagues have established two scholarship funds 

in their memory.  One will be awarded to a northern resident to 

recognize his or her potential for contributing to the social, 

cultural, economic, and governmental development of the 

North.  The other will be awarded within the regional and 

urban development degree program at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There can be no more fitting tribute to the memory of Brian, 

Tom, and Darren than these scholarships which are dedicated 

to education and the betterment of the lives and institutions of 

northern people.  Brian Goffin, Tom Fraser, and Brian Gatrell 

are sorely missed by their colleagues in Municipal 

Government, and will be remembered for their dedication to 

service to the people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would join with 

the minister today on behalf of the opposition in the tribute to 

the employees from the Department of Municipal Government 

who lost their lives in a tragic accident in northern 

Saskatchewan.  And I think the minister said what is on the 

minds of all of us when she pays this tribute, that without 

dedicated public servants the Government of Saskatchewan 

simply would not function as it does today. 

 

And these three gentlemen often flew many miles around the 

northern part of our province, providing services to people that 

otherwise wouldn't have had them.  And it at times, I'm sure, is 

a very dangerous profession up there.  And we'd just like to 

join with the minister in paying tribute to these three 

individuals and hope that the scholarship funds set up on their 

behalf are very successful, so that others will recognize the 

contribution of public servants in this province well into the 

future. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce 

guests, please? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- It's a great pleasure to introduce to 

the Assembly through you, Mr. Speaker, three guests seated in 

your gallery.  They are Helen Sinclair, the president of the 

Canadian Bankers' Association; Graham Dixon, the regional 

director of the Canadian Bankers' Association; and Dieter 

Jentsch, who I believe is the Saskatchewan president of the 

Canadian Bankers' Association -- and if he isn't, he should be. 

 

So it's a great pleasure to introduce them and I look forward to 

meeting them in my office. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 61, The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 

to both urban and rural municipalities.  Accordingly the 

amendment gives legal effect to decisions reflected in the 

1994-95 budget.  The amendment provides for an overall 

adjustment in funding through the revenue-sharing program to 

urban and rural municipalities.  This funding adjustment 

implements a strategy which was announced last year as part of 

the government's overall balanced budget plan.  More 

specifically, the Bill provides for a reduction of 8 per cent in 

both the urban revenue-sharing pool and the rural 

revenue-sharing pool. 

 

In addition, another $2 million is redirected from the two 

revenue-sharing pools to the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency.  This represents municipalities' 

contribution towards core services provided by the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. 

 

With regard to the distribution of revenue-sharing funds, the 

provincial government in consultation with the municipal 

associations, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SARM 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), decided to 

apply the 8 per cent reduction on a uniform basis.  While these 

reductions represent some challenges for municipalities, I'm 

confident that municipalities will be able to manage in the same 

manner as they have managed in more difficult times. 

 

I commend municipal governments for their efforts in keeping 

local tax increases to a minimum while still being able to 

provide essential services to their residents.  Municipalities 

have shown leadership with their innovative ideas of ways to 

deliver services effectively and efficiently through 

intermunicipal cooperation.  I believe more of these kinds of 

cooperative efforts will be pursued by municipalities in the 

future. 

 

In closing, the total revenue-sharing fund of $77.8 million 

represents a significant level of financial support to 

Saskatchewan municipalities and I urge the members to support 

this Bill. 

 

Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 61, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few short 

comments, Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn the debate on this 

Bill, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we've seen in the past, we again see where the 

government is using third parties to offload some of the 

problems that they are facing, an offload as we've seen here, a 

reduction of $8.9 million in funding to both urban and rural 

municipalities. 

 

The thing I find interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that the present minister happened to be a mayor of a 

community and I'm wondering, if the minister put her 

mayoralty cap back on, wonder how she'd be reacting to a 

government reducing funding. 

 

Now certainly we can give local governments commendation 

for the way they have managed the funds that have been placed 

at their disposal.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, what local 

governments are finding, as school boards and health boards 

are also finding, it's becoming more increasingly difficult, 

especially in the rural communities, to continue to survive, and 

the fact that they have to pass on higher and higher rate 

increases through property taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't begrudge the fact that the government is 

in a position of having to make some tough decisions.  It's 

unfortunate that the present government didn't take the time 

while in opposition to give a strong purview to where the 

finances were at that time and would have been less demanding 

and offered some alternatives back in the late '80s and worked 

with the government of the time; we may not be facing some of 

the difficult decisions that have to be made today. 

 

So I might add, Mr. Speaker, that I commend the local 

municipalities, both the rural and urban 

municipalities, for the work they are doing -- the councillors 

and the reeves and the mayors for the way they are dispensing 

with their . . . disbursing their funds and the way they are 

providing services.  And we look forward to working with 

them. 

 

However I would suggest that they are finding it even 

somewhat difficult to continually look at reduction after 

reduction.  And I guess the big impact we have here is the fact 

that these reductions . . . the minister I think has indicated no 

more reductions next year.  I find it interesting that all of a 

sudden the reductions are over.  What it indicates is, do your 

reductions quickly in the first year or two and the last couple of 

years no reductions.  The same thing with the no-fault 

insurance -- no increase in insurance premiums but just wait till 

following the next provincial election; we've put a band-aid 

solution right now. 

 

So I think what we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is just 

another case of, it looks okay today, where are we going to be 

tomorrow?  Are we going to work with communities to help 

strengthen the communities and work with the funds?  Give 

them access to the funds that would give them the ability to 

provide the services to their individuals equally across the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

will move second reading of The Assessment Management 

Agency Amendment Act, 1994 at the end of my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency is a body responsible for managing and directing the 

assessment system for tax purposes in Saskatchewan.  This Bill 

is a product of extensive discussions over the past year with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association, members of the 

Saskatchewan Assessors Association, and the board of 

directors of the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency, otherwise known as SAMA, and with representatives 

from many, many local governments across this province. 

 

One reason but not the only reason for these amendments was 

to implement the provincial government budget decision 

respecting provincial funding for SAMA.  The government 

gave notice last year at budget time that it would reduce its 

contribution this fiscal year.  This change is part of the 

announced four-year balanced budget plan. The plan responds 

to calls for provincial deficit reduction from many sectors 

including municipalities.  The need to balance our budget has 

required many changes, and this is one of them. 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

Historically the government has paid the major part of the cost 

of property assessment services by funding the central data 

processing, research and manual development, and property 

inspection services components, except in the four largest cities 

which pay for their own field services. 

 

(1430) 

 

This has been the case both since the establishment of SAMA 

in 1986 and before, when it was part of the provincial 

government.  Establishment of SAMA in 1986 was a 

recommendation of the Local Government Finance 

Commission supported by SUMA and SARM.  It was intended 

to give local governments a more direct role in respect of 

decisions relating to assessment through membership of 

SAMA's board of directors. 

 

It also involved municipalities directly in financing assessment 

services.  Local governments are in fact the major beneficiaries 

of property assessment policies and field valuation services.  

They rely on assessments to levy property tax and business tax. 

 

This year's budget change takes into account this importance to 

local governments.  Municipalities must be willing to accept 

more responsibilities for these services which they rely on so 

heavily. 

 

The provincial government also has an interest, along with 

local governments, in certain assessment matters.  These 

include assessment, research and policy development, 

maintenance of a central database, confirmation of assessment 

roles, and ensuring quality assessment data throughout the 

province. 

 

The government remains responsible for enacting legislation 

regarding assessment.  The government is certainly prepared to 

financially support those areas.  This Bill reflects this, with an 

annual provincial funding of $4 million for SAMA.  In 

addition, there is provision which will permit transitional 

funding to SAMA of $2 million more for this year, as shown in 

the budget, for a total of $6 million in 1994 and '95. 

 

The balance of SAMA's annual expenditures beyond the $4 

million are associated with carrying out local valuation 

services.  These are the activities which produce local property 

assessments to be used by the local governments for tax 

purposes.  Municipalities will have financial responsibility for 

this portion of SAMA's services as they are the main 

beneficiaries for those services.  The transitional funding I refer 

to will ease the impact this year of that adjustment in financial 

responsibility. 

 

However, as I said in the beginning, there is a lot more to this 

Bill than just financial provisions, Mr. Speaker.  Since local 

governments are the primary beneficiaries of assessment 

services and will have increased financial responsibility for 

funding the property inspection services, the agency should be 

more accountable to them.  This Bill does this, and many of 

these changes have received a positive reaction from 

local governments. 

 

With respect to the SAMA board of directors, the composition 

relating to local government representation remains as it is -- 

two each representing rural and urban municipalities; one 

representing the boards of education.  The key change here is in 

the method of selecting the representatives.  At the suggestion 

of a number of local governments, the board members 

representing municipalities and school divisions will be elected 

by local governments rather than chosen by the association, 

boards, or executives. 

 

One of the two urban municipality representatives will be 

formally represented from the four largest cities.  In addition, a 

member representing the Saskatchewan Assessors Association 

will be added to the SAMA board as well as another provincial 

at-large member. 

 

Changes are also being made in the process within SAMA for 

making adjustments in assessment policy.  A new, large-cities 

committee for the SAMA board will be established paralleling 

existing urban and rural SAMA board committees.  This will 

draw in greater expertise and focus greater attention on these 

cities' assessment needs.  The role of all three of these 

committees is being enhanced to focus more attention on 

assessment policy.  A new technical advisory committee 

drawing on a wide base of experience in organizations will also 

be established to advise SAMA's management on an ongoing 

basis in operating and policy matters. 

 

A new requirement for a SAMA annual meeting from 

municipal and boards of education delegates has been added; 

again this is an enhanced accountability.  Delegates to the 

annual meeting will elect local government representatives on 

the board, consider resolutions and reports, and conduct other 

business.  Recommendations which SAMA might make for 

changes in assessment legislation will now have to be 

considered at the annual meeting and then have the concurrence 

of a majority of affected municipalities and school divisions 

before being directed to the provincial government for 

legislative changes.  This is to help improve SAMA's 

accountability and to ensure that changes proposed have local 

government support. 

 

In the round of debate over SAMA's reassessment proposals 

which took place over the last couple of years, it became 

apparent that while extensive legislation amendments were 

sought, the reassessment proposals did not have the support of 

most municipalities.  Many letters were sent to this minister 

asking that we not proceed with that legislation.  The new 

provisions proposed in this Act will ensure local governments 

are consulted by SAMA before recommending changes in 

assessment legislation. 

 

There are also some other financial changes intended to 

increase SAMA's accountability to both local governments and 

the province.  Revisions to SAMA's  



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

budget process are to be made.  Presently SAMA sets its 

budget and sends out its requisitions.  Both local and provincial 

governments are placed in the position of having to react to 

whatever arrives in the mail.  The new budget process will 

require SAMA and its administration to come before a 

Treasury Board-like committee consisting of representatives of 

the three local government associations and the province to 

explain and account for the proposed budget.  It provides an 

opportunity for input and direction to the SAMA board and 

administration before SAMA's budget is set. 

 

New authority for a supplementary requisition by SAMA to 

municipalities for 1994 is included, due to the timing of these 

amendments relative to when SAMA had to send out its 

original requisitions this year. 

 

At the recent SARM convention there was discussion by some 

municipalities of withholding payment of what SAMA has 

requested for 1994 because of the increases which are 

occurring.  Much of this arises from frustration with SAMA in 

a number of other respects as well.  The existing and proposed 

legislation gives municipalities a number of options to carefully 

consider before they decide in effect to break the law. 

 

First the municipal requisition formula is determined by the 

SAMA board.  The current formula used by SAMA considers 

population and assessment, but not services received.  

Municipalities can ask their representatives on the board who, 

by the way, form a majority on the board, to seek a review and 

revision of the formula. 

 

Second, municipalities can ask their representatives on the 

board to review SAMA's proposed expenditures and budget 

and to reconsider whether they should be spending $9.3 million 

this year or in future years.  The SAMA board sets its budget 

and has to be made accountable for it.  Changes could be made 

before the final requisition of 1994 is sent out. 

 

Third, these amendments will provide all municipalities, not 

just the four largest cities, with the option of providing their 

own valuation services.  Municipalities will be able to do this 

individually, or jointly with other municipalities.  If 

municipalities are to have more financial responsibility for 

local valuation services, they should also have the option of 

providing their own services.  A number of municipalities have 

specifically asked for this option. 

 

Some safeguards are included along with this option in this Bill 

to ensure the quality of assessments is protected.  These 

include, first, requiring assessments to continue to be done 

consistent with SAMA's assessment manual and policies and 

provincial assessment legislation. Second, requiring all 

assessments to be done by qualified persons who are to be 

certified by SAMA as meeting the standards set by SAMA. 

And third, providing that all assessment rolls continue to be 

subject to confirmation by SAMA, and are also to be subject to 

review and audit. 

These safeguards are included at the urging of various interests.  

There will be an 18-month window for municipalities to make 

their decision in this regard.  After this, opting back in or out of 

SAMA's field services could be done only with SAMA's 

concurrence.  This amendment will serve to stabilize SAMA's 

operations and allow the agency to concentrate its energy on 

developing a new, updated assessment system for 1996 and 

beyond. 

 

If some municipalities still do withhold payment for whatever 

reason, SAMA has existing temporary borrowing powers.  Its 

existing right to take legal action is supplemented in this Bill 

by the right to withhold confirmation of a municipality's 

assessment roll for municipal tax purposes. 

 

If a municipality refuses to abide by the law and contributes to 

undermining the assessment system by doing so, it should not 

simply continue to receive the benefit of SAMA services in 

spite of this.  SAMA's board has a responsibility to be fair to 

the majority of municipalities who abide by the law and meet 

their obligations. 

 

Finally, this Bill includes some assessment-related provisions.  

These are clarification of certain terms and definitions of the 

date of which assessments are set each year and of the base 

year for reassessed values.  These have largely been requested 

by SAMA to improve its operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I noted when I began, this package of changes 

had been the subject of considerable debate before the Bill was 

drafted and reached the legislature.  It represents a balance of 

various interests. 

 

A March 1994 resolution from the SARM board stated that 

they would support development of an assessment body funded 

by the province, specifically created to provide core services to 

municipalities.  And further, that we should devise legislation 

to allow for the provision of field assessment services by both a 

central and independent system for use at the option of all 

municipalities, and such services to be funded on a 

fee-for-service basis.  We believe this Bill reflects the 

recommendations of that resolution and therefore should have 

SARM support. 

 

A SUMA convention resolution called for election of board of 

directors and more fiscal accountability.  Many, many 

municipal leaders have expressed strong opinions about making 

SAMA more responsive and more accountable.  In this Bill, 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) is 

recognized, along with municipal governments, as a major 

stakeholder and have voting rights at the annual convention.  I 

believe this will address many concerns expressed by the 

boards of education and has the concurrence of SARM. 

 

And finally, the assessors and SAMA, while not totally 

supportive of the opting-out clause, have indicated that the 

formation of our certification board to be followed next year by 

a professional appraisers Act is a positive move.  Their greater 

participation on the 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

agency through membership on the board and in the technical 

committee allows them a comfortable degree of security and 

influence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the SARM and its president for 

their advice and the comments.  I appreciate the cooperation 

shown by SSTA and their help and support for the direction 

taken by this Bill.  I'm especially pleased that the assessors who 

work for SAMA have participated in the development of the 

Bill and are willing to endorse these changes with appropriate 

safeguards for quality assurance being incorporated into this 

Act. 

 

SUMA has been supportive of accepting more financial 

responsibility for field services but has presented some 

interesting arguments over election of directors at a SAMA 

annual meeting rather than at their SUMA convention. 

 

I believe that the election of directors from an annual meeting 

of local government stakeholders, where issues can be debated 

and opinions of potential directors can be analysed by all 

stakeholders, provides the best opportunity to elect qualified 

people.  Notwithstanding the objections by SUMA executive, it 

is my belief that most urban municipalities will welcome 

participation in an annual meeting. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the Bill addresses not only the issue 

of permanent funding but also other issues like local 

government responsibility, representation, SAMA's 

accountability, safeguards to protect the assessment system, the 

process to reach consensus and to make changes in the system, 

consultation, and fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all important . . . or more important than 

the financial provisions in this Bill.  This Bill does not end the 

debate over our assessment system, but it does turn the page. 

 

The job now is to implement these changes and get on with the 

substantive issue relating to assessment and tax policy rather 

than remaining fixed on the debate over financing and 

governance which has gone on over the past several years. 

 

The opposition will have heard parts of this discussion and 

perhaps from the various participants because it has been an 

open and public dialogue. 

 

I would encourage the opposition to show a willingness to go 

forward with these amendments, recognizing both the fiscal 

content and the need to enhance the participation of local 

governments. 

 

When the former government established this agency in 1986, 

they recognized a need to have more municipal control and 

involvement over assessment, as well as a need for greater 

fiscal responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 62, An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act, and ask all 

members of the legislature to support 

these amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I listened 

very intently to the presentation made by the member 

responsible for Municipal Government and I find the comments 

very intriguing in view of some of the arguments presented by 

the same member when she was a member of the Minister's 

Advisory Board on Rural Development -- SUMA 

representative. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, it's interesting to note that there have 

been a number of questions regarding SAMA and its operation 

over the past number of years, and certainly the government of 

the '80s had a number of questions raised regarding SAMA's 

objectives and goals.  And I know that in our debates through 

the Rural Development, when I was the chairman of the 

minister's advisory board, there were a number of debates at 

that time as to who should be footing the bill for the SAMA 

board, how the SAMA board should be elected. 

 

And we all know that it was elected, or appointments were 

made, through SUMA and SARM and the government and the 

school boards, and I'm pleased to see that the minister has, 

through this Bill, will be allowing for elections of members.  

And I guess one of the questions we'll be asking when we get 

to the debate in Committee of the Whole is whether the Bill 

sets out the number of individuals on the boards and how many 

people will be involved from the different representatives or 

groups that are interested. There are certainly a number of 

questions that can and will be raised at that time. 

 

When I look at the Bill that's before this Assembly, I guess one 

of the biggest concerns that most people have, and the minister 

referred to it as well in the prior Bill on The Municipal 

Revenue Sharing Act, is the funding.  Now I think when it 

comes down to funding of SAMA, even though local 

governments both urban and rural would be concerned with the 

fact that a greater portion of that funding is going to fall on 

them, I think at the same time they also want to have and feel . . 

. I think one of the major concerns most local governments had 

was the fact that they felt they really didn't have a lot of input 

and at the end of the day when assessments were changed it 

wasn't easy for local governments, it wasn't even easy for 

SAMA boards to justify the changes that they were suggesting 

regarding assessments. 

 

So hopefully this Bill will allow for greater, as the minister 

indicated, consultation and a working relationship between the 

rural municipalities, urban municipalities, and school boards in 

coming to a common conclusion and working agreement 

regarding assessment and assessment management across the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe there are certainly a few other points we 

should be taking time to discuss with the 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

interested parties, and I would at this time move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Parks Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Ultimately, we will allow this Bill to pass.  We support the 

general principles of the Bill.  And there are some concerns that 

I just want to make note of at the conclusion of my brief 

remarks to give the minister an opportunity to present a 

credible response to those concerns that I will be raising. 

 

The Act to amend The Parks Act, Mr. Speaker, is intended, the 

amendments to this Act are intended to help to protect and 

represent important ecosystems within our province, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that's laudable. 

 

And it's supposed to also at the same time, because of whatever 

changes are going to be made, increase the efficiencies in the 

administration reflecting the changing needs and the changing 

conditions that we have in our provincial park system. 

 

And there are a few things, I noticed here, that are of some 

significance when we talk and the minister talks in a second 

reading speech about the Clarence-Steepbank recreation 

reserve, that it is now going to be designated as a provincial 

wilderness park and it's going to be adding 17,500 hectares of 

land to this public system. 

 

Now that's necessary, Mr. Speaker.  However, it begs a 

question, and the question that it begs is one that I have asked 

the minister once before in question period.  And he took 

particular exception to the question and I have already since 

then pursued it with the Minister of Justice in terms of this 

idea. 

 

And I think we're all working toward an international goal of 

taking up to 12 per cent of the world's surface and putting that 

area of land into what is considered to be the protected or 

endangered spaces.  And the endangered spaces is supposed to 

be representative of the various ecosystems that exist in the 

world. 

 

And that 12 per cent is a lofty goal.  And I don't know, Mr. 

Speaker, if we will ever be able to achieve that within the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Right now we're somewhere, I 

believe, just under half of that goal; somewhere close to 6 per 

cent. 

 

And so when we take . . . And I notice later on that there are 

going to be areas being added in other areas 

as well to the provincial park system.  That is good.  That is 

good. And as long as we do that in a responsible fashion, the 

government will continue to have our support. 

 

But I guess the question that I would have in my mind is that 

while we have that laudable goal and we're trying to achieve 

that, and there are other areas within the province, as I 

understand it, where small portions of land are now being 

purchased to be added to existing parks, ostensibly at least, to 

achieve that endangered spaces goal that we have, but at the 

same time, when we already have land that is in a protected 

phase . . . and I refer specifically, Mr. Minister, to the Bronson 

forest area, as you know.  I was coming to that. 

 

And we have a major, major sale of land, Mr. Speaker, where 

we have land that is now controlled by the province, it's part of 

our province, it's part of the protected area of the province.  

And it's there; we have it.  And now we're not only probably 

contemplating, but I think in fact it's completed, that this land is 

going to be sold.  It's going to be sold and it's going to be put 

into private hands.  And I use the term private; it's not 

government owned; it's going to be owned partly at least by the 

Thunderchild Indian Band. 

 

And the question that I would have of the minister at that point 

is, what mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that that 

land, in spite of changing hands and becoming now part of a 

private ownership . . . and I know the reasons  

_- in 1980 or '81 Bowerman made a commitment, and all that. 

 

And by the way, Mr. Minister, I would remind the Minister of 

Justice made a commitment that he would get to me the letter 

that was signed, the letter of commitment that was signed by 

Minister Bowerman back in those days, that I could have it in 

my hands and see this exceptional circumstance that causes 

you, and gives you the right, I guess, to make that sale . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . All right.  Thank you.  So I will be 

looking forward to getting a copy of that letter so we can 

peruse it before this comes up for third reading in committee, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And so I will be asking you what steps have you put into place 

whereby the people of this province will have the assurance 

that this land is indeed going to be taken care of?  And I don't 

think I will accept the answer, well these are the aboriginals; 

these are the native people and they've done well over the years 

and they will continue to do well.  Because there's a lot of 

pressures on those folks as well when it comes to economic 

viability and economic prospering. 

 

And is the area going to be used, for example, for paid hunting?  

What are some of the potentials?  Is it going to be dug up with 

oil wells?  Is it going to be clear-cut for logging?  Are you 

going to put any stipulations in there in terms of how this land 

is going to be used even though it's being sold?  Or is it carte 

blanche sales saying, here's the land, it's part of the treaty 

entitlement settlement and now it's yours to do with as you will. 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

And if that's going to be your answer, then I guess we'll be into 

it for a little bit just to ensure the people in that surrounding 

area who also have a legitimate concern, and who are not part 

and parcel of a private group of individuals buying government 

land for whatever reason it may happen to be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those brief remarks to the minister, I 

would now have no hesitation in letting this Bill go to 

committee. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very 

happy to rise in support of this amendment as well.  And I 

appreciate the general support of the parks system by the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

I am especially pleased with the designation of the 7,200-acre 

Clarence-Steepbank Lakes wilderness park located east . . . or 

sorry, located north of Candle Lake.  This park came about 

because of local public interest, cooperation from 

Weyerhaeuser, and the efficiency of the Department of 

Environment and renewable resources; and also to a great 

extent our colleague, the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University, took a very keen interest in this 

particular park area and we're very pleased to see this coming 

to fruition. 

 

The Clarence-Steepbank Lakes area consists of old-growth 

forest, and old-growth forest is a hundred years or more in age.  

This particular habitat is very important to a number of wildlife 

species, such as woodland caribou, northern flying squirrels, 

martins, and fishers.  Birds also depend on old-growth forests. 

Certain species such as pileated woodpeckers, barred owls, 

white-winged crossbills, will only be found in old-growth 

forest. 

 

We also have a number of migrant birds -- we call them 

neo-tropical birds because they come all the way from South 

America, Central America, to nest in Saskatchewan.  And they 

too are dependent upon old-growth forest, such as the 

black-throated green warbler, Cape May warbler, and the 

blackburnian warbler.  These birds will be migrating through 

the province within the next couple of weeks. 

 

So these forests are not only invaluable to our wildlife but also 

to people as well.  And Saskatchewan's forests are very 

valuable. They create jobs -- there's a lot of jobs in the forestry 

industry.  And unlike perhaps the forests in British Columbia, 

Saskatchewan forests are very accessible; there's no mountains 

to overcome. 

 

And I guess most importantly about forests, is that they are a 

renewable resource if managed properly, and certainly in 

hindsight we could have done a lot more in managing our 

forests.  Probably the most important thing is that reforestation, 

we are a way behind, and there's no use pointing a finger at this 

day and age.  It's what we could have been doing 20 or 50 years 

ago.  It's up to all of us, whether we are government or the 

public or industry, is to get a better handle on reforestation. 

As the member opposite alluded to, it is universally accepted 

that we try to protect a minimum of 12 per cent of an ecological 

system in order to preserve species, diversity, and abundance.  

And certainly the Clarence-Steepbank Lakes wilderness park is 

one step closer to achieving this goal. 

 

Another key element of the amendment is a designation of 

water courses within the proposed Grasslands National Park, 

and these water courses will be designated as protected areas 

with these amendments. And this again is one step closer to the 

realization of a Grasslands National Park. 

 

This park was first proposed in 1957, some 27 years ago, and 

despite concerted efforts by governments of all stripes, and 

interests groups and cooperation, we still do not have a 

Grasslands National Park. And this is even in light of the fact 

that over 90 per cent of the land within the proposed park is 

Crown land  and there was widespread public support for the 

park. So it does show, as the member opposite indicated, how 

long it takes to achieve some of our goals in protecting natural 

areas. 

 

The Grasslands National Park is a very unique area in Canada 

with species such as yellow-belly racers and short-horn lizards, 

prairie dogs, sage grouse and others only found in this corner, 

this small area of Canada.  So it's imperative that we continue 

to protect this area.  And much of the land has been protected 

because it has been used for grazing by ranchers for decades, in 

fact since the land was settled.  So hopefully we can proceed 

very quickly to officially proclaim the Grasslands National 

Park before too many more years elapse. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the environment and wildlife remain very 

important to Canadians.  In a recent national survey, over 85 

per cent of Canadians said that maintaining abundant wildlife 

populations was important to them.  Government, along with 

private sector, NGOs (non-governmental organizations), and 

the public, must continue to work together in achieving the 

globally accepted goal of protecting a minimum of 12 per cent 

of each of our ecological regions in Saskatchewan. And I am 

very happy to support these amendments because they do inch 

us closer to achieving this goal.  Thank you very much. 

 

(1500) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Pringle that Bill No. 45 -- An Act to 

amend The Child and Family Services Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

our opposition really doesn't have a lot of reasons that we 

should be holding up this Bill.  I think that as we've reviewed 

the Bill, there are certainly a number of good ideas and good 

amendments that are going to be brought forward to the Bill 

and in the Bill, and certainly benefits which I think will benefit 

children across the province of Saskatchewan which we wholly 

support. 

 

We support the concept of placing wards of the province into 

the care of a family in which the child feels comfortable, loved, 

and secure.  And certainly as we view circumstances taking 

place around the world, I don't think there's anyone in this 

Assembly doesn't have a place in their heart for children and 

the problems that children face outside of this province and, 

Mr. Speaker, as well, inside the province. 

 

And we have great concerns about the circumstances that 

children must live and the homes at times where they must face 

considerable verbal abuse, even at the hands of parents, and 

children that are in a situation where they're in foster homes.  

We certainly want to make sure that they are placed in homes 

where there is a loving and caring environment.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, we're all quite supportive of this Bill. 

 

I noticed there are a large number of amendments in the Bill, 

Mr. Speaker.  I think we need to take a bit of time in committee 

to review the commitments and to review the amendments so 

we have a better understanding of where the government is 

proceeding with the amendments to the Bill. 

 

I also would have some questions regarding the process for 

home studies and how the government determines whether a 

family is well equipped to monetarily care for a child. 

 

So as I've indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, we don't have a lot of 

concerns that we want to raise at this time through second 

reading, but we do have some questions we want to raise in 

Committee of the Whole, and we will at that time address those 

questions and quiz the minister on the roles and the goals that 

government has in the introduction of this Bill.  So I would 

allow the Bill to now proceed to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 52 -- An Act to 

amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I look forward to the 

opportunity to question the Minister of Education on the 

specifics of Bill 52 in the Committee of the Whole.  But today I 

would like to make a few short comments on the Bill. 

The minister has stated that these amendments will eliminate 

the barriers to voluntary amalgamation of urban and rural 

school divisions.  She has also stated that her government has 

no master plan for any province-wide restructuring of the 

school divisions, and I trust that she will honour that 

commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the condition of the health districts 

and services in rural Saskatchewan since the NDP government 

forced communities into new health districts.  It's quite chaotic 

out there, Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

pointed out in the media yesterday.  I'm grateful that the 

Minister of Education has stated that any amalgamation of 

services will be done on a volunteer, pilot-like basis, unlike the 

NDP health reforms which were forced upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However I'd also like to have a little more than an assurance 

from the minister that the Health minister's plan will not be 

used to amalgamate school divisions, because there is a loss 

then of local control and local input, as there has been on the 

health boards, Mr. Speaker.  People have lost the opportunity to 

have their own representatives represent them on the health 

boards.  That kind of representation must be allowed on the 

school divisions, and the only way that can happen is if they 

voluntarily amalgamate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are a number of rural areas that do have a number of 

concerns about amalgamation and how it will affect the 

operation of schools within their area.  In her second reading 

speech, the minister stated that amendments in Bill 52 

addressed a desire to retain local community and parental input 

and advice in the event of a voluntary amalgamation between 

rural and urban divisions.  And I believe that is a must, Mr. 

Speaker, if any changes are made to the school division 

structure. 

 

I will pose these and additional questions on the specifics of 

this promise in committee, because the people of Saskatchewan 

need a solid and concrete evidence that this input will be 

allowed and then what the minister is saying is simply not 

rhetoric. 

 

Allowing communities to share secretary treasurers or directors 

of education in the school divisions is not exactly allowing for 

local control, Mr. Speaker.  That's the bureaucracy of the 

system; that doesn't mean control.  And in fact, to allow the 

sharing of secretary treasurers is not new. It's happening today 

in the two school divisions in my constituency and there's a 

very high probability that the sharing of director services will 

also occur in the near future in those two school divisions. 

 

But according to the government, these amendments will allow 

boards of education to achieve efficiencies and provide better 

service through the joint acquisition or operations of any 

service within their division. 

 

I find that interesting, Mr. Speaker, that while the government 

believes school divisions will be able to 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

save money through jointly acquiring goods and services, this 

is the NDP (New Democratic Party) Party that is also tying 

their hands through amendments to the labour legislation in this 

very Assembly.  Basically these changes will force any arm of 

government to use union-only services and contracts, most of 

which will cost the taxpayers much more money than it's 

already costing them for those same services. 

 

Provisions in The Trade Union Act will effectively prevent 

provincial and municipal governments, hospitals, universities 

and schools, and other arms of government from contracting 

out cleaning, security, and cafeteria services.  This is from the 

same government who has offloaded hundreds of millions of 

dollars worth of spending cuts onto third parties such as 

municipalities and school boards.  It's now preventing these 

same third parties from cutting their own costs by contracting 

services out to the more efficient private sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure why the government touts the 

freedom given to local school boards while tying their hands at 

the same time.  It just doesn't make a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, 

to say that the Minister of Education is going to provide an 

avenue for more local and parental input into the system while 

at the same time telling the school divisions that you will have 

to operate under this particular manner through The Trade 

Union and The Labour Standards Act. 

 

So when the government claims to be consolidating services, I 

have to ask just how much is this so-called consolidation going 

to cost.  I will ask those questions, Mr. Speaker, in Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

There are changes which are needed and which will be helpful, 

Mr. Speaker, such as redefining the mandate of the 

Saskatchewan Book Bureau and protecting school officials, 

teachers, and students involved in the school safety patrol from 

legal liability.  And that is one of the very definite benefits of 

this piece of legislation that the minister has introduced, is that 

it will protect those people who are trying to provide a public 

service, from legal liability. 

 

And the children that are out there assisting the younger 

children across the street in the school safety patrols do a very 

worthwhile and a very credible job. They need to have the 

protection that they will not be liable for some action that they 

may have inadvertently taken which they took with the best 

intentions in mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's also one other section in this Bill which is 

worthy of comment.  And it deals with the idea of setting up 

school districts within a division board jurisdiction.  In the rural 

areas those school districts are already in place.  The old school 

districts from years gone by remained in place and have a 

jurisdictional area within part of the school division.  In the 

cities that didn't seem to happen, Mr. Speaker.  You had the 

larger division board but you do not have any jurisdictional 

areas around each school. 

In rural Saskatchewan each school district has its own local 

board of trustees which make recommendations and 

presentations to the division board.  In urban Saskatchewan that 

does not happen.  You may have a parent-teacher association 

but they're not an officially constituted part of the system.  This 

will allow that kind of input to happen where parents can sit on 

a local school district board and have an official capacity 

within the school division. 

 

What this Act does not provide however, Mr. Speaker, is any 

detail or outline on what kind of powers and responsibilities, 

what kind of access to the system that these kind of school 

districts and the people who may be represented as trustees on 

those school district have to the greater division boards.  And 

that is one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, that the minister needs to 

clarify, and I will be asking her questions on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe that we can deal with this situation perhaps better now 

in the Committee of the Whole.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 -- An Act 

to amend The Trade Union Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As 

you're aware and members are aware, this Bill has seen some 

focused attention and consternation on the part of many people 

of this province, Mr. Speaker, and a number of my colleagues 

have added their voice with that of the majority of the people of 

this province in opposition to this Trade Union Act as it has 

been presented by the Minister of Labour.  And I want to put a 

few thoughts on record as well this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to 

sustain that opposition. 

 

One thing I think that has become clear to many people in this 

province is that this government has on a consistent basis used 

the legislative powers that it has by its majority as a weapon 

against those that oppose their will.  And I might suggest to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that if the weapon were not legislative 

powers or if we could compare it to the weapon of a firearm, 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice, both at the provincial and 

the federal levels, would jump with great alacrity to have them 

not only as a restricted weapon but banned altogether because, 

Mr. Speaker, in many instances this government can be accused 

and convicted of using its legislative power in a most 

unconstitutional and even unlawful way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition that many people have to this 

Trade Union Act is that instead of trying to change labour laws 

in a open and consultative and democratic approach, this 

government has dealt and conducted itself in double 

_dealing, with threats to get 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

their way; if you don't do the way we say, you will suffer, you 

will be punished, they are saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that speaks loudly to the people of this province because 

they know that ultimately they have very little protection 

against a government that is concentrated and focused on one 

particular objective.  They cannot be derailed.  They cannot 

even be turned, it seems. 

 

And we have ample evidence of that as the years have gone by 

with the numerous, long . . . with a long litany already of 

legislative actions that they have taken to get their will, mostly 

and largely, Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the people of this 

province. 

 

The most glaring example of that is not something that has 

been passed yet, but it's because of the majority of this 

government it will be passed ultimately, and that's The Labour 

Standards Act that is a good example of that.  And now they 

are doing that with this Bill that we're discussing this afternoon, 

The Trade Union Act. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the problems is that there was no 

consultation.  In spite of what the minister says, there was no 

meaningful consultation and there was no compromise before 

the Bill was brought in, Mr. Speaker.  Simply nothing. 

 

Now the Bill thrown in before this legislature, like right now, 

was done with very little, with very little forethought other than 

to use this Assembly as a sounding board, to use this Assembly 

as a sounding board.  If there's a lot of rancour, if there's a lot 

of resistance, well maybe we'll look at consulting the people 

then and see whether we can then implement a few changes, a 

few dots and a few t's crossed a little bit differently, something 

that we will be able to get away with and then it's going to be a 

done deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us, the one that we're debating 

right now, is an example of exactly that, and it proves that that 

is the case.  I believe it is a Bill that is shoddily written and 

contains, Mr. Speaker -- listen to this  

_- I believe that this Bill contains every union concession ever 

dreamed of. 

 

And so instead of doing their homework, instead of consulting 

with the business community as well, they went ahead and they 

introduced, Mr. Speaker, a backward piece of legislation which 

does, I admit, accomplish two things. 

 

Oh yes.  This Bill, this Trade Union Act, accomplishes two 

things.  First of all, it pays off union leaders for their political 

support, and that was a bill long outstanding, as it were, for a 

couple of years now.  And number two, perhaps even worse, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill drives business and jobs out of this 

province. 

 

So the two accomplishments in summary, Mr. Speaker, what 

this Trade Union Act will do is it will pay off the political 

union allies of this government, the union leaders.  And 

secondly, it will drive business 

and jobs out of the province.  There's no doubt about that. 

 

But neither of these two objectives are going to serve the 

general public.  It is not for the public good, Mr. Speaker.  In 

fact I would suggest to you and I would suggest to members 

opposite that it's going to have the opposite effect.  It's going to 

hurt union members, as slowly, slowly jobs are being driven 

out of this province into other jurisdictions.  So it may serve 

well for the union leaders, Mr. Speaker, but in the long run it 

has yet to prove that indeed the majority of workers in this 

province will benefit. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is so Draconian, so harsh, so 

harsh that normally passive business leaders in the business 

community are now outraged. They are now outraged and they 

have gone public in their outrage in opposition to this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would submit to you and I would submit to members of 

this Assembly and I would submit to members of the public, 

that in order for normally passive people to become so outraged 

as to voice their opinions in public in such a loud voice, that 

indeed there must be some reason for this type of action. 

 

And actually, almost it's akin to what happened in Ontario 

under Bob Rae.  For the first time ever in my life, I saw in 

Ontario the business community outraged to the extent that 

they took to the streets.  Now we're used to seeing placards 

being waved on lawns in this Assembly, but Mr. Speaker, I 

submit to you, never have we seen placards waving in this 

Assembly with business suits attached to them and ties and 

white shirts, the white-collar folk. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, has not happened.  It has not happened yet, 

is what I say to the members opposite.  It has not happened yet, 

because the business community, Mr. Speaker, simply is 

outraged. 

 

And so again as is the pattern of this government and the 

format and it's becoming the flagship of this government, we 

are going to help people, but in so doing they are actually 

counter-productive in so many ways.  And time after time when 

I've gotten to my feet I've gone through a litany of the things 

that the government has done that in the end is not productive; 

it's counter-productive, and very often does exactly the 

opposite of what it was intended to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, in spite of what I've said, 

the Minister of Labour has literally the unmitigated gall to 

criticize, to criticize the business community for opposing these 

Bills, Mr. Speaker.  He calls them ruthless.  He calls the 

business community greedy. And he shouts out that they are 

extremists, Mr. Speaker. The business community is being 

accused by the Minister of Labour of being ruthless, of being 

greedy, and of being extremists.  And those are quite the words 

for a Minister of Labour to use to a member of this society, or a 

group in this society that are responsible for creating the jobs, 

the jobs that are so essential for the economic recovery of this 

province, 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

and for that matter, Mr. Speaker, any province. 

 

I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to The Financial Post under the 

section of "Insight," Wednesday, April 27, 1994, where it says, 

and I quote, that: 

 

 Saskatchewan Labour Minister Ned Shillington says the 

recently introduced, ground-breaking labour laws are needed 

to rid the workplace of conflicts created mainly by the greedy 

"ruthlessness" of business. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, the reaction of the business 

community when the Minister of Labour, whom they are 

supposed to work with and have confidence in . . . What is the 

reaction of the business community, a Minister of Labour like 

that? 

 

And he says that this is all brought about in the '80s because we 

are now living in the age of greed and the glorification of 

greed: 

 

 "There's a kind of ruthlessness that I don't think existed in the 

'70s," he said.  "I think there was a more of a paternal sense 

of responsibility toward employees, which in many cases 

doesn't exist now." 

 

The classic Marxist socialist attitude of the socialists across the 

way to business.  It is a classic example that the almighty 

profit, the almighty dollar, is the be-all and the end-all as far as 

the business world is concerned, and that all businessmen in the 

business community have only one objective and that is the 

bottom line on the profit/loss statement. 

 

And I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the minister and 

members opposite that that is not the case, that we have a 

business community here that has as much concern for the 

productivity of its workers than the workers have themselves.  

Because every businessman who has a workforce working for 

him . . . And I have a workforce working for me.  It's nominal, 

it's small -- it's only eight or nine employees on the farm --but I 

know that if I mistreat the employees, I know that if I don't 

respond and even anticipate some of the problems that they 

may have in the workplace, they are not going to be satisfied 

workers. 

 

And unless a worker has that liaison with the employer that, if I 

do a good job there will be more production, and that's going to 

come back many fold to the worker.  And the employer knows 

the same thing; that the employees are going to become much 

more productive.  So it's in the vested interest, Mr. Speaker, of 

both parties to have that good working relationship. 

 

But the problem is that the level playing-field that the minister 

is so fond of talking about doesn't exist.  That level 

playing-field has now been cantered over in relation . . . over 

toward the employee, the union side, because what happens 

here is that The Trade Union Act amendments proposed to give 

major new powers to politically appointed members of the 

Labour Relations Board.  And I want you to notice that, Mr.  

Speaker.  The Trade Union Act amendments proposed to give 

major new powers to politically appointed members of the 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

So is the Labour Relations Board going to act in good faith and 

good conscience, or are the members of the Labour Relations 

Board going to jump to the tune of the piper that pays and for 

whom they owe their existence on the Labour Board?  I think 

that, Mr. Speaker, goes without saying. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Construction Association 

president, Jim Chase, is one also that says that there are serious 

concerns that they have about this piece of legislation.  Mr. 

Chase says, and I quote:  our people have been going through 

tough times and you load this on top of them and they're just 

going to move out of the province, and this could be the kicker 

that will do that.  Unquote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that that is serious.  

And if the government is intending to put forward legislation 

that is going to result in business moving out, well then, Mr. 

Speaker, there are going to be fewer jobs.  And I come back to 

my earlier contention that many things . . . and many times this 

government does things that are counter-productive and will 

wind up doing exactly the opposite of what they would want to 

do. 

 

And I quote in the final paragraph here, it says: 

 

 Shillington insists the controversy in Saskatchewan is 

overblown and driven by deep-rooted suspicion that the 

government is anti-business. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker?  I would say that that's 

exactly the case.  There is this deep-rooted, underlying 

suspicion that this government is anti-business.  And I go back, 

Mr. Speaker, to my earlier point that, Mr. Minister, this Bill 

will do certain things and it will do two things.  And the first 

thing that it will do, and I repeat, Mr. Speaker, it will pay off 

the union leaders for their political support to your political 

body.  But it also will do the other thing and that is drive 

business and drive jobs out of this province. 

 

So the minister is also fond, Mr. Speaker, of saying, well show 

me proof.  Show me proof that this Bill will hurt business.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, ill-advised statements such as this merely 

prove that the minister has not consulted with small-business 

people.  Otherwise he would have known, first of all, that the 

business people are not greedy, they are not ruthless, or he 

wouldn't have made those kinds of comments.  They are 

people, Mr. Speaker, like you and like I and like other people in 

the province, that actually create the jobs in this province. 

 

And so the minister says, well show me proof.  Well we have 

done this in the past, Mr. Speaker, and we have full intentions 

of continuing to do this in the future to provide that proof.  The 

business community on a daily basis -- on a daily basis -- fax 

us information of 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

how these Bills, both The Trade Union Act and The Labour 

Standards Act, are going to detrimentally affect their business.  

And they fax them to us with facts, with figures, with proof.  

And the minister, I believe you have been receiving those same 

faxes.  However, however hard we try to hammer this message 

home, it does not seem to be taking any effect. 

 

Now I understand also, Mr. Speaker, that the government is 

considering bringing in amendments.  We're going to be seeing 

about 10 amendments to The Trade Union Act.  But it's the 

same game over again.  It's the same game, Mr. Speaker, all 

over again. 

 

And I look at the press release that the government members 

have given out today about the House amendments to The 

Trade Union Amendment Act.  The one thing I can say about 

that in passing, before I put it down, Mr. Speaker, is that I 

noticed at the end, the tail-end, among other things that I could 

talk about, is that the minister said, well it hasn't been amended 

for 10 years.  And Shillington said, I quote, said: 

 

 The new legislation will help to continue the development of 

a cooperative labour relation. 

 

The amendments will be produced . . . in the last sentence here 

it said: 

 

 The amendments will be introduced in Committee of the 

Whole following second reading of the Bill. 

 

And for those people who are wondering what's going on, this 

is the second reading of the Bill right now in adjourned 

debates, where members get up and basically put on line their 

thoughts on the issue. 

 

But notice, Mr. Speaker, those amendments are not going to be 

tabled until Committee of the Whole.  So that means now that 

we have to wait until we get into the Committee of the Whole, 

discussing that one particular Bill where the amendment will be 

effected, and then for the first time we'll have a look at that 

amendment -- for the first time.  And ostensibly I assume that it 

will be the first time that the business community will have a 

look at those amendments. 

 

(1530) 

 

And that's not acceptable, Mr. Minister.  If you want to be 

cooperative and you want to establish a cooperative spirit -- as 

ostensibly you're saying you want to -- why don't you come 

forward with those amendments right now?  Why don't you 

table them so that we can look at them and discuss them?  And 

then when we get into the Committee of the Whole, we'll be 

able to do it intelligently and be able to have a good discourse 

in terms of the pros and cons. 

 

So that is what I am saying to you, Mr. Minister.  You're doing 

exactly the opposite in the last sentence as what you were 

saying in the previous paragraph, with the cooperative spirit.  

That's not cooperation; that's 

coercion.   That's what it is, Mr. Minister, simple coercion. 

 

So bringing in, I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, first of all 

a Bill like this, as far as I'm concerned and your relationship to 

the business community and job creation, is absolute lunacy.  

But you say, well we're going to fix it up a bit; we're going to 

make a few concessions, then settle for a Bill that's only half 

lunatic.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not progress.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is not cooperation, and that does not create jobs, Mr. 

Speaker.  I'm sure that you realize that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government started this campaign even 

before they introduced The Trade Union Act.  We all remember 

the possibility the government was to bring in anti-replacement 

worker legislation.  Do you remember that, Mr. Speaker?  

Before this legislation was passed, the word was out, it's going 

to include scab legislation, anti-replacement worker legislation.  

Why?  Because they thought if they brought it in, subsequent 

legislation which did not contain such a clause, the business 

community would be relieved and they would wipe their brow 

and say, whew, we escaped that one, and that they would be 

pleased with the rest of it. 

 

We see this in nearly every Bill that this government is 

bringing forward.  It makes for great politics, Mr. Speaker.  But 

with the greatest of respect, members opposite, I say it makes 

for poor government.  It does, it really does. 

 

So now we all wait for the Minister of Labour to bring in the 10 

amendments, not unlike Moses delivering the good news from 

the burning bush; but, Mr. Speaker, at least Moses consulted 

with the proper authority.  And I believe there was a lot more 

substance to that 10 amendments than what we are facing here 

with the amendments that this Minister of Labour is proposing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have still a lot of concern.  We have a lot 

of items that we want to talk about.  And we want to give the 

Minister of Labour the opportunity and the time to give us 

those amendments so that indeed we can go to the Committee 

of the Whole, from a position of strength for both of us, so we 

can have that proper dialogue.  So that the people of this 

province -- the people, not necessarily the workers, not 

necessarily the union bosses, but the people of Saskatchewan -- 

can reap the benefits of the legislation that you are proposing. 

 

And so to do that, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that 

Act 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Rural 

Municipality Act, 1989 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the Minister of 

Municipal Government to introduce the officials who have 

joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right I 

have John Edwards who is a director of municipal policy and 

legislative services; and Ken Engel is on my left, director of 

municipal planning and advisory services; and Jim Anderson is 

the senior policy analyst who is sitting immediately behind me 

on my right. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I've just been going through this Bill again.  And it's quite 

extensive, with a large number of amendments.  And I'm 

wondering if the best way to proceed here would be to have 

you outline what each amendment will do and, where 

applicable, on whose request the amendment was drafted.  

Could you do that for me, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First off, Mr. Chairman, all the 

amendments that are in the Act that we're dealing with today 

have been either requested by the rural administrators' 

association or SARM or individual RMs (rural municipality).  

And it's through consultation with these groups that we brought 

these amendments forward into the Act today. 

 

I will go over the changes so that you can get some insight into 

where the Act is going.  Section 4 and 14 and 15 facilitate the 

reversion of small urban centres to the status of hamlet in rural 

municipalities.  That was asked for.  What they want to do is be 

able to facilitate the process through which a village can be 

reverted to a hamlet for governance under the RM. 

 

Section 45 and 46 update conflict of interest provisions in line 

with amendments made to urban legislation at the last session. 

 

Section 192 clarifies the long-standing practice that rural 

municipalities are not required to maintain undeveloped road 

allowances. 

 

Section 214.1 provides and expands fire prevention and 

emergency response authority for RMs. 

 

Section 221.8 will clarify the authority for public utility boards 

to borrow money. 

 

Section 244 removes ministerial approval requirement if a 

municipality wishes to sell or give land to a district health 

board. 

 

Section 254 removes the requirement of ministerial approval 

for formation of corporations, and section 

332.1 changes assessment appeal provisions as requested by the 

municipal board. 

 

And section 345 provides additional authority for rural 

municipalities to enforce tax collection respecting buildings 

situated on property owned by other persons, and there's a few 

other small housekeeping amendments besides that.  But those 

are the main provisions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I believe 

you've stated in your second reading speech that the type of 

governance for small communities has been changed so that 

hamlets can deliver limited services beyond what they're doing 

right now.  How will this make it more attractive for resort 

areas to remain in rural municipalities?  Resort, yes.  How will 

this make it more attractive for resort areas and communities to 

remain in rural municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The resort communities across 

Saskatchewan that have been within RMs have, for a number of 

years, felt somewhat pressured by a lack of autonomy and a 

lack of ability to manage some of their own services.  We're 

reluctant to grant autonomy outright to these resort 

communities, to let them form more municipal districts or 

municipal organizations. 

 

(1545) 

 

What we have done is added into this Act amendments to allow 

them more autonomy to manage their own municipal or their 

own community services and still reside . . . and be governed 

by the RM at large.  So what we have done is given them 

autonomy, given them the ability to manage their own fiscal 

services a little easier, but still not take them out of the 

governance relationship that exists between them and the RM 

that surrounds them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, are those, the requirements 

for resort communities to remove themselves from the RM, are 

they the same as say a hamlet or a village that wish to remove 

themselves? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The requirements to form a resort village 

are within the urban Act, and they don't exist within The Rural 

Municipality Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So in other words they would have to apply 

on the basis of a hamlet in order to have themselves removed 

from the RM? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They would have to meet all the 

requirements that would allow them to be incorporated as an 

urban municipality. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  In the area dealing with rural public 

utility boards who are borrowing funds to establish water 

distribution systems for residents who are not now served, what 

sorts of regulations apply, such as the limits to funds, that type 

of thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Previous there was no provision in The 

Rural Municipality Act that allowed utility boards the ability to 

borrow.  This Act provides that 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

authority for utility boards to borrow up to a hundred per cent 

of the cost of the project.  Anything in excess of that, they have 

to go to the SMB (Saskatchewan Municipal Board) for 

approval. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So what you're saying is that the particular 

RM then can go to municipal government board and borrow 

100 per cent of the capital cost of whatever is within their 

boundary.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- For the utility project that has been 

approved.  They have to define the utility project.  They have to 

have an analysis of the cost of that project, and then they have 

to go and finance the project.  And this gives them the ability to 

borrow the capital cost. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  This is a fairly large issue in some 

places.  There's the Wood River project where there's up to 12 

RMs involved here.  All of them together would be a very 

significant amount of money, I would think, that they would be 

going to Municipal Board to borrow.  There's no problem with 

that, as you can see it, given the existing legislation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The water utility boards, as you probably 

are aware, are utility boards that are user-driven.  A group of 

farmers or people who live within the RM form together to 

form a utility board, and they make a request for a project to 

deliver potable water to their residences.  They make an 

application to the RM to finance that project, based on their 

desire to pay a user fee for use of the water or utility that's 

delivered. 

 

Based on that analysis, then the RM can go and borrow on 

behalf of the utility board the cost of that project.  But it is 

driven by the user need or the residents of the area that have 

formed a group called a utility board, that have defined the 

project, defined the cost of the project, defined their services or 

their financial requirements and their utility bills under the 

project.  And based on that, the RM will go and borrow or 

finance . . . borrow financing to approve the project. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Do they have to make application to the 

Municipal Board before they can proceed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They don't have to go to the Municipal 

Board to get approval.  They don't have to go and make an 

application under the Municipal Board. 

 

I think I misled you a minute ago.  It is not the RM that does 

the borrowing; it's the utility board that does the borrowing, but 

the utility board is set up within the RM Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay. So they don't have to have approval to 

go borrow the money; they can just go borrow it.  Okay. 

 

And there's no limit at all on funds that can be borrowed, no 

limit at all? 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The Act allows them financing of 20 

years for a project.  The user group develop the business plan, 

if you like, for the project.  They make application to a 

financial institution if that's where they want to go for financing 

the project, and there is a requirement in the Act that it's a 

20-year project that has to be repaid through user fees by the 

patrons of the project. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  What you're saying is that government 

in no way is saying there's a limit to the amount of funds that 

you can borrow.  You are empowered through this Act to do it.  

The ultimate liability resides with the utility board, not the RM. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The liability is with the utility board, not 

the RM, and the financing is defined by the size of the project 

and the capability of the financial institution that they're 

dealing with to provide those funds. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  Why then, Madam Minister, are 

groups of individuals not allowed to access natural gas under 

the same proviso? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's an interesting question.  I think 

perhaps it should be referred to the Minister of Energy.  We're 

talking about utility boards that provide water services, potable 

water to residents.  Now I guess we've not heard before of any 

group of residents in rural Saskatchewan who want to 

collectively form a board to deliver natural gas within their 

area, but we'll look at it.  But it's not within the bounds of this 

Act to permit a utility board, that we are aware of, to deliver 

anything other than water services. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well as I read the Act, Madam Minister, I 

don't see anything that defines only water here.  It's the utility 

board that you're empowering.  In a deregulated gas market, a 

hospital goes direct to well-head -- all they need is a 

transmission facility in between, the same as a water pipeline.  I 

mean you have a Crown entity, Sask Water; you have a Crown 

entity, SaskEnergy, and yes, there have been groups interested 

in forming a board because they see economic benefits to 

natural gas, the same as they see economic benefits to potable 

water being delivered to a number of communities. 

 

And I see nothing in your Act here that would prohibit that 

taking place, nor the borrowing of funds to do the installation 

of the delivery mechanism. They can go direct to well-head the 

same as any other institution can. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's not included as a definition of utility 

within this Act.  We haven't had any application by any 

municipality or local residents to proceed in this direction.  And 

I would suggest it probably fits under the Minister of Energy 

and Mines, because it's through his office that applications for 

delivery of and transmission of gas is processed, not through 

the RM Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, Madam Minister, it's the minister 

responsible for SaskEnergy that does that 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

particular function.  The Minister of Energy only monitors the 

big pipeline system in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

transmission of gas in and out of the province, and the 

collection of royalties and taxes in regard to that. 

 

The other business is handled currently by SaskEnergy, as Sask 

Water handles water.  And I'm wondering if groups would 

come forward to you as the minister responsible for this Act, if 

you would grant an audience and allow them to present their 

proposal to you.  Because the Act to me it . . . yes, it doesn't 

specifically name natural gas but it doesn't prohibit natural gas.  

And I'm wondering why you wouldn't allow the same type of 

cooperative effort to go forward in that regard as you would 

with water. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Section 226 of the Act describes those 

services that can be provided under public utilities: 

 

 (a) for the supply, collection, treatment, storage and 

distribution of water; 

 (b) for the collection, transmission, treatment and disposal of 

sewage or storm drainage; 

 (c) for the provision of radio or television services or both; or 

 (d) for the provision of a municipal transportation system. 

 

Those are the utilities that can be provided under this Act as a 

public utility. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Madam Minister, I stand corrected.  

Would you look at amending the Act to include natural gas? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well this is the first time that it has come 

to our attention, and no one has requested it.  And if there are 

groups of users out there that want to explore it, we will 

certainly consult with them and talk about whether it's an 

appropriate service to be delivered through a utility board. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The reason I ask, Madam Minister, is that the 

costs of delivery of natural gas as provided by SaskEnergy 

have become very prohibitive because of attitude more than 

anything else, and that program of rural distribution was 

basically put on hold.  There's nothing going on out there.  

People are looking at ways to band together to achieve what 

they can't . . . because the old program has basically been 

discontinued.  They don't have some of the same cost 

prohibitions that SaskEnergy has. 

 

There's lots of areas in the province that didn't get it in the first 

go-around and are wondering why they can't have access to it 

when they see these water groups forming all over the place.  

They've got federal money involved through the PFRA (Prairie 

Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and there's possibilities 

they also can access other programs to deliver this in a 

collective sense. 

And that's why I bring the proposition to you here today that 

they have people who own natural gas wells.  There's 

transmission lines available.  What they wish to do is do the 

same thing that water people are doing, and that's why I asked 

the question; at least that you would have an open mind about 

it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As I said, we haven't had the discussion 

with any municipality or groups of residents and we certainly 

will keep our mind open on that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, these 

amendments, as I understand, will allow rural municipalities to 

issue fire orders and supply emergency response services and to 

enter into cooperative arrangements with urban municipalities 

and Indian reservations to provide joint fire protection. 

 

One other thing that's been brought to our attention, particularly 

on the emergency response services, is that they are quite 

fearful of the labour legislation that is presently before the 

House.  And I'm wondering if you have had any indication 

from these particular areas in regard to that.  They are telling us 

that their costs will go up significantly when SARM and 

SUMA -- or SARM particularly -- when you were talking to 

them about amendments, did this issue raise itself at all in your 

discussions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Most of the fire departments that operate 

in rural Saskatchewan are volunteers and they are outside the 

purview of either The Labour Standards Act or The Trade 

Union Act, so I don't know what impact those could possibly 

have on the delivery of fire protection services in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm specifically talking about ambulance 

services, Madam Minister, and like-minded things as far as 

emergency response goes.  And I presume, unless I read it 

wrong, that those things would be included in these cooperative 

efforts that this Act allows. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The delivery of ambulance services 

would be under separate legislation.  Particularly in this 

legislation we're dealing with the emergency response for fire 

or mutual aid districts but not for services that are under the 

Department of Health, like ambulance services.  That's 

delivered, as you would know, under a separate Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, so none of the emergency response 

services that you envision would have . . . there would be no 

applications there at all involving either The Trade Union Act 

or Labour Standards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Volunteers do not fall under either The 

Labour Standards Act or The Trade Union Act, so I can't 

envision a circumstance where there would be any 

repercussions by changes in those Acts and the delivery of 

services, emergency services for rural residents. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to repeal The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Reorganization Act and to enact certain 

consequential provisions resulting from the repeal of that 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

The Chair: -- And at this time I'd ask the minister to introduce 

the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To my right I 

have Bill Reader, the deputy minister.  Behind me, to my right, 

is Ron Styles, associate deputy minister of Housing; to my left 

is Ken Alecxe, associate deputy minister of Culture and 

Recreation; immediately second to my right is Ron Davis, 

assistant deputy minister of municipal services; and behind me 

is Larry Chaykowski, executive director, administrative 

services. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, by the looks of the number of 

officials we have before us, it might be hard to get a head count 

and see if indeed we've got enough MLAs in the House to 

conduct business of the House today.  But a welcome to the 

minister and her officials for taking the time to come and join 

us this afternoon. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to start off with a question that's been 

on the minds of a few people in Wapella for quite a while.  I've 

been waiting for the opportunity to raise it with the Municipal 

Government.  It's a question that I went through fairly 

extensively with the Minister of Justice, but it certainly is an 

area that's responsible to your department, and that has to do 

with tendering.  And you're probably well aware of it.  The 

tendering process that took place by the town of Wapella back, 

I believe it was in 1991 or '92, and at that time the local council 

had awarded a contract to 

upgrade some water facilities, or a water treatment plant, to a 

local contractor or a contractor from the Esterhazy area. 

 

And everything seemed to be fine and dandy until the second 

lowest -- or the lowest tender actually, as it ended up at the 

time -- the tenderer who took the town to task really wasn't that 

much lower than the tender that had been offered.  But the town 

decided to let the tender to the contractor from Esterhazy, based 

on the fact that they had originally set their tender and let their 

tender with the notification that highest or lowest tender not 

necessarily accepted. 

 

And they felt that they had covered every angle that might be 

thrown at them and that at the end of the day they should 

maybe look at the closer contractor, because if they had any 

problems that arose from the contract, that they would still be 

money ahead by the fact that the person living closer . . . it 

wouldn't cost them as much to bring the contractor back if there 

was some problems that had arisen that weren't really related to 

the original job contract. 

 

(1615) 

 

And we're all well aware of the fact now that they were taken 

to court by Mike Robinson Service Plumbing & Heating Ltd.  

And the court came out and awarded Mr. Robinson $19,000 in 

damages.  And the judge indicated -- and I'm just going to read 

into the record from the firm Osman, Gardner and Gordon that 

had represented the town of Wapella.  Maybe I'll read the 

second paragraph, and there's a few other paragraphs I'd just 

like to read into the record here: 

 

 Mr. Justice Grant Armstrong of the Court of Queen's Bench 

presided at the Pre-Trial.  It was obvious that the Judge had 

read all the pleadings and materials very carefully by the 

detailed questions he asked.  He had also done some research 

in terms of the law and referred us to the Canadian Business 

Law Journal regarding the issue of liability. 

 

Unfortunately, Madam Minister, I haven't been able to find out 

which specific law journal he referred to, and I've been trying 

to find out so I could get some information on what he was 

specifically looking at. 

 

 This article supported the Plaintiff's position and the Judge 

made it very clear that, in his opinion, the Town would not 

succeed on the issue.  He stated that perhaps you could find a 

Judge who would have sympathy for the Town but really, 

that was the Town's only argument! 

 

And then he went on to give reasons as to why he awarded the 

sum of money of $18,000 -- pardon me, I think I said 19,000 

earlier -- 18,000 of damages. 

 

On page 2 of Ms. Gordon's letter, she says: 

 

 Finally, the Judge indicated to us that he certainly understood 

the difficulty of the council members in understanding the 

legal 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

interpretation of this "waiver or privilege clause".  He went 

on to say that if you called many lawyers in Saskatchewan 

and asked them for their opinion (without doing research) 

they would tell you that you could choose whomever you 

wanted. 

 

As the town did when they let the contract. 

 

 The Judge pointed out to the other side that actions such as 

this are particularly difficult for small towns which are facing 

many difficulties in these tough economic times (he 

commented on the possible loss of our service station).  The 

Judge commented that he understood that council members 

were trying to do their best for the Town. 

 

 Finally, the Judge pointed out that the Saskatchewan case 

decided by Judge Halvorson (the one he was referring to and 

made his decision was based on) involved Graham 

Construction Ltd.  Graham was awarded the contract and 

Kencor sued and was successful.  George Gette notes that one 

of the owners of Service Plumbing and Heating had 

considerable experience as a previous employee of Graham 

Construction Ltd.!! 

 

And it would seem to me that is the only reason . . . one of the 

major reasons Wapella to end up in a lawsuit, because it just so 

happened one of the employees of the Service Plumbing and 

Heating business that had also set a contract, happened to be 

aware of this case that had taken place a number of years ago. 

 

The big problem facing the town of Wapella, Madam Minister, 

I'm sure you can be well aware of, is the fact that not only did 

they have a cost of some $18,000 in damages; but by the time 

the end of the day came around they were facing something in 

the neighbourhood of around $12,000 in legal fees just to 

defend their actions as well -- actions which they felt they had 

done properly; they had done nothing wrong. 

 

The judge indicates he certainly understood where the town 

council was coming from.  The fact that he didn't perceive that 

they had done anything wrong as well, as they had done 

everything in their best . . . what their understanding of the law 

and in the best interests of the community. 

 

And what I'm wondering, Madam Minister, is what do towns 

like Wapella do when they set tenders or let tenders based on 

these facts and the knowledge that they have? 

 

And I happened to pick up a local paper about, I think it was 

two or three weeks after this judgement came down, and I see 

that the tenders that are being let are still being let with that 

same waiver in mind.  And I think what can happen . . . and it 

happens right across this province and it even happens the 

provincial government is letting tenders based on that waiver. 

And I think, Madam Minister, your department and your 

government should be looking at ways of informing 

communities what can happen and what's the alternative.  I 

think maybe what we need is a new process of tendering, at 

least informing people that this may not help you just by 

putting that waiver in. 

 

And I would like to know what can be done for the people of 

Wapella -- number one, what other options do they have; and 

number two, what is your department doing in making sure that 

communities are aware of the problems they may face if they 

would release a tender in such a manner? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank the member for that question, and 

there's a lot of issues in it.  Certainly you're right when you say 

that many small town councils are doing the best job they can, 

and circumstances like this are a surprise to them because it has 

been traditional that when tenders are put out there is usually a 

statement that says, the lowest or any tender may not 

necessarily be accepted.  And this judgement of course puts 

into question the legitimacy of that kind of a statement. 

 

What can we do for Wapella?  There really isn't anything that 

we can do as Municipal Government department for the town.  

They have gone before the courts.  A decision has been 

rendered by the judge on circumstances that he feels are those 

that pertain to the legalities of the situation. 

 

But on the question of how we can help prevent this from 

happening in the future, is a good and valid question and I 

appreciate it. 

 

Certainly we don't like to see municipalities get caught in 

situations like this where they have to expend monies that they 

hadn't anticipated through legal challenge, and it's difficult for 

them.  And what we have done is send out a bulletin to all 

clerks and administrators of all urban and rural municipalities.  

And I'll read it for you so that you'll have an understanding of 

where we are trying to help, and perhaps you have some 

suggestions about what we could do more.  And it goes like 

this, quote: 

 

 When municipalities are calling for tenders on projects or the 

supply of goods or services, many are using the following 

standard reservation clause: "the lowest or any tender may 

not necessarily be accepted and the village/town/RM of . . . 

reserves the right to reject any and all tenders." 

 

 Recent court challenges indicate this reservation clause may 

not be adequate to protect the municipality should it wish to 

accept any tender other than the lowest.  Whenever a 

municipality advertises for tenders, the contract must be 

awarded under the conditions as set out in the advertisement 

or the tender document. 

 

 One condition that is of particular concern is a local 

preference policy.  Municipalities must 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

notify potential bidders that a local preference policy is in 

effect when advertising the tender.  This can be done either 

in the advertisement or in a separate tender document. 

 

 The municipality must outline the policy or where a copy of 

the policy can be obtained.  The municipality must also 

review any similar policies affecting the awarding of the 

tender contract.  All parties in the tendering process must 

have notice of the terms affecting the awarding of the tender 

contract. 

 

 We suggest that each municipality review its tendering 

process. To avoid potential conflicts, the tender notices 

should specify all terms and conditions or factors it may rely 

on in making a selection.  This includes the unspoken 

municipal policies affecting the awarding of the tender 

contract. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

I'm wondering if you wouldn't mind tabling that letter for us, 

please, so we would have a copy of it on hand. 

 

Madam Minister, so what you're saying is you've sent out 

notice to local governments, both municipal and rural.  I would 

think that possibly the same notice should go to our provincial 

government.  Because I think any time a tender is let . . . and I 

notice a number of contracts let out by the provincial 

government have had the same rider in it, and at any time any 

department certainly could be challenged if local governments 

can be challenged.  And I think when it comes to the senior 

government, such as our provincial government, there could be 

substantially higher costs incurred if you run into a problem in 

that manner. 

 

You indicated that towns could indicate in their tender that they 

leave it at their discretion to choose a local contractor versus 

another contractor if a local contractor should bid on a project.  

Is it in your department's mind the fact that that type of tender 

or that type of a qualification would stand up in court, or could 

that be challenged as well and maybe be found as being 

something that a specific contractor could challenge and maybe 

take a town to court on, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- What we're trying to do is advise them of 

the necessity to have their lawyers check out their tender 

documents very carefully in view of this decision by the court.  

We're not providing them with legal services.  What we're 

saying is that where they have a reservation in the tender that is 

not necessarily going to accept the lowest bidder, that they have 

to alert the potential bidders of that circumstance.  And it 

would be advisable for the municipality when they're 

developing their documents, to check it out with a lawyer 

before they release them, to make sure that they are covered 

and legal challenge will not result. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, it would appear to me that 

maybe we need some changes basically through 

legislation as well to address some of these concerns so that 

councils have a better understanding.  If you ask for your 

lawyer's interpretation, and as I indicated when I read the letter, 

the judge indicated as well that if he took the request to a 

number of lawyers, you could come up with a number of 

different understandings of how they viewed the interpretation 

of that type of a contract. 

 

And what I'm wondering, Madam Minister, is if the 

Department of Community Services, in light of what has 

transpired here . . . And I understand that this isn't the only one, 

but simply because a number of communities have chosen to 

settle out of court, that we really haven't heard about a number 

of other circumstances.  If the department has pursued what the 

Minister of Justice . . . doing some research that would 

basically strengthen contractual agreements so that 

municipalities, local governments, or even the provincial 

government would not get caught in the same format and find 

themselves at the end of the day with a cost that they really 

hadn't anticipated. 

 

And as you've indicated as well, local governments are 

certainly strapped and they passed . . . introduced a Bill today 

that's going to cut some more of their funding which is going to 

make it that much more difficult.  And certainly we don't want 

to leave them in a position where they're finding themselves, 

after having set their budget, all of a sudden having to find a 

substantial sum of money. 

 

And in the town of Wapella I believe it was going to be 12 

mills that they would have to levy on the property taxes just to 

make up the shortfall that they ran into in there unless they 

found it elsewhere.  So I'm wondering, has your department 

looked at some options or other alternatives? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I expect that after we have sent this notice 

out to the municipalities, if there are problems out there that 

they have encountered they will be alerting us of those 

problems.  And we certainly, with our officials and Justice, will 

sit down and see if there is anything that we can do through 

amendments or through process that will provide some sense of 

security or comfort to those municipalities that are issuing 

tenders in the future.  But it will be something we'll take under 

advisement.  I appreciate the comments that you have made and 

we will look into it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, has SUMA as an umbrella 

organization for local governments raised this concern with 

your department at all? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, the first we heard of it was from the 

gentleman from Wapella and comments that you have made in 

the legislature.  But this is not an issue that has been brought to 

our attention by either of the municipal associations. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I think, Madam Minister, that's one of the things 

that has frustrated some of the people in Wapella as well, and 

the fact that their umbrella organization hasn't taken the 

concern and the 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

financial difficulty they've run into, the fact that they have 

picked up on that concern and raised it as an umbrella group.  

And I think that's one of their frustrations. 

 

Madam Minister, if I'm not mistaken, Mr. Sokalski had written 

your office and asked for a meeting.  I'm wondering, did you 

respond to Mr. Sokalski?  Would you be willing to grant him a 

meeting? 

 

It seems to me, the last I had talked to him, he still hadn't 

received or heard anything from your office or even the 

Minister of Justice's office regarding at least giving him an 

opportunity to raise some of the concerns on behalf of Wapella 

residents and seeking your input. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I know he has been in contact with my 

office.  He has talked to some of my staff.  On the issue 

specifically to Wapella, there's nothing that we can do about it.  

The judge has issued a judgement in the . . . or has issued an 

award in that case of $18,000.  I gather it was an out-of-court 

settlement.  That decision is now set and we can't overturn it.  

There's nothing much that we can do for Wapella or for the 

gentleman. 

 

I will talk to him if he wants to, but he must be aware that our 

actions now are proactive.  We are looking at how we can 

prevent these circumstances from occurring in the future, but 

there's nothing we can do at this time for the residents of 

Wapella. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  And I certainly 

hope that your department does take some of these things into 

consideration because you're right.  The fact that even though it 

is a pre-trial, I think the reason the town eventually -- and the 

town council -- decided just to settle out of court and accept the 

recommendations was that by the time they went to court . . . 

and it could drag out for one, two, or three years, and the costs 

associated would probably far surpass just settling out of court 

with the settlement the judges called for. 

 

And as well in settling, it's already set precedent.  How many 

times have we had this precedent set?  And no doubt maybe 

when communities, when times are flush and there was a lot of 

money around, you didn't really consider an $18,000 additional 

bill as being something to really worry about. 

 

But I think most communities, as has been reflected through 

governments across this land, are becoming a lot more careful 

and concerned with the way they disburse and dispense their 

finances.  And they want to hold onto them so they can provide 

a fair service to their constituents and to their ratepayers. 

 

Madam Minister, maybe there's . . . I'm wondering if there's 

someone in your office that could give me an indication of 

whether a community or an RM, through their liability 

insurance, would be able to cover this type of an expense.  

Does liability insurance that most 

communities carry cover this type of an expense they'd run 

into? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It would have to depend on their 

insurance contract.  If they have errors and omissions included 

in their liability insurance, it may well be covered.  But it 

would have to be under the terms of their insurance contract 

and they would have to look into it with their broker or their 

agent and find out whether or not it were covered. 

 

But many of the municipal councils are quite aware that they 

should take out error and omission insurance, liability 

insurance, and in most circumstances it is because they want to 

be protected against these type of decisions.  So I would say 

that they would have to check with their broker or their agent to 

see if this is covered under their local insurance policy. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So the best 

recommendation, I guess, that I could make then is that they 

would go to the agent that they've purchased the insurance 

through and the agent would go back and just see how far their 

insurance policy, what it covers, and whether it does cover that 

or have that error and omission clause. 

 

I thank you, Madam Minister, for your comments.  As I've 

indicated, it's unfortunate.  And I've talked to people in the 

community of Wapella and it just seems that really, as we've 

discussed today, there isn't a lot that can be done; it's after the 

fact. 

 

What I'm wondering, Madam Minister, would it be possible to 

find out which business journal the judge would have been 

quoting from in making his statement?  I've done some research 

and I can't.  I believe he was going back to a 1980 court case, 

but I haven't been able to . . . I understand there are business 

law journals and there's just one issue after another and we'd 

need to have an idea of which specific issue we're looking at in 

order to make that decision.  Would that be possible?  Could 

we get that information? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we'll ask our officials to work with 

the Department of Justice and provide you with that 

information. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Appreciate that.  Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I'd like to thank you for sending your globals over.  That helps 

out a lot. 

 

I have a few questions for you, primarily dealing with staffing 

and salaries and a few things like that that I'd like to talk to you 

about.  I'm going to ask you three things and you can just take 

note of them and if you can supply the information at a later 

date, that would be fine. 

 

I would like details of all expenses paid to ministerial staff in 

the last year.  I would like detail on all expenses 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

paid to the minister in the past year.  And I would like detail of 

all travel undertaken by ministerial staff in the past year 

including the total cost, cost per staff member, destination, and 

purpose of each trip.  And likewise the detail on all travel 

undertaken by yourself in the past year including total cost, 

destination, and purpose of each trip, and who accompanied 

you on those trips. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We'll provide you with that information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  This year you 

hired two new staff -- a Perry Erhardt and a Paula Hill.  Can 

you tell me what their qualifications are and if there was any 

type of competition held by yourself in selecting these new 

positions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The person who became the senior 

ministerial assistant in my office was a transfer and it was done 

internally and it was not through competition.  That person is a 

lawyer and holds a B.A. (Bachelor of Arts) and a B.Ed. 

(Bachelor of Education) as well, and has worked within 

government for a year previous to that.  The junior secretarial 

in my office has been there for over a year.  She holds a B.Ed. 

degree and I don't know if she was awarded the position 

through competition or not.  I will have to look that up and find 

out. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Can you identify for me, Madam Minister, 

which one is the lawyer in the senior staff position in your 

office? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's Perry Erhardt. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you.  You also, it appears, Madam 

Minister, have acquired another ministerial assistant who does 

not appear in your globals under new permanent employees.  

Can you tell us when Margaret Morrissette was hired and if 

there was a competition for her position? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Margaret Morrissette came to our office, I 

believe, in November.  I don't have the actual date; I'm trying to 

recall.  That was not through a competitive competition.  She 

was transferred from another minister's office to our office. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It appears, Madam Minister, that Ms. 

Morrissette was transferred from the Department of Finance.  Is 

she being paid out of that department or your department -- 

which is it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- She's being paid out of our department. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  It appears, Madam Minister, 

comparing the salary structure of Ms. Morrissette, when she 

was in the Department of Finance she was paid at 2,893, and 

yet in your operation is being paid 3,454.  That's an increase of 

19 per cent 

 I presume that this transfer was done through executive 

government. 

 

What I would like to know from you, is a 19 per cent increase . 

. . would you consider that fair in light of some other recent 

decisions that your government has made? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Ms. Morrissette was reclassified 

according to the grid, and she is now the intermediate 

ministerial assistant in the office and it was through that 

advancement on the grid that she got the increase. 

 

It is according to her qualifications and her responsibilities 

within our office, and because of that increase in responsibility 

she was awarded an increase in salary commensurate with her 

place on the scale or place on the grid. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, the individual came 

from the Department of Finance, which I would presume is one 

of the more difficult departments of government.  She comes 

over to your department with this . . . basically the same 

position, as I can see, a ministerial assistant 2.  We went 

through a recent by-election campaign when the Deputy 

Premier denied that any such raises were occurring at all. 

 

What is so onerous about her responsibilities now compared to 

what she was doing in the department and with the Department 

of Finance that would necessitate a 19 per cent increase when 

you've just recently brought laws into this Assembly taking 

away 6 per cent raises for judges because that wasn't deemed in 

the public interest, and yet you have no problem paying a 19 

per cent increase to a ministerial assistant 2 who switches from 

Finance to Municipal Government.  Could you explain a little 

more what these onerous responsibilities are that would 

necessitate that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can't tell you what she was doing in the 

minister's office in Finance, but I can tell you what her 

responsibilities are in my office. 

 

She is a ministerial assistant who is in charge of liaisoning with 

the department on recreation, cultural services.  That is a very 

active side of our department.  She is the person in my office 

who liaisons with the lotteries and all the lottery community as 

well.  She has a responsibility there that I think is expanding 

and requires a lot of communication, a lot of work. 

 

And I don't know exactly what her obligations and 

responsibilities were within Finance, but she is very qualified.  

She does good work and she accepted the position according to 

her place on the grid.  And as she moved into the intermediate 

ministerial assistant position, the grid then allocated her an 

appropriate compensation, as that grid position indicated it 

should. 

 

So I don't know if you say that's a pay increase; definitely it 

was a promotion.  And when you have promotions you usually 

get pay increases with them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think a lot of people in society today, 

Madam Minister, would really wonder at 19 per cent.  I mean 

your department has hacked and 



May 4, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

slashed your way through grants to the people that you deal 

with, with your relationships with Municipal Government.  

You've asked them all to take less.  You're asking them to pick 

up extra SAMA bills.  I mean it goes on and on and on.  And 

yet, I mean, I think 5 per cent is what the rest of the folks in the 

real world would consider a lot of money. 

 

Here we have this individual who moves from the same 

position to the same position -- you call it something else and 

you define a new grid -- and then you somehow can justify a 19 

per cent increase for a political hack in your office.  And that's 

what the public are upset with you about.  That's what they 

were upset with you about in Regina North West.  And yet you 

want to come into the legislature here and somehow justify this 

type of thing.  And it simply isn't justifiable. 

 

You can't bring legislation in here to deny one segment of the 

population an increase because it isn't in the best interests of 

the province and then turn around and give your political staff 

those kind of increases. 

 

It seems, Madam Minister, that you've been very active in the 

hiring and the raise department, because since last year you 

have hired 33 new in-scope permanent employees and you are 

spending $1.8 million more on this class of employee.  That 

works out to $54,545 per new employee.  Even if we assume 

that all of your previous in-scope permanents got a 5 per cent 

raise, that only accounts for $300,000 of the increased 

spending.  In that case the new employees must be getting 

about $45,000 each.  And just for reference, last year your 

average in-scope employee got about 32,000.  How do you 

explain this dramatically increased employee cost? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all I'd have to say I don't 

accept your analysis of the figures.  I think you obviously have 

taken a number of figures out of context and decided that 

you're going to work your magic with them. 

 

I want to go back and talk for one more moment about Miss 

Morrissette.  Again there was a salary grid that was developed 

in consultation with the PSC (Public Service Commission).  It 

had with it certain qualifications and certain responsibilities.  

That, I think, was a step forward, and we have said that time 

and again. 

 

When we have people who fall under those qualifications and 

with a number of years service, then they are allocated a certain 

salary.  If that means that they were in an inappropriate position 

on the grid before or there was no grid before and when the 

grid applied to them they received an increase, I don't think that 

you can characterize that as a 19 per cent increase. 

 

What happened was she was reclassified into another position.  

The position had different responsibilities.  It 

took into her account her education and her background, and 

according to that she was allocated a salary. 

 

Now in regard to the positions that you're talking about, we will 

take your question and we will apply our own analysis to it and 

give to you the correct answer.  But at this point in time I can't 

understand how you arrived at those conclusions that you have 

arrived at and what numbers you have taken out of the material 

that we've given you.  But our officials will review that 

question and provide an answer for you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, all I did was took the 

globals that were presented last year and the globals that were 

presented this year and just went category by category across 

the board. 

 

I'll give you another example.  Looking at your in-scope 

temporaries, you have more than doubled your spending in this 

class of employee even though you only hired eight more 

people. 

 

You've went from 46 to 54.  So just exactly so you know what 

the numbers are, in last year's globals which were presented 

here, you reported 46 employees receiving $523,000.  This year 

you have 54 temporaries receiving 1,088,022. 

 

So last year the average temporary employee, just comparing 

the two, is 11,369.  Even if we assume a 5 per cent increase, 

which is possible, this still comes out to 11,938 per employee, 

or a total of 644,000.  And that would be for all of your 54 

temporaries. 

 

How do you explain the difference between the figure and the 

actual spending in this area? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well when you're comparing the figures 

with last year, you'll have to be mindful that last year the 

figures were related to Community Services.  We reorganized 

the government March 1, 1993.  And under that reorganization, 

a number of positions were transferred from Rural 

Development into the new Department of Municipal 

Government, as well as a number of positions were transferred 

from Public Safety into the division of Municipal Government 

as well. 

 

So there was an amalgamation of various other departments 

into our department, and that probably explains those increases 

in numbers that you have talked about.  But our Department of 

Municipal Government is not the same as the Department of 

Community Services, and so the figures that you relate from 

last year to this year are just out of context. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I don't understand, Madam Minister.  

We're just talking about numbers of bodies here.  Now you can 

do all the reorganization and amalgamation you got, but the 

information that you gave me is that you have X number of 

bodies now; last year you had X number of bodies. 

 

Are you telling me that people that were in Rural Affairs were 

paid that much more than the folks that 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 1994 

were in Urban Affairs?  I mean, you've gone from 46 to 54.  

Okay?  So you reorganized.  They ended up with eight more 

bodies. 

 

But you've more than doubled the total salary for the eight 

extra bodies.  I can't believe, in my understanding of how the 

public service works, that those people make that much more 

money.  We're talking about . . . and these are your temporaries 

here.  How in the world can you spend nearly double the 

amount of money with only eight extra employees?  They aren't 

paid that much more. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You are looking at the in-scope, 

temporary, casual labour services -- those are the numbers?  

Those are not full-time positions.  They may be short-term 

contracts that come in for two or three months and then leave 

again.  So it's hard to relate the number of positions and divide 

that into the salary and get what you think is a salary per 

person.  It doesn't work that way. 

 

There were, as I said, a number of in-scope, temporary, casual 

positions that were very short term in nature and had a specific 

job and a specific contract applied to them.  So it's not a salary 

grid that you're applying here but it's a contract. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Did you have 54 temporary employees in this 

category in the last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The number 54 relates to the number of 

people as of March 31, 1994 that were there.  Now that number 

fluctuates up and down over the course of a year.  It may have 

been more, it may have been less.  But as of March 31, 1994 

there are 54 in-scope, temporary, casual people.  That number 

could have been greater on December 1 or it could have been 

less on June 1. 

 

The salary that you have there is the global salary that was 

spent in that category for the whole year.  So you can't relate 

just those 54 people divided into the salary and get a salary grid 

or any compensation that is meaningful out of that.  As I said, 

you have to be aware that the 54 relates to the casual number of 

people on staff as of March 31. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, last year I didn't get that . . . 

or my colleague didn't get that explanation, because we 

checked very carefully.  When you were asked, the number that 

you gave last year was 46, and you didn't define that it was any 

specific day. 

 

How many did you have then?  I mean one of the reasons that 

we go through this exercise is so we don't have to . . . If you'd 

have put down 112 here on December 31, then I would have 

been able to do a little bit different mathematics. 

 

So how many did you have, Madam Minister?  Am I going to 

have to go through this whole package again and question 

every number that I'm given here?  I wanted to know how 

many in-scope, temporary, casual people you've had, and you 

pick a number on 

a specific day.  I presume that number of 54 looks better than it 

has on some other day. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Referring you back to your question -- 

question no. 1(a), personnel report -- no. 1 says, record the 

estimated or actual number of employees or staff broken down 

by categories indicated at March 31, 1994. 

 

So from your question, the staff presumed what you wanted to 

know was how many people were employed at March 31, 

1994, and the figure was 54. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, would you tell me what the 

greatest number of employees in this category you had some 

time in the last year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have that figure here, but we'll 

provide it for you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  If you would provide to me, Madam 

Minister, what the greatest number were and what the least 

number were, maybe we'll change our map a little. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


