




















































Hansard: March 16, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 929 

 March 16, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

to present a petition on behalf of some 5,000 -- actually more 

than 5,000 -- Saskatoon residents who are gravely concerned 

about the possible effects of certain changes to the health care 

delivery system that have been proposed by the Saskatoon 

District Health Board. 

 

The prayer of the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) cause the Minister of 

Health to examine the proposal to close emergency and 

cardiac care at City Hospital and to involve the medical 

and nursing staff at City Hospital in an open review 

process before any decision is finalized; (2) examine all 

proposals for alternative approaches with a view to 

seeking a solution to keep the emergency and cardiac care 

units open at City Hospital; (3) to delay any renovations 

at University Hospital needed to accommodate the 

decision to close emergency and cardiac care at City 

Hospital until a full consultation with City Hospital 

nursing staff and medical staff has taken place and their 

alternative proposals have been examined; (4) to respect 

the voices of the thousands of taxpayers who have signed 

this petition, to ask that the new City Hospital financed by 

their tax dollars will provide safe and efficient health care, 

including the components of emergency care and cardiac 

care which it was designed to deliver; (5) to report to the 

petitioners within three days of the presentation of this 

petition the decision of the minister with respect to the 

requests outlined in this petition. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce through you 

and to you to the Assembly this afternoon, guests who have an 

interest in the Clarence-Steepbank Lake area of the province.  

We have with us . . . I'm not sure if all these people are present:  

Gene and Myra Froc from Lumsden, John and Irma Kurtz from 

Moose Jaw, Allan Steinkey from Saskatoon, Chris Schultz 

from Nipawin, Lois Barlow-Wilson from Regina, Barrett 

Halderman from Humboldt and Ken Lozinski from the 

Department of Environment and Natural Resources here in 

Regina. 

 

I also want to give special recognition today to Hal Miller.  Hal 

was responsible for doing the first background work for the 

Clarence-Steepbank park area and without his contribution we 

wouldn't be making this area a provincial park.  Hal was a 

resource officer with the Department of Environment and 

Natural Resources who died tragically in an automobile 

accident before Christmas. 

 

So I'd like to ask all members of the Assembly today to 

acknowledge our appreciation for the efforts of these 

individuals who have helped to create this wilderness park and 

also to welcome them to our Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to my colleagues, the 

members of the Assembly, a constituent of mine and a 

small-business person in Regina Wascana Plains, Jenny Huber, 

who's seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I ask members to welcome her at this her first time in the 

Legislative Assembly.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Discrimination 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

recognize International Day for the Elimination of 

Discrimination. 

 

While this day will officially be commemorated on March 21, 

many individuals including members of the Liberal caucus will 

wear bows for the next week to demonstrate support for the 

elimination of racism in Canada.  These bows, Mr. Speaker, 

contain red, yellow, black, and white ribbons, representing the 

colours of the human race. 

 

Racism in any form is a detriment to our society and must not 

be tolerated.  Unfortunately there are far too many examples 

which demonstrate that racism does exist.  We must look at this 

day not as an occasion to celebrate the advances we have made 

in eliminating racism; instead, we should use this opportunity 

to reaffirm our commitment to end racial discrimination of all 

kinds. 

 

Today I am asking all people to make this commitment to 

improve our society and each of us as individuals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clarence-Steepbank Provincial Wilderness Park 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Environment and Resources will later this afternoon bring forth 

the proposal of the 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

Clarence-Steepbank Lake Provincial Wilderness Park, which is 

included within the parks amendment Act.  Clarence-Steepbank 

is located in my constituency 150 kilometres north-east of P.A. 

(Prince Albert).  It will become Saskatchewan's fourth 

provincial wilderness park.  I especially want to recognize the 

work of my constituent, Adam Kosowan, of the department, 

who designed the park area. 

 

I also did consult with my constituents.  The new park will be 

the smallest of four provincial wilderness parks.  This area has 

not been logged.  I visit and talk to cottagers and users from the 

East Trout and Whiteswan Lakes area . . . requests for 

protection for that area.  The expanded park area is being 

withdrawn from the Weyerhaeuser FMLA (Forest Management 

Licence Agreement) agreement.  I am proud to see this area 

protected for the future generations to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Study on Unwed Mothers 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to report 

today that Murphy Brown has been vindicated and Dan Quayle 

has been proven wrong once again.  An extensive 20-year study 

on unwed mothers and their children, financed by the federal 

government, has just released its findings.  Some of its 

conclusions will surprise us; some will not. 

 

First and most important, it states that, "Poverty . . . is the big 

culprit when it comes to the health and welfare of children."  

Children who are raised in poverty score lower on a whole 

range of education tests, and of course are therefore likely to 

remain in poverty and raise their own children in poverty. 

 

Following from that conclusion is the second, the one that 

Quayle would not like.  It is: ". . . a mother's schooling, not her 

marital status, (that) . . . determines how well her children turn 

out."  An educated mother will raise an educated child who is 

more likely not to fall into poverty and the welfare cycle.  I 

quote: 

 

. . . lack of education, rather than lack of a husband, that is 

the crucial factor in determining whether a mother lives in 

poverty or not. 

 

The conclusion, it seems to me, is clear.  If we are serious 

about breaking the poverty cycle, as we say we are, we start 

with the child and his or her education and we ensure that it is 

complete and thorough.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sale of Imp-Pak Packaging 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues.  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today and to 

announce a happy ending and a new beginning for one of the 

government's economic development projects.  Our 

government has finalized the sale of Imp-Pak Packaging in 

Swift Current to a company called UFR, Urban Forest 

Recyclers. 

 

It is a happy ending because the sale marks a successful 

conclusion to this government's involvement in this venture.  It 

is a new beginning because this business will once again be up 

and running and providing new jobs and economic growth in 

Saskatchewan and Swift Current. 

 

One of our key objectives, Mr. Speaker, was to arrange a sale 

that didn't entail any further government investment in this 

particular project.  I'm happy to announce that we have met all 

of those objectives.  And while meeting this goal, we also 

achieved some other very important objectives. 

 

This deal, Mr. Speaker, creates 10 jobs immediately.  And 

during the start-up of the business there will be more jobs.  And 

as the business gets fully established, 45 jobs will be created 

during the summer and 60 jobs by fall.  This is a cash sale, and 

puts $8.5 million back into the public coffers. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, it is easy for like-minded 

people to cooperate with each other, but it takes 

open-mindedness and commitment to the common good for 

those with different agendas to come together. 

 

A demonstration of this commitment occurred yesterday in 

Regina when the Saskatchewan Labour Force Development 

Board held its first meeting.  The 24-member board consists of 

representatives from labour, business, education and training 

organizations, aboriginal, women's, minority, and 

disadvantaged groups.  The board was selected by a steering 

committee headed by Barb Byers of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour and Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce vice-president, Brian Kinder.  The board will advise 

governments on training and labour force development and 

make recommendations to the Canadian Labour Force 

Development Board. 

 

I know that all members will join me in recognizing this 

cooperative effort by those who have not always sat willingly 

at the same table.  Jobs, better training, more cost effectiveness, 

will surely result. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Yorkton Strategic Planning Committee 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This 

afternoon I wish to take the occasion to recognize and 

congratulate the strategic planning committee, and its 

participants in Yorkton, for the work they do in planning, 

promoting, and developing the city and the area around it. 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

Through the cooperative efforts of men and women who 

represent all facets of the community, we have seen, in five 

short years, growth and accomplishments in the city that are 

simply outstanding.  Twice a year for the past five years, 60 to 

80 community leaders come together, set goals, objectives, 

form task groups and then go to work in subcommittees to 

work on projects. 

 

Just last week the 1993 economic status and business survey 

was published and the results are remarkable.  Building permits 

for the second year consecutive were only third to Regina and 

Saskatoon.  The 1993 business survey went on to say that sales 

in Yorkton exceeded expectations.  The economic outlook for 

1994 is reasonably optimistic with employment levels 

remaining the same and increasing by 25 per cent.  Thirty-three 

per cent of the businesses surveyed indicated that they will be 

doing some type of business expansion in 1994. 

 

1993 was highlighted by bringing a major retail outlet to 

Yorkton, which is one of the objectives of that committee.  The 

1994 projects, just to name a couple, include an urban 

development centre and supporting of the district health board 

for Yorkton to become a major health care centre. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, the chairman of the community 

strategic planning committee stated, and I quote:  Together we 

can make Yorkton the promise of the Parkland; let's continue to 

build on our success. 

 

Community cooperation is their philosophy and I congratulate 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Optimist Club Support of Youth 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure everybody 

heard today and would like to join me in congratulating the 

Holy Cross School choir from Saskatoon for a fantastic 

performance in our legislature. 

 

The choir, whose director is Jacquline Ackerman, have come to 

Regina to participate in the Optimist Club music festival.  This 

three-day event starting today and ending March 18 will bring 

together 20 choirs to perform. 

 

We know the Optimist Club contributes greatly to our 

communities, from Canada Day celebrations to various youth 

programs that they have cooperated and helped with the people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

This year's youth program has a slogan we would probably 

enjoy -- just say no -- to help with all of us in joining the fight 

against youth drug usage.  The Optimist Club should be 

commended on its great efforts to help and guide the youth of 

our communities down brighter roads. 

 

Today's performance demonstrated that these young adults, 

who are obviously gifted musically, are also fine students, and 

this is a credit to our school system. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank and congratulate the 

Optimist Club and the Holy Cross choir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before calling the next item on the agenda, I 

want to draw members' attention to the Rules and Procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly in regards to exhibits.  It says in the 

Rules and Procedures that the exhibit of non-parliamentary 

items on members' desks and in the Chamber should be 

prohibited. 

 

Now certainly the wearing of items on your clothing is 

acceptable, but referring to them and stating what the cause or 

the reason for wearing them makes that an exhibit and is simply 

not acceptable in the legislature.  So I ask members to please 

refrain from doing so in the future.  You may wear them but if 

you then explain what they are being worn for, you're using it 

as an exhibit and that is simply not acceptable. 

 

I ask members now to turn to oral questions. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, your department recently 

sent out a four-page colour brochure in an attempt to sell your 

new Labour Standards Act.  Mr. Minister, can you tell us how 

many of these brochures have been distributed, how they were 

distributed, who they were sent to, and what is the cost to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers for this public relations exercise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, there were 

approximately 1,500 of those letters went out.  I want to say to 

members opposite, I have spoken to all 1,500 of them.  So this 

wasn't a public relations exercise.  This was the fulfilment of a 

personal undertaking given to these people when we are 

discussing labour legislation. 

 

What we're attempting to do is to set aside the devastation of 

the Tory years and build a consensus between business and 

labour so that they might work together for our mutual benefit.  

I know the members opposite like to set labour against 

management, divide and conquer.  All I can say is that's not our 

approach, that's not what we've done, and we think we've 

achieved a reasonable degree of success here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

brochure you sent out does not tell both sides of the story.  You 

do not tell the employees that some jobs will be lost as a result 

of these changes, and 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

you provide almost no detail to employers about the cost of 

these changes to Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Mr. Minister, why aren't you telling both sides of the story?  

Why aren't you telling Saskatchewan people that in addition to 

the benefits outlined in your brochure, this program will also 

have real costs in terms of job losses and financial cost to 

Saskatchewan businesses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well unlike Liberals and 

Conservatives opposite who seem to have an allergic reaction 

to anything which sounds like labour legislation, we think 

labour legislation is a part, an essential part, of the economic 

restructuring which is taking place in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I know you people may be wedded 

firmly to the 17th century -- I wish you the best of luck in 

trying to maintain it -- but this government is getting this 

province ready for the 21st century, and progressive labour 

legislation's an essential part of that. 

 

We did send to the business community and to everyone else 

we met with, a costing of these proposals.  That is certainly not 

something that the Conservatives indulged in when they were 

in office.  None of their proposals were ever costed and you 

never bothered to tell anyone what you were doing. 

 

So I say to members opposite, we are seeking to build a 

consensus; we think we've had some success.  I know you're 

allergic to cooperation.  You want to set one group against 

another . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Minister, I won't 

comment on your rhetoric; I'll let the public judge that for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, many business people I have spoken to have 

expressed concerns about the Price Waterhouse study.  They 

would like to see exactly how this study was conducted, what 

questions were asked, and how some of the very sweeping 

conclusions were drawn. 

 

Mr. Minister, by Price Waterhouse's own admission, this study 

is inconclusive.  They admit that no questions were asked about 

several of the ideas dealt with in your legislation such as 

additional work hours.  And in some areas the results were 

extremely inconclusive, like the estimates that the extension of 

notice provisions will cost businesses anywheres between 

400,000 and $4 million.  Quite a stretch, Mr. Minister.  Hardly 

an accurate estimate when you have such a large range. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you clear up some of this confusion today by 

releasing the entire Price Waterhouse study, including the 

survey questions and the results, and table them here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to say to both Liberals and 

Conservatives opposite, that we are attempting to develop a 

different approach than you are.  One of the things we are 

doing, which was not part of your . . . is that we have provided 

information up front. 

 

I want to say to members opposite that I'm a bit surprised that 

Liberals and Conservatives . . .  I guess I shouldn't be.  If you're 

prepared to knee-jerk vote against the legislation without ever 

having seen it, I guess you're probably prepared to reject Mr. 

Rosten's analysis of this without ever having understood it, and 

it seems without ever having read it. 

 

But if the Conservative caucus -- I say this, Mr. Speaker -- if 

the Conservative caucus and the Liberal caucus want Mr. 

Rosten to appear and assist them in understanding what we're 

doing, I'd think we'd do that and I think we'd take that very 

seriously.  So if you want to hear, I'll make him available to 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, first 

of all I'm not too sure that the Liberals will appreciate you 

suggesting that I speak on their behalf, but I'll let them 

comment on that for themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems that the Price Waterhouse study did not 

deal with the most important issue, namely how many jobs will 

be lost and how many potential new jobs will not be created as 

a result of this legislation.  Or if they did study this issue, the 

results were never released. 

 

Mr. Minister, the opposition feels that there should be a free 

and open debate among members of this legislature, employers 

and employees, about this important piece of legislation, and 

we would welcome meeting with the people that you 

mentioned before.  Now these things cannot happen, Mr. 

Minister, however, unless we all have access to the same 

information -- the information that you have access to. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you release the Price Waterhouse study 

today so that an open and informed debate on this Bill can take 

place?  Will you table that in the legislature and will you also 

table any other studies or information or opinions, written or 

suggested, that you have access to?  We'd appreciate having all 

of the information and the interview.  Would you do that, 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I guess one shouldn't be surprised that 

the Liberals and Conservatives opposite vote against the Bill 

without ever having seen it.  One 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

shouldn't be surprised that you leap to conclusions about the 

cost of it without ever having digested the study which was 

done. 

 

But I say to members opposite, now that you've had the 

legislation there's going to be a full and free debate in this 

legislature and we welcome your comments on it.  We hope 

they are a bit better considered than your reaction to first 

reading when you voted against it without ever having seen it.  

We hope your next reaction is a little more thoughtful than your 

last. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Victims of Violence Legislation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, members 

of the official opposition have indicated their full support for 

the intent of legislation brought into this Assembly to protect 

the victims of violence, domestic violence.  Mr. Speaker, we're 

all aware of the fact that any violent crime must be dealt with 

and dealt with fairly and as fairly as it can be under the legal 

system under which society allows it.  But, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a very sincere concern with the legislation that was 

presently introduced or reintroduced the other day in this 

Assembly. 

 

Members of the legal community, constitutional experts, and 

even those involved in the assistance of abused women, have 

publicly voiced concern regarding the vulnerability of the 

legislation to court challenges based on the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms. 

 

My question to the Minister of Justice: Mr. Minister, the intent 

of the Bill, I believe, is honourable but will it stand a court 

challenge?  Have you done the necessary homework?  Have 

you asked your department to determine whether or not this 

legislation is within the bounds of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for that important question.  The matter of the constitutionality 

of a Bill like this is of utmost concern to the government and to 

the Department of Justice.  We spent a long time with our top 

people considering the constitutional position of the provisions 

in this Bill, and the advice from our top officials in the 

department is that it is constitutional.  It was drafted in such a 

way as to clearly be acceptable from a constitutional point of 

view. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate the fact that you've taken the time to review the 

legislation with your officials.  However, Mr. Minister, there 

are a number of men and women in the legal field who have the 

opinion that it may not stand. 

 

Doug Schmeiser, a University of Saskatchewan law professor 

and constitutional expert, says that, and I quote: there are great 

concerns.  I think that there are all kinds of potential attacks.  

He suggests that the law could violate the right to life and 

liberty, right to presumption of innocence until a fair hearing is 

held, and the right to a lawyer without delay.  As you know, 

Mr. Minister, these are fairly fundamental premisses on which 

our society is based. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you may say you are confident that your 

advisers have filled you in on the law.  It would be a profound 

shame if you have raised the hopes of victims of violence and 

at the end of the day they are proven wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table the opinions, the legal opinions, 

that you have received regarding this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think we can get into this in 

committee, and I think that it's very important that I be able to 

tell the member what the legal advice is that I have obtained 

with respect to the constitutionality of this Bill.  We are aware, 

of course, of Professor Schmeiser's views and they were not 

unexpected.  Without adding anything to that remark, though, I 

want to say this: the government believes that from a policy 

point of view this Bill is a very, very important thing for us to 

do.  We want to do it because it is an important thing to do.  

We believe it to be constitutionally acceptable and we simply 

have to deal with any challenges to its constitutionality when 

those challenges are raised in court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Another question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, I 

might add that no one disagrees with you on that fact.  

However there is another concern, that the provincially 

appointed justices of the peace may be infringing on an area of 

law that only federally appointed judges, such as Court of 

Queen's Bench justices, can deal with.  There seems to be 

widespread agreement that this new law may be vulnerable to 

this point. 

 

Mr. Minister, I say again, the intent is honourable and I fully 

support your efforts, but have you set yourself up, and the 

victims of domestic violence, for a fall?  Would you give some 

real level of assurances and comfort that you have ensured the 

constitutionality of this law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I believe I can give the member that 

comfort right now by saying that this question of the 

jurisdiction of justices of the peace to make the kind of orders 

that are contemplated in this Bill was considered by the 

Department in depth at the time that the provisions were being 

drafted, and they are satisfied and I'm satisfied on the basis of 

their advice, that this is a constitutional and appropriate thing to 

do.  But we can get into that in much more detail during our 

committee discussion of the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to Saskatoon City Hospital 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Health.  The 5,372 



934 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

signatures I laid before this Assembly this afternoon, come 

from people who place a great deal of importance on the 

opinions of doctors and nurses in our hospitals. 

 

Madam Minister, how much importance does your department 

and the wellness model place on the expertise and experience 

on the front-line health care delivery professionals in our 

hospitals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

thank the member opposite for her question.  Obviously she 

knows that we do put a lot of importance into the need for 

consultation and cooperation with health professionals in health 

care reform.  We have around our round table, on the Rural 

Health Advisory Committee, on many of our committees that 

are developing health reform, we have nurses and doctors who 

are represented, and other health care professionals. 

 

The Saskatoon Health Board consults with staff and physicians 

on an ongoing basis and there is very substantial consultation 

that takes place.  And people work through solutions 

cooperatively. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, the front-line staff, the doctors and nurses at City 

Hospital, are telling us that the closure of the cardiac and 

emergency care units at that hospital constitute a danger to the 

safety of other patients throughout that facility.  And I quote 

from a letter written by an RN (registered nurse) at City 

Hospital about patients who may suffer a heart attack in the 

hospital: 

 

This group of patients also requires the services of Internal 

Medical Specialists.  These physicians get . . . 80% of their 

referrals through the Emergency department.  If . . . 

Emergency . . . (closes) we risk losing valuable and 

knowledgeable physicians from Saskatoon (City Hospital 

and from the city of Saskatoon itself). 

 

Madam Minister, can you tell us whether your department 

officials were involved in any objective analysis as to whether 

the closure of the emergency care and coronary care units will 

constitute a threat to the safety of all patients at the hospital? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 

full well that the Saskatoon Health Board makes the decisions 

as to where the services are going to be located in Saskatoon.  

And I have every confidence in Mr. Cliff Wright and the other 

members of the Saskatoon Health Board that they will make 

the appropriate decision. 

 

I have also been advised by the Saskatoon Health Board that 

they have done a very extensive audit reviewing emergency 

services in Saskatoon before determining how the service 

consolidation will take place. 

 

It is my understanding that the audit findings indicate that there 

isn't a need for three emergency units in Saskatoon and that 

there is a need for two.  It's also my understanding that the 

Saskatoon Health Board will be using staff and physicians to 

form the emergency services unit.  They will be consulting with 

them and working with them and they will -- the staff and 

physicians -- will be planning the services in that regard.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, I did not solicit the 5,372 signatures that I laid before 

this Assembly.  Those signatures came from hundreds of 

nursing and medical staff at City Hospital in Saskatoon, from 

patients, from families, and from taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

If the process were working, the nurses and doctors at City 

Hospital would feel that their legitimate arguments, not 

emotional reactions, Madam Minister, but legitimate 

arguments, were being listened to.  And unlike what you've 

said today, the Saskatoon District Health Board has its plan in 

place but has not acknowledged the request for a meeting with 

the concerned City Hospital staff. 

 

Will you participate in ensuring that there is an objective 

review of their concerns so that the potential costs -- and these 

costs being both human and financial -- in closing emergency 

and cardiac care at City Hospital can be addressed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I will certainly, Mr. Speaker, pass on the 

concerns of the member opposite to the chair of the Saskatoon 

Health Board.  If the allegations that she has made against the 

Saskatoon Health Board are accurate, I will bring that to the 

attention of the Saskatoon Health Board. 

 

My information is there has been very extensive consultation.  

In the final analysis, however, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon 

Health Board will make the best decision as to where 

emergency services will be located.  And I have every 

confidence in Mr. Cliff Wright and the Saskatoon Health Board 

that they will make the appropriate decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, the taxpayers and the health care professionals on this 

particular petition are telling us that there are no legitimate or 

justifiable financial arguments for the closure decision.  In fact, 

what they're suggesting is if they were able to meet with the 

health board in Saskatoon that they could show ways, 

substantial ways, of being able to save money. 

 

Another quote, Madam Minister, from a health care 

professional: 

 

The new . . . (cardiac care) and Emergency . . . were 

designed and built with substantial staff 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

and physician input (at City Hospital). 

 

If the Health Board is allowed to go ahead with its 

proposed changes, the area that houses the present 

(cardiac) Care Unit is . . . (going) to be left (entirely) 

vacant.  And the hundreds (upon hundreds) of thousands of 

dollars (that have been) spent on equipment (all financed 

by the people of Saskatchewan and charitable 

contributions) will be wasted. 

 

Madam Minister, what responsibility do you assume to see that 

the concerns of these people are fully investigated before 

decisions are going to be made that may in fact cost the 

taxpayers more money if they proceed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I will 

bring the concerns of the member opposite to the attention of 

the chair of the Saskatoon Health Board, and we will ask him to 

look into her concerns. 

 

The fact is however, as I indicated in my earlier response, these 

decisions will be made by the Saskatoon Health Board.  I also 

have every confidence . . . I know that Mr. Cliff Wright is very 

proud of the City Hospital and he takes a certain pride in that 

facility.  And I know that whatever decision the Saskatoon 

Health Board makes will be a decision that is going to be for 

the benefit of Saskatoon and district, and it will be the 

appropriate health care decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Melfort Pipeline Project 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for Sask Water.  Mr. 

Minister, your government likes to talk about the due diligence 

that takes place before any project is undertaken in this 

province.  If that's the case, Mr. Minister, why in the world is 

the Melfort pipeline project in such a complete mess?  Where 

was the due diligence when you decided to award a major 

portion of the contract to an Alberta firm, A K Construction, 

over a Regina firm at an additional retendering cost of 

$187,000?  Where was the due diligence when A K 

Construction went bankrupt, leaving unpaid bills in the Melfort 

area of about $700,000? 

 

Mr. Minister, could you explain the due diligence that went 

into awarding this contract to a company that obviously was 

incapable of completing the work properly and appeared to be 

on the verge of bankruptcy, even before the contract was 

awarded? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member opposite.  Mr. 

Speaker, the portion of the pipeline that the member refers to is 

the Melfort to Weldon pipeline which was done by A and K 

Construction.  It is a completed portion of the pipeline.  The 

November 1992 estimate on that section of the pipeline, Mr. 

Speaker, was $2.105 million.  The final projected cost of that 

section is $1.8 million, Mr. Speaker.  The pipeline is in good 

condition; the job was good. 

 

I want to tell the member opposite that the company did go 

bankrupt.  There is a bond in place to protect the local 

businesses.  And I as a businessman am concerned with local 

businesses.  But there is a bond in place.  And Sask Water also 

has a hold-back so that all the local businesses in the Melfort 

area are protected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 

forgot one important consideration -- a pipeline is supposed to 

transport water, not leak water, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have another document here which speaks to 

the tremendous amount of due diligence which your 

government put into this project.  It's a copy of the receivership 

notice that was filed on A K Construction following their 

bankruptcy.  It says that the receiver manager, W.W. 

McCullough and Associates, is not satisfied that all bonding 

documents were properly completed by A K Construction. 

 

Mr. Minister, where was the due diligence in making sure that 

this contractor had completed all of the bonding requirements 

and was capable of completing the work?  And how did you 

possibly award such a major contract to a company that 

obviously could not meet those requirements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, the letter that 

was received by the receiver was in error.  Actually the bond is 

in place and the bond is good and the bond will protect the 

local businesses of the Melfort community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are leaks 

on the line and I do not deny that.  But in the case of Rafferty, 

for instance, we don't know if there's a leak there and we may 

never know if there's a leak there.  And that was only a hundred 

million dollars over budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to tell the member opposite that yes, the line has 

leaks, the leaks will be fixed, and the Melfort region will be 

receiving water shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, maybe 

you should go down to Rafferty these days and see that the dam 

is holding water and your pipeline is not holding water, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

A K Construction left about $700,000 in unpaid bills from 

Saskatchewan suppliers, and the receiver has already identified 

about $2 million in additional 



936 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

debts.  The company apparently was not properly bonded as the 

documents by the receiver suggests, and the assets seized by 

the receiver are nowhere near enough to cover these debts, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, will these unpaid bills be paid?  When and by 

whom, Mr. Minister?  Mr. Minister, who is going to end up 

footing the bill for your gross incompetence and negligence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Firstly, I want 

to assure the member opposite that there is a bond in place.  

The bond is $695,000.  There is a $177,000 hold-back by Sask 

Water.  And unlike what the members in the Liberal Party and 

the members in the Conservative Party are saying, Mr. Speaker, 

the local businesses are owed $47,000, not the $700,000 that 

they've been spreading all over the community of Melfort and 

area.  The bond is in place, Mr. Speaker, and the local 

businesses will be covered for the bills that are owed to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

receiver says, yes there is a bond in place but the bond is not 

adequate to deal with the problem, Mr. Minister.  That's what 

the receiver, the person put in charge of completing the 

transaction, has said about your project, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, the old mayor of Melfort personally gave the 

assurance to the city council that this wouldn't happen yet the 

contractor went bankrupt.  The contractor left hundreds of 

thousands in unpaid bills.  The contractor was not properly 

bonded.  The contractor did not complete the work.  The part 

that is completed is leaking like a sieve, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you hold an independent review of this entire 

fiasco so we can see how many mistakes were made and to 

ensure, Mr. Minister, that it'll never happen again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to tell 

the member again, I don't think he understands that there is a 

bond in place -- a $695,000 bond.  There is a hold-back at Sask 

Water of $177,000.  The businesses in the Melfort area will be 

covered. 

 

There were two leaks on the A & K Construction line, Mr. 

Speaker, two leaks.  And we don't know about Rafferty yet.  

But two leaks on the A & K.  What the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, are trying to do is play politics on the backs of the 

local people in the Melfort district.  And I think they should 

apologize for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Tabling of the Price Waterhouse Report 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The government has made a decision.  I'm pleased to announce 

today the government's made a decision that we will table the 

full report of the Price Waterhouse.  I want to say that there 

was some doubt as to whether or not this was necessary.  We've 

made copies available to the media, to spokespersons for the 

business community.  And if we had known the member 

opposite was so thirsty for knowledge, all you had to do was 

come around the office and ask for it.  However, Mr. Speaker, 

they do want it so I'll hereby table it. 

 

In taking my seat, I just want to point out that we hope when 

you get this, you won't repeat the mistake you made on first 

reading.  We hope this time you'll read it before you make . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we go on to the next item, I think the 

minister knows full well that that was not a ministerial 

statement.  It was totally out of order, his comments, and had 

nothing to do with the ministerial statement.  The ministerial 

statement is to . . . Order.  Order.  Order.  Order.  Order, order. 

 

(1415) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The State of the 

Environment Report Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The State of the Environment Report Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Parks Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I am pleased today to move second reading of An Act to amend 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act governs the operations of the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and regulates 

these industries in our province.  The history of liquor and 

gaming regulation in Saskatchewan has followed a steady 

course.  It has been subject to societal pressures of public 

demanding access and the same public demanding controls to 

that access.  It is a history, Mr. Speaker, that merits mention so 

that we may understand the road we have travelled from 

prohibition to public access. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the early 1920s Saskatchewan people began to 

realize that prohibition did not effectively control the sale and 

the consumption of beverage alcohol.  While it had effectively 

prevented the legal sale of alcohol, bootlegging and 

rum-running across the borders had replaced those sales.  In 

1925, Saskatchewan ended prohibition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province decided that they 

would rather have a controlled and regulated industry than one 

which operated outside the law.  They realized that the demand 

for alcohol was not lessened by prohibition.  They realized that 

prohibition didn't work. 

 

Over the past 65 years there has been a steady modernization of 

liquor laws in our province.  In 1935 men's beer parlours were 

permitted; in 1959, Mr. Speaker, for the first time women were 

allowed to drink in public.  Hours have been extended, and, Mr. 

Speaker, the minimum age was lowered in 1969 and then raised 

in 1976.  In 1983 liquor advertising was permitted.  And in 

1988 Sunday and religious holiday openings were permitted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes have each been introduced to meet 

the demand by consumers for access and have been met with 

responsible use by the public and the industry at large. 

 

Today we face a similar modernization of gaming regulation.  

Its history is not as long nor as colourful.  In 1969 the 

prohibition on gaming was lifted by the federal Liberal 

government, and for the first time year-round racetrack betting 

was legalized.  The 1970s saw gaming expansion in the form of 

casinos and lotteries.  And by the mid-1980s, small-scale 

church and community bingos were competing with private 

sector bingo gambling halls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this administration we have made some 

charities . . . or some changes.  This government is committed 

to reform.  Charities have been given an increased role in bingo 

gaming, VLTs (video lottery terminal) have been introduced, 

and for the first time a comprehensive social impact program 

has been developed. 

 

As well, Saskatchewan's regulatory bodies have been enhanced 

with the creation of the new Liquor and Gaming Authority 

created last year by this Assembly.  The creation of this 

Authority has benefited the hospitality industry, the consumers, 

and the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker.  It has created a single point of 

entry for small business and it has permitted easier access to 

government services.  As well, it has permitted better 

coordination of regulatory controls.  It has also provided for 

direct administrative savings by amalgamating three 

corporations into one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is in this spirit that this Bill introduces further 

changes to benefit the hospitality industry, consumers, and the 

taxpayer.  Taxpayers will benefit from this Bill by the 

amalgamation of the Saskatchewan Horse Racing Commission 

with the Liquor and Gaming Authority.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 

we show a desire for administrative savings.  We will be 

creating a single point of entry, and the need for further 

coordination of regulation and recognition of common purposes 

have led to this move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also strengthen the integrity of horse 

racing activities in our province.  We will be introducing a 

separate body to hear appeals and decisions and there will be 

new conflict of interest provisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also benefit the consumer.  

Consumers will benefit as a result of a streamlined process for 

regulation.  Central tenets of liquor and gaming regulation will 

be maintained.  And this will include maintaining a statutory 

minimum age, enhancing control and enforcement procedures, 

and introducing increased consumer protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, changes to this Bill will permit us to introduce a 

gaming consumer protection package that will include 

standardization of key elements affecting both liquor and 

gaming consumers.  It will provide for increased access to 

information and will strengthen the integrity of this common 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some 40,000 people in Saskatchewan 

who depend on the strength of the hospitality industry and 

tourism in Saskatchewan for their jobs.  Mr. Speaker, 40,000 

people.  And these are jobs in all numbers of businesses from 

bars and bingo halls to casinos and outfitter camps.  As diverse 

as these jobs may be, they have one thing in common.  And that 

is that they depend on the ability of Saskatchewan small 

business to succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, small business will benefit from this Bill as a 

result of modernized and streamlined regulation.  This Bill 

provides us with an opportunity to reform many of 

Saskatchewan's outdated and confusing rules and regulations.  

It will provide us with an opportunity to build on our strengths 

in the industry.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is the next step in this 

government's plan to build on our economic strengths as a 

province through reasoned and targeted support to small  



938 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

business and the hospitality sector in particular. 

 

As you know, Saskatchewan's hospitality industry is one built 

on the food services and beverage industry.  It's an industry that 

depends on hospitality, that depends on quality products, on 

innovation and reasonable and modern regulation.  It is one 

built on small business, and this government recognizes that.  

And that is why I will be sponsoring a discussion paper on 

industry reform this spring that will serve as the basis for 

industry renewal and re-regulation. 

 

It will provide us with an opportunity to bring together the 

various players of Saskatchewan's growing hospitality industry 

to identify a common approach to responsibly managing this 

sector.  This Act will serve to build on other economic 

development in small-business reforms introduced by this 

government, that have helped to restore strength to the 

hospitality industry -- strength that had led, Mr. Speaker, to 

recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure a sure sign of this economic recovery is 

the return to consumer confidence and to consumer spending.  

In fact, Sask Trends Monitor reported that 1993 was a record 

year for food and beverage sales in Saskatchewan.  For the first 

time, more than a half a billion dollars, $518 million, was spent 

by consumers in our restaurants and bars.  And this is an 

increase of nearly 9 per cent in receipts and an 8 per cent 

increase in volume over the previous year. 

 

And this growth has been, in part, because of our commitment, 

because of the government's commitment, to eliminate the PST 

(provincial sales tax) on restaurant meals and that puts roughly 

$66 million into this economy every year; to cut the 

Saskatchewan small business tax and put another $20 million 

into our economy; to introduce new forms of entertainment 

such as the video lottery terminals which will put over $15 

million this year into the hospitality industry in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will continue our plan for supporting 

Saskatchewan small business because this legislation builds on 

success.  In introducing this Bill, our motivations are many.  

We want to modernize the flexibility to respond to new and 

changing consumer demands in a reasoned and in a responsible 

manner.  We will achieve administrative savings through 

further streamlining of government's operations. 

 

And we will, with this legislation, be recognizing joint needs of 

Saskatchewan industry, supported by common interest in liquor 

and gaming regulation.  And, Mr. Speaker, we will be meeting 

the demands for a liquor and gaming industry that is fairly 

regulated and that is tightly controlled. 

 

All of these motivations, Mr. Speaker -- modernization, fairer 

and more responsible regulation, administrative savings, and 

support for small business -- are recognized in this Bill.  And 

that is why I'm pleased to move second reading of this Bill, An 

Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1994.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I listened 

fairly closely to the minister's address as he was introducing his 

legislation, Bill No. 33, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, and it seemed to me the minister took a long 

time to go through a long litany of change regarding our society 

and how we've moved from a society that took a fairly firm 

look at drinking and gambling and alcohol abuse, to a society 

that has become more open and acceptable.  And I found it 

almost interesting that the minister would use this as a 

proponent to justify where the government is going today. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, that just because we've had changes in the 

past, the changes in the past haven't necessarily been beneficial 

and good for our society.  I don't know if we can just use those 

changes to justify some of the effects that we will face as we 

expand the role of gambling in our province. However I can 

understand where the minister is coming from when he 

suggests his government is looking for more money.  And I 

believe the minister did suggest that we need more betting to 

take place, and I can see why they're looking at changing 

legislation. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, I think there are going to be some 

serious side-effects, and I trust that the government and the 

minister have taken the time to review some of the side-effects.  

Sure, it's going to be nice to have money coming into the 

provincial coffers through gambling, through betting at the 

tracks, through drinking, and through the hospitality industry.  

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we're not out here to criticize the 

hospitality industry.  They're doing the best they can to try and 

justify the . . . or generate the revenue they need to justify their 

existence. 

 

(1430) 

 

However it would seem to me that one thing we continually 

neglect and have turned our backs on, and that's the moral 

responsibilities we have, and what type of leadership we want, 

what type of example we want to set for our young people.  Or 

not even just for our young people but for our civilization in 

general, Mr. Speaker, where are we heading?  What road are 

we heading down? 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that a number of the 

arguments the minister made would seem to indicate that no, 

we're not really that interested any more.  Money is the bottom 

line and that's the name of the game.  And we forget about the 

social and moral effects that these changes are going to have on 

our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of other areas that we 

could get into.  But I think for the sake of taking further review 

of the legislation, looking at it in more depth and taking the 

time to come up with some of the other arguments and allowing 

my colleague, the member responsible, to review the Act, I 

move to 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

end of my remarks I'll move second reading of The Animal 

Protection Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing Animal Protection Act provides 

authority for owners of cattle, horses, pigs, and poultry to 

destroy a dog in the act of attacking these protected animals.  

This Act simplifies the legal processes of recovering damages 

from a dog owner and provides a procedure for the destruction 

of a dog where the dog attacks a protected animal away from 

the dog owner's property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this protection extends only to those animals 

listed in the Act, those animals which I've just mentioned.  

Sheep producers were provided with similar protection against 

dog attacks by The Sheep Protection and Dog Licensing Act, 

but the Act was repealed in 1988.  Without the protection of the 

Act, sheep producers are required to prove that the owner of a 

dog knew the animal was a threat before obtaining 

compensation for livestock killed by the dog or requiring the 

destruction of the dog. 

 

This is a difficult point to prove in court, and puts sheep 

producers and producers of any other animals not listed in The 

Animal Protection Act at a significant legal disadvantage. 

 

The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 1994 corrects this 

oversight by extending the protection under the Act to all farm 

animals, defined as any animal raised in captivity for the 

purpose of producing animal products.  This includes not just 

sheep, but also goats, bison, ostriches, and any other animal 

being raised for agricultural purposes in Saskatchewan.  The 

amended Act provides the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

with the Authority to designate which animals do not require 

protection under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, livestock production in Saskatchewan has been 

diversifying at a rapid rate.  Extending the protection of the Act 

to all farm animals allows the livestock producer to defend his 

animals from dog attacks, regardless of the species of animals 

being raised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 1994 

also increases the fines and penalties provided for in the 

original Act, so as to provide a practical deterrent against 

violations of the Act.  Thus the fine for failing to carry out a 

court order to destroy a dog is increased from $20 to $100.  The 

minimum fine for committing an offence under the Act has 

been increased from $25 to $100, and the maximum fine has 

been increased from $500 to $1,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when amended, The Animal Protection Act will 

serve the needs of Saskatchewan's livestock producers for 

many years to come.  All livestock producers will be treated 

equally under the Act, whether they raise traditional livestock 

such as cattle, horses, sheep, and pigs, or more recent additions 

to our provincial livestock industry.  And as Saskatchewan's 

livestock herds continue to expand and the diversify, the 

protection of the Act will automatically be extended to new 

species unless excluded by the Minister of Agriculture and 

Food. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of the Assembly to 

support this Act, and I move second reading of Bill No. 34, The 

Animal Protection Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at first 

glance this piece of legislation seems to be harmless enough.  

I'm sure that there are many men and women in the agricultural 

field that are listening very intently and will be following the 

passage of this Bill. And it seems to me that we should take a 

bit more time and review it a little more closely before we get 

into the real debate on the Bill.  And therefore at this time I 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting Agrologists 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

end of my remarks I'll move second reading of The Agrologists 

Act, 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more than 1,100 practising agrologists in 

Saskatchewan, registered with the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Agrologists, or SIA.  Currently they are regulated by The 

Agrologists Act passed in 1946, but that Act is outdated.  At 

the request of the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has prepared this new Act which 

will conform with today's standards of professions' legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, passage of this Act will accomplish a number of 

objectives.  It will repeal the the old Agrologists Act.  It will 

make legislation governing the profession of agrology 

consistent with other professions' legislation.  The new Act will 

clarify the roles of the SIA council, the professional conduct 

committee, and the discipline committee, giving them the same 

right, responsibility, and structure as similar bodies in other 

professional organizations. 

 

As part of this restructuring, a member of council will be 

appointed from the public by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, and this member will sit on the council's discipline 

committee.  Also, the dean of the College of Agriculture and 

deputy minister of Agriculture and Food will be designated ex 

officio members of the SIA council. 

 

The new Act will also delete those administrative provisions of 

the old Agrologists Act that should have been incorporated as 

by-laws of the institute.  This will allow the SIA to govern 

itself and to amend its rules to reflect changing circumstances 

within the agrology 



940 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

profession, without having to resort to the time-consuming 

process of lobbying the government to amend its legislation. 

 

In keeping with the institute's new power, the Authority of the 

Minister of Agriculture and Food to review decisions of the 

discipline committee has been deleted from the new legislation.  

In its place is a mechanism to appeal a discipline committee 

decision to the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for its time The Agrologists Act was a fine piece 

of legislation, as evidenced by its 48-year life span.  In drafting 

the new Act, this government has retained those aspects of the 

old legislation which have served the agrologist profession so 

well. 

 

The new Act continues to provide title and scope of practice 

protection.  Title protection allows only members of the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists to use the title of 

agrologist. 

 

Scope of practice protection allows only truly recognized 

agrologists to practise agrology, which is defined in the Act as 

to engage for hire, gain, or the hope of reward in investigating, 

experimenting with, teaching, or advertising on scientific 

principles and practices of agriculture. 

 

This definition is consistent with that contained in the old Act.  

The original Act recognized that farmers and farm suppliers 

regularly trade information among themselves and did not want 

to prevent this practice, and these exemptions from the scope of 

practice are retained in the new legislation. 

 

Those exemptions are (1) a person carrying on the business of 

farming; (2) an undergraduate student working under the 

supervision of a practising member of SIA; (3) a person or his 

agent who gives advice based on information provided by a 

member regarding the quality or use of a product or service that 

he or she offers for sale; and (4) an agricultural technician or 

technologist who works under the supervision of a practising 

agrologist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two more important points to mention 

before moving second reading.  First, in an effort to standardize 

terminology, the Act changes the title of agrologist in training 

to an articling agrologist.  Second, fines for infractions of the 

Act have been increased so they are consistent with the levels 

in other professions' legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation was developed in consultation and 

with full support of the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists.  

They will serve the profession well for many years to come.  

Therefore I ask the members of this Assembly to support this 

Act and I move second reading of Bill 35, The Agrologists Act, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I realize 

and my colleagues realize that there are a number of agrologists 

across the province of Saskatchewan, men and women who'd 

be interested in some changes in bringing their association up 

to date and possibly into the real world. 

 

I was trying to follow fairly closely the comments and the 

arguments the minister was making regarding changes or the 

reasoning for this Bill and the fact of updating The Agrologists 

Act. 

 

A question just came to me the other day regarding agrologists 

and their role in society, and I think as we get into the further 

discussion and debate, that's a question that we can raise at 

another time regarding agrologists, the role and the necessity 

for such an Act that creates another association, another 

bureaucracy that people have to deal with. 

 

And I know that many agrologists actually do quite a 

commendable job in dealing with men and women across the 

province, certainly in the agricultural field.  Therefore to allow 

further research into the legislation before we can continue on 

in second readings and committee, I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this point I would like to ask the minister to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I indeed 

would like to introduce the officials who are with me.  I have 

on my right, John Edwards who is the director of municipal 

policy and legislative services branch in the Department of 

Municipal Government.  And on my left, Kathy Dermody who 

is the director of administration in the Department of Provincial 

Secretary. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, and officials.  Welcome here.  I don't think that you 

will be here very long but the minister, prior to your 

introduction of me, Mr. Chairman, asked me whether I was the 

critic or not.  And yes, indeed I am.  And I'm going to 

reciprocate by asking him probably one of the most difficult 

questions he'll have in this Act.  And that is, are you the 

minister; are you the real thing?  And the reason I ask that, Mr. 

Minister, is because I noticed that because during the second 

reading speech it was not you that made any comments, but 

rather it was the . . . indeed it was the Government House 

Leader that read the speech during the second reading.  So if 

you could indicate that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well fortunately, Mr. Chairman, 

we're a cabinet of many diverse talents and when the minister is 

not able to be here, we should not hold up proceedings in the 

House.  So the Minister of Economic Development did second 

reading on my 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

behalf because I believe I was in Ottawa at that time and 

meeting with Mr. Masse on some things of significant 

importance to Saskatchewan.  I am the minister. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No doubt individuals of many talents.  I 

believe, Mr. Chairman, we have a different expression for that, 

that starts with jack of all trades, and I'll let the minister figure 

. . .  All right, let's get on with business here, Mr. Minister. 

 

We're dealing here with An Act to amend The Wascana Centre 

Act and I know that during my second reading comments I 

recognized the significance of this Wascana Centre, not only to 

Regina but indeed to all the citizens of this province because 

it's something that we as a province can look up to with a great 

deal of pride.  It's I believe, where the Legislative Buildings are 

standing on, where we are right now, and Wascana Lake and 

the art centre, the museum and so on. So it's rather significant, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

(1445) 

 

And I say that to put it in context to what we're going to be 

talking about over the next couple of minutes.  And that is that 

the way I understand, the purpose of the Act is that it will not 

reduce funding to this centre out of the Consolidated Fund.  

And obviously that is something I suppose that a lot of people 

are pleased with, that funding will not be reduced. 

 

But concomitant to that is the fact that no increase or no 

reduction means zero, means the same amount as last year.  

And as I need not remind you, you were one of the fellows that 

would always get up and when we had a zero per cent increase 

or even a 4 per cent increase in spending, that, according to 

you, was an actual reduction because of other extenuating 

circumstances in the economic field. 

 

So I want you first of all, Mr. Minister, to get up and confirm 

that that is the intent of the Bill, is basically to maintain status 

quo. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can confirm 

that.  I think it needs to be kept in mind that over the last . . . 

well I can only speak for the last two years, in fact there were 

in each of those years reductions in the funding, as there was in 

pretty well most of expenditures in government and various 

departments. 

 

We have in this budget decided that it is come to an end on the 

reductions and we were fortunate.  And I'm pleased to be able 

to report to the member and to the House, as I have to the 

Authority, that we were able to provide under the statutory 

funding, which is what the Bill here is about, the same level of 

funding as was provided last year. 

 

Everything the member says opposite about what Wascana 

Authority is all about is correct.  I know that the executive 

director recently went to a national conference in Ottawa and 

one of the things  

that everybody who was there from all the provinces and the 

territories were asking about, was the Wascana Centre 

Authority, because nowhere else in Canada is there such a 

thing.  The thing that comes closest is the National Capital 

Commission in Ottawa. 

 

And they are really quite envious about what has been 

established here in Regina and in Saskatchewan around the 

capital buildings and in the Authority.  So we're proud of it.  I 

think we all can be proud of it.  If times were different and the 

finances were different, I think we could even do more to even 

make it a . . . more of it than what it is.  But as it is, it is much 

better than exists in most other places in Canada. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, one of my university 

degrees actually happens to be in geography.  And a 

fundamental premiss in geography is, you answer the question 

not just about the rocks and geology and the development of 

land and so on, but rather to answer a fundamental question.  

And that is, why do people do what they do, where they do it?  

And that's the fundamental question that a geographer tries to 

answer. 

 

And a core of that is to do exactly what you were talking about, 

is to answer that question, why are people where they are, and 

why are they doing what they are doing at a particular time.  

And that conference that you were talking about is very, very 

interesting.  Because I think Regina, and I might add, 

Saskatoon, are two cities that are very, very unique in what 

we've done with our centre city . . . inner core, inner-city core. 

 

Because when you go to Buffalo, or when you go to New York 

or some of these other large, older cities, quite literally the 

centre of the city is in utter decay.  And the centre of the city 

has just fallen apart because suburban areas have grown around 

it.  And that's a natural process for cities to do that. 

 

And I think if we did not have our forefathers in Regina and 

city being very futuristic looking in their planning . . . I think 

we have a lot to thank them for, for the kind of centres that we 

have in Saskatoon with the removal, for example, of the 

railroad centre in the centre of the city and in Regina, here what 

we have around Wascana.  So I fully recognize the significance 

of what you just said about what other people look to 

Saskatchewan and city of Regina and Saskatoon with some 

envy, because yes, Mr. Minister, we do have something to be 

thankful for there. 

 

And we recognize here today that there is a cost associated with 

that, I think.  And you indicated that you had for two 

successive years actually created reductions for the Wascana 

Centre, and I'm assuming that the same will be holding for the 

Bill following. 

 

What I'm asking you now, Mr. Minister, is what were the facts, 

what were the figures that made you determine in Treasury 

Board that indeed you were going to maintain the '94-95 

funding to be identical to that of the '93-94? 



942 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, there are certain 

basic needs that a place like the Wascana Authority has which 

must be met.  I mean the grass has to be maintained to a certain 

standard, the trees have to be looked after, there's an 

infrastructure that needs maintenance, and in order to meet 

certain minimum standards, you need to have a certain amount 

of money. 

 

The Wascana Authority over the last two years -- more than 

that -- has actually be able to maintain a fairly high standard 

even though there have been reductions because it has worked 

on becoming much more efficient.  It is doing more with 

less -- not only more with less money, but it's doing more with 

fewer people, from the point of view of employment. 

 

And the decision is based on, one, how many resources does 

one have available?  In the case of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, how much funding is available after you've 

distributed among all of the needs that government has to 

provide for?  And two, what is a certain level or standard of 

maintenance that has to be maintained in order to make sure 

that there is some quality to the facility? 

 

And having considered both of those questions, it was decided 

it could be done with the same amount of funding as was done 

last year.  The Authority will be -- as it has done before -- will 

spend this year . . . to even look again as to whether it can 

become even more efficient. 

 

What the Authority would like to do -- I know the member 

would be interested in knowing -- is it would like to be able to 

do some capital works and do some new things.  But that's not 

something that's in the works right now because of our 

financial limitations. 

 

Now I hope that we might be able to include some of the 

infrastructure work under the federal infrastructure program.  It 

will not be a big project, but to the extent that that's available to 

us, we will certainly be looking at what we might do under that 

program to make sure that the rebuilding of some of the 

infrastructure which is now old, might be considered and 

started so that we can maintain the good reputation that the 

Wascana Authority has established over these years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, according to 

what you were just saying then, I would assume from that that 

two years ago, prior to your cuts to Wascana Authority, we 

were cutting the grass too often or we were doing too much due 

diligence to maintenance, and that these have now been 

reduced because of whatever reasons that you're suggesting. 

 

Or, Mr. Minister, what we have been doing now because of 

those cuts has simply been living off of inventory or living off 

of depreciation.  Many businesses and farms and so on that are 

being hard put to normally can survive for a few years simply 

because they don't replace machinery perhaps that should be 

replaced, they don't shingle the roof that should have been 

reshingled.  And therefore they can make do for a 

couple of years, but the crunch comes.  The final crunch comes. 

 

And although I was speaking in glowing terms a few moments 

ago about Wascana Centre and an area that we can indeed be 

proud of, there are areas that are obviously suffering from 

neglect, dire neglect. And unfortunately, I might add, that this 

is an obvious neglect.  The impression that visitors get when 

the first time when they come here, they see the beautiful 

building, they see the beautiful lawns.  And I think hats off to 

our maintenance people in the yards for a beautiful lawn and a 

beautiful rose garden, as it were, outside.  But when you take a 

look at the roads that bring us here, it's just utter disgrace, the 

roads that we have to put up with. 

 

Now I recognize that it's been . . . and I won't get into geology, 

but if we form Lake Agassiz here with the clay beds, and all of 

Regina has got that kind of a problem.  But it does take a 

certain amount of upkeep to make it presentable and indeed 

make it so that visitors can come and want to come to this 

place. 

 

So I made a number of comments, Mr. Minister, from my 

perspective, and I'd like you to react to some of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's not any 

different in the Authority than it is in any other organization.  

When you have limited amounts of funding that's available, 

you have to stretch it and make it go as far as you can.  And the 

Authority, to its credit -- I take no credit for that; it's really a 

function of the work of the staff of the Authority and the people 

who manage it -- have been able to do that.  They've been able 

to look at the way they used to do things during the, shall I call 

them the glory days when there was a lot of money around, in 

the '70s and in the '80s, and they had to look at the way they did 

things then and reconsider as to whether they could do things 

more efficiently.  And they've done that. 

 

Now I'm the first to admit that there are certain equipment and 

other things that have to be looked at, at replacement over a 

period of time, because the member opposite is a farmer and he 

knows that equipment only lasts so long.  But you can make it 

last longer with adequate maintenance.  I was once a farmer 

too, so I know something about it as well.  But if you do the . . .  

I mean you just have to make sure that you do the kind of 

maintenance to extend the lifespan of the equipment.  And the 

Authority has been able to do that as well. 

 

There needs to be a look at refurbishing some of that and 

replacing it over time.  And that's one of the things that the 

Authority is examining now, in order that we can keep up to, as 

I said earlier, the kind of standard that you have to have in 

order to keep the Authority as to what I think the public expects 

it to be. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for those comments, Mr. 

Minister.  And I know that there are what we call, a lot of what 

we call, bale-wire farmers out there.  But there is only so much 

bale wire that you can put on a 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 943 

tractor to keep it together, and eventually, in spite of what you 

do, it does fall apart.  And the replacement cost is something 

that you can postpone but you cannot eliminate. 

 

I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, and this isn't my idea -- my 

colleague here made this suggestion -- that if we need these 

kinds of repairs that are obviously needed in the area on some 

of these grounds, have you considered combining the need here 

with a offshoot of the Sask Works program from Social 

Services, or perhaps New Careers people that could be 

incorporated into facilitating some of this deterioration that we 

have been talking about? 

 

It seems to me that it would be a dual purpose whereby we 

could be facilitating some repairs that are needed, some 

updating that is needed, and at the same time passing on skills 

and passing on useful labour to those people perhaps who are 

not usefully employed at this time.  Have you given that some 

consideration, or is that a possibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I think the member is talking 

about a program under the New Careers program. 

 

And that's certainly worth considering.  We have not at the 

Authority level had the staff present us with what they're 

planning to do for this summer -- I think in fact that meeting is 

tomorrow -- but I think that's something that's worth 

considering. 

 

But I also want to indicate to the member opposite that during 

the summer, one of the things that the Wascana Authority 

does -- because that's when the biggest workload is -- is that it 

hires a significant number of students, mainly I think university 

students, from areas of study that involve the environment, 

maybe even geography. 

 

And I think that that's important because it relates directly to 

the field of study that they're doing.  And it not only helps the 

Wascana Authority because it gets the kind of employees that 

they need for summer employment, it also helps the students 

because they are able to get work during the summer.  But also, 

I think just as important, work in the field in which they're 

studying which I think is a pretty good fit. 

 

So I want to make sure that that opportunity exists for these 

young people.  But where we might be able to look at the kind 

of the suggestion the member makes opposite, I think certainly 

it would be worth considering. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, well thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I 

certainly don't want to detract from employment opportunities 

for students; that was not my idea.  But there are still areas 

where the more unfortunate or those not gainfully employed 

could benefit from at least you looking at something like that. 

I know when I was Minister of Social Services, I was very, 

very impressed what the community of La Loche, for example, 

does with their road-building project through the bush to Black 

Lake.  I know, for example, what the town of Cumberland has 

done with the New Careers people in the building of an arena 

complex in their town.  And furthermore, closer to my 

constituency, Duck Lake, for example, through New Careers 

has built an extremely impressive interpretive centre right on 

the premises. 

 

So there can be a fairly detailed and fairly high-level expertise, 

end result, in work if it's properly supervised by all kinds of 

people and at a minimal cost to the taxpayer of this province.  

And when you consider the benefit to these other people at the 

same time, I think it's a win-win situation.  I take some 

comfort, Mr. Minister, in saying that you will take a look at 

that. 

 

But any time there is a . . . they hold the line or a decrease in 

budget, something has to be impacted.  And so, Mr. Minister, I 

want you to explain to me now what the impact of this basic 

reduction in funding is going to have upon the Wascana Centre.  

Were there jobs lost?  Are there going to be jobs lost?  Is there 

termination of employment and so on?  So I would like you to 

comment on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is the 

same funding as last year, so I do not think there will be any 

impact in spite of what . . . one can sometimes make the 

argument of inflation and other things. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, you used to be good at that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it was a different time. 

 

But I want to assure the member that because the funding is the 

same as it was last year on the statutory side, that all the work 

that's done, the statutory funding, will not be impacted, I 

understand, and there should not be any change. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, what other forms of funding or 

sources of revenue would the Wascana Centre have other than 

statutory funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well there's the statutory funding.  

There is a grant that comes from the university.  Where is it?  

Here we are.  Let me explain here; I have it.  For 1994-95 

statutory funding from the province will be 767,000; from the 

city, 418,000; university, 209,000 -- for a total of 1.394 million. 

 

That is not the only funding that the Wascana Authority gets 

because we also provide maintenance money to the Authority 

as well, but that's not related to the statutory funding.  It's 

maintenance as related to maintenance done on the government 

property of the Wascana Authority . . . Pardon? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation)? 



944 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, the maintenance funding will 

be budgeted this year in the Department of Provincial 

Secretary.  I don't want to get into the estimates here but the 

member will no doubt be wanting to ask questions in estimates. 

 

In the past, in the Provincial Secretary . . . In the past it was 

difficult to track where the funding was all coming from 

because the maintenance funding, I believe, was in the 

Department of Municipal Government -- or was it the other 

way around?  Sorry.  The maintenance funding was in the 

Department of Provincial Secretary; the statutory funding was 

in the Department of Municipal Government.  What we have 

done this year, to sort of make sure that everything is clear, is 

that we put it all into the Department of Provincial Secretary so 

it will be shown, and if the member has time to look at the 

estimates -- and I know he will, because he will certainly be 

preparing for the time when we get into the Committee of 

Finance -- you'll see that it's all in one place there. 

 

And although there is no reduction in the funding on the 

statutory component, there will be a small reduction in the 

maintenance; but I will be able to explain in estimates exactly 

where that is taken out from, because it's just not simply a cut, 

as small as it is, but it's also in specific areas, which I think will 

be of no impact to the Authority as such, but will have other 

impacts.  But that's nothing to do with this Bill; that's 

something that we can consider when we are in Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I find most 

elucidating from this discussion is that we finally found out a 

job that you actually do in your position as Provincial 

Secretary.  We've been wondering where that $800,000 that 

your Provincial Secretary increase came from.  And I don't 

know, I would maybe suggest that part of that money should be 

turned over to Wascana and to Meewasin Authority to be used 

in other terms than just being used for the Provincial 

Secretariat. 

 

But anyway you're on your feet earning your money today, Mr. 

Minister, I'm glad to see that. 

 

And it was remiss of me to ignore the funding that the Wascana 

Authority has to count on, and as well the Meewasin Authority, 

and that is the university and that is the city of Regina in this 

case, and the city of Saskatoon out there.  And you indicated to 

me that the university has 209 million and the city of Regina 

contributes 418,000 -- 209,000, pardon me, and 418,000. 

 

How does that relate as far as their contributions this year, and 

take me back two or three years on their contributions to make 

sure that the bottom line is indeed the same.  Have they cut 

back or are they the same?  Could you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, I want to make . . . I 

want to correct the numbers I gave the member opposite 

because I didn't quite give the right numbers. 

But let me explain first of all how it works. 

 

The same treatment is applied to all of the three partners under 

this Act.  So that when there is a reduction or an increase, or as 

in this case, the numbers stay the same, it impacts the same 

way on the other partners in the Wascana Authority. 

 

Now let me make the correction.  I gave you numbers about 

1994-95 funding -- I gave you the wrong numbers.  So I will 

repeat again for each of the partners so that you know exactly 

what they are. 

 

The government's contribution is $781,532; the city's 

contribution will be $426,291; and the university will be 

$213,145, which is basically the same as last year because they 

operate on the same basis as the province does, because we are 

all regulated by this Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you for that clarification of the 

numbers, Mr. Minister.  They were reasonably close.  I'm not 

quite sure why you went astray there.  But could you give me a 

breakdown, for the sake of the people who are listening, what is 

this money actually being spent on?  Like we haven't spent any 

time talking at all about the expenditures, and precisely where 

does this money go?  We're dealing with a fairly big chunk of 

money here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can give the member opposite in 

the House the categories, but I can't give you the numbers 

because what we have here is a global number and the 

Authority has to now put together its budget to put the numbers 

to each of the categories. 

 

But the categories that are involved under the statutory is 

irrigated turf, trees and shrubs, flower maintenance, nursery 

maintenance, lake weed control, picnic sites, playing fields.  It's 

sort of basically all the kinds of things that you see happening 

in the park and facilities that are there.  And those are the kind 

of categories that are involved. 

 

And then of course there is things like snow removal, survey 

and engineering control, the greenhouse, the policing services 

to make sure that the member doesn't park in my parking stall 

or I don't park in his parking stall or whatever else the security 

service does.  So that's the kind of things that are involved here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Does it include the repairing of plug-ins for 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) parking? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Have you recently had trouble with 

yours?  The answer is yes. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair.  With me today is Mr. 

Jim Brickwell, a senior policy analyst with municipal 

government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I don't want to 

seem to be remiss, so I will say to the Deputy Premier, who 

was the minister on this previous Bill, that I hope he passes on 

my thank-you to the officials that were here with him.  I 

thought we were going to have the same officials, so I 

neglected to do that.  So I'd like to do that at this time. 

 

So I say now to the Minister of Justice, who is obviously the 

sponsor of The Meewasin Valley Authority Act, that we're 

basically not going to have any problems here today either. 

 

I do want to have a few questions for clarification so that I can 

understand more readily what happens.  I'm a little bit more 

familiar with the Meewasin Authority, being in my home neck 

of the woods kind of thing, than I am perhaps here.  But I 

would ask you, Mr. Minister, a question.  What were the 

circumstances that surrounded the budget restraint to the 

Meewasin Valley?  What caused that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think the member is referring to the 

budget reductions that occurred in '92-93 and '93-94, and those 

reductions were part of the government's expenditure restraint 

and expenditure reduction programs.  So that the Authority had 

to absorb those reductions in those two years.  Now the level of 

funding for the current year, in the current budget, is the same 

as it was in '93-94. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- As we all know the Meewasin Valley 

Authority is in control of a large chunk of land around the river 

in Saskatoon and beyond, and so therefore it plays a very 

significant role in maintaining that river and the beauty of the 

river and the quality of the river for the citizens of Saskatoon 

and indeed many, many visitors that come to Saskatoon 

because of the university or for whatever reason.  And as such, 

it would seem to me that environmental aspects of that area is 

extremely important; in fact that's one of the criteria upon 

which that Authority was set up. 

 

How has this, Mr. Minister, reduction and subsequent freezing 

of the monies available to the Authority affected the 

environmental aspects of the area? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It has of course affected the operation of 

the Authority and they have had to trim their sails in the last 

two fiscal years in consequence of those reductions.  They 

have, for example, restricted the hours of operation for some of 

their facilities.  They have had to postpone some of their capital 

project plans, delay them. 

If my memory is correct, there have also been some trimming 

of staff in the past two fiscal years, although I don't come 

equipped with that information to the House.  It is my 

recollection that that is the case. 

 

I am a member of the board of directors of Meewasin and have 

been for about the last year and a half I think, as the minister 

responsible.  And I've taken quite a keen interest in their 

program, but I don't have the detail with me as to any staff 

changes that have taken place over the past two fiscal years. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, there is what we call the 

planning and development committee and then there's the 

engineering advisory committee, and it's my understanding that 

these two committees that existed prior have now been 

amalgamated and have been joined into one committee.  Why 

was that done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That was done at the request of the 

Authority.  They thought that these two committees could be 

combined into one and could perform the former functions that 

were exercised by the two committees.  In that way they can 

eliminate some expenditures and have that money available for 

other purposes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well obviously this would not have been a 

first choice of the Authority, I would imagine; that they did this 

under duress simply to try to save money. 

 

So that the people who are perhaps listening to us now, Mr. 

Minister, so they can more fully understand and appreciate 

what this means, could you outline for us what each of the 

previous committees did, what their functions were, what their 

mandates were, and how is this now translated into the one 

committee that's going to be doing the two jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The planning and . . .  Oh first of all let 

me say that while there certainly is a budgetary aspect for this, 

the request to amalgamate these committees and thereby 

streamline the internal structures in MVA was more broadly 

based than that.  It took into account the experience with these 

committees and the kind of things they do and was, in the 

judgement of the Authority, a situation where the two 

committees could be amalgamated and could be doing the same 

thing. 

 

The planning and development committee, which is described 

in the legislation, does the work that is referred to in section 21 

of the Act.  People make applications for construction within 

the Meewasin area and it is the responsibility of the planning 

and development committee to receive these plans and to 

consider whether they ought to be approved or not, and to 

advise the Authority on whether or not they are approved or 

should be approved. 

 

So the person who is requesting the approval submits plans, 

elevations, specifications, and models concerning the 

improvement as may be appropriate, and then the committee 

looks at these plans and advises the Authority as to whether or 

not they are  



946 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

consistent with the overall plan for the development of the 

Meewasin Valley area. 

 

The engineering committee is concerned with the engineering 

aspects of . . . and design aspects of proposals that are being 

made to it.  That in the most general terms is the mandate of 

these two committees.  By putting them together, they put 

together all of those functions because all of those functions 

continue to have to be exercised, and they'll be exercised by 

one committee instead of two.  The member will have noticed 

the way in which the new committee is to be structured, 

including both the architects and the engineers and the planners 

on the same committee. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that explanation.  

I don't think we'll have to go into the history of it, but I think 

both of us can appreciate some of the history involved in the 

Meewasin Authority where indeed there tended to be that 

conflict between the engineers and the people that were more 

or less entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining the 

decorum and maintaining the vistas of what the Meewasin 

Valley was supposed to be all about. 

 

And then we have the trades people . . . not the trades people 

but the business people perhaps and the farmers and people 

who were more pragmatic and looked at it from a different 

aspect of it, and the conflict that has occurred over the period of 

time.  Although I must say that I think that that conflict has 

subsided substantially over the last number of years. 

 

One word that you mentioned twigged an automatic response, 

an automatic question from me, and that was the buzz word, 

coin word "streamlined".  It was streamlined, you said.  So that 

indicates to me that there could be possible job losses.  Does 

this mean that through the amalgamation of those committees 

were jobs lost?  And if so, was there any particular expertise 

that was lost as a result? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, in this case streamline doesn't 

involve any downsizing.  The Authority has told us that they 

plan neither to increase nor decrease their permanent staff, nor 

their temporary staff.  And so there'll be no impact upon the 

employment situation at the MVA . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Minister, that would prompt me 

to ask a subsequent question, a supplementary question to that.  

Was there any reclassification of employees as a result of this 

that would have meant less money for some? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Not that I'm aware of. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, so far we have not talked at all 

about how this objective is going to be achieved, that of 

freezing the funds.  Am I correct in assuming . . . is there a 

difference in how the Act, the Meewasin Valley Act, is set up 

in its funding as opposed to The Wascana Centre Act? 

 

I have to claim I'm not quite sure of how the Wascana Act 

works, but it seems to me that The Meewasin  

Valley Authority Act, what we are . . . I see you're conferring 

so I'll just sit until you have that response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The principles underlying the two 

organizations are quite similar, although the details of the 

funding formulas are different.  And I'll just specify what those 

are.  In the Meewasin situation, the province has forty and 

one-third per cent of the responsibility; the city has thirty and 

one-third per cent; and the University of Saskatchewan has 

twenty-nine and one-third per cent. 

 

In the case of Wascana, the percentages are different.  The 

province bears 55 per cent; the city, 30 per cent; and the 

university, 15 per cent.  So you have those different 

percentages.  The structures though are very similar. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I won't ask an 

obvious question as to how this formula could have been 

arrived at -- forty and one-third and twenty-nine and 

one-third -- and we won't get into that. 

 

In your second reading speech, Mr. Minister, you -- and I 

quote -- say this:  "This amendment suspends the statutory 

formula for another year."  This statutory formula referred to 

there are the percentages that you just quoted to me.  Is that 

correct?  Yes, all right. 

 

Now if that is the case then, Mr. Minister, what have we 

changed over the previous two years when there was a 

reduction in the end amount of money that Wascana and 

Meewasin got? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's a very good question, and a very 

complex answer will result from it.  The scheme of the Act is 

that the funding is to be at the level of 4 mills, and that seems 

to have been the case for many years. And then in '83-84 there 

was a sharp reduction in statutory funding, which then 

increased in '84-85, '85-86, and '86-87. 

 

In '86-87 the funding got up to a certain level, just over 

$830,000, and then that amount was frozen as a dollar amount 

right through to fiscal '91-92.  Then came the reductions in 

funding that I had indicated to the member earlier, and that 

resulted in the percentages that you see in the existing Act 

under section 62.1 which specified that for fiscal '92-93 it was 

to be 95 per cent of the previous year. 

 

And then last year that was amended to be 93.8 per cent of the 

amount paid in the previous year, '92-93.  So the Act is very 

complex as a result.  We propose this year to maintain that 

funding, that last year's funding, at the same level. 

 

I don't recall the reasons why the funding was reduced so 

sharply in '83-84, and I make no particular point out of it 

except it is part of the figures that I'm holding in my hand.  But 

the amount then increased up to '86-87, and that level remained 

in effect until the fiscal '91-92, and then the changes took place 

that I've described. 

 

(1530) 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If I am to 

understand what you have just said now, that means that under 

normal circumstances, until '91-92, the amounts of money that 

the Government of Saskatchewan was going to be paying to 

these authorities would have been based on 4 mills.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm advised of the following -- very 

interesting.  The amount prior to '83-84 was 5 mills and it 

became 4 mills in '83-84.  It's still 4 mills in the Act.  So the 4 

mills in '83-84 raised about 753,000.  That 4 mills continued in 

'84-85 and '85-86 and '86-87 to bring the funding up to 

$830,000.  And then it was frozen at that figure of 830, so that 

was the beginning of moving away from the 4 mills to a level 

of funding expressed in dollars. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me then is in '91-92, 

when you talk 95 per cent of the previous year, you're actually 

saying 95 per cent not of what 4 mills would have created at 

that time, but rather of that stable figure of $830,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's exactly right, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And furthermore that the last year was at 93.8 

per cent of that $830,000 and today it is 100 per cent of that 

93.8 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Actually a little worse than the member 

indicates.  It was 95 per cent of the previous year.  But then last 

year it was 93-point-something per cent of the preceding year 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right.  It's, as I say, a little 

worse than the member indicates. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I was trying to be gracious 

to you there and I realize now 93.8 per cent of 95 per cent is 

not exactly the same as it would have been of a 100 per cent 

figure. 

 

Just for the benefit, Mr. Minister -- and this is my last question, 

depending on your answer; there's always that caveat -- for the 

benefit of people who are watching, we've been talking about 

percentages of forty and a third and twenty-nine and a third and 

that's meaningless to folks out there.  Could you put that in 

terms of this, number one, I'm assuming now that all the 

partners, which is the University of Saskatchewan, the province 

of Saskatchewan, and the city of Saskatoon, they are all being 

affected in the same proportion by this legislation. 

 

So if that's the case then, could you put some actual figures in it 

for us this year -- what they'll be getting this year as compared 

to last year, and put the actual dollar figures in there on the 

record, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, these figures apply to last year and 

they apply to this year also: the province contributes $740,169, 

the University of Saskatchewan contributes 573,900, and the 

city of Saskatoon contributes $556,674, for a total of 

$1,870,743. 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to take 

this opportunity to thank the minister for his forthright answers 

and the officials who were so adequate in making actually both 

of us look as good as possible. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to join with my colleague from 

the opposition in thanking the officials for being here today and 

for providing us with some very complex information in a form 

that we could understand. 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  With me today 

are Mr. Ray Petrich, the master of titles with the department; 

and Brent Prenevost, who is a Crown solicitor with the 

department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 

minister and to his officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have a few questions we would like to raise 

regarding Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Land Titles Act.  

As I indicated the other day, Mr. Minister, we really don't have 

any major objections to the Bill; however we find it does deal 

with some fairly complex legal matters and we would like to 

give the minister, give me, an opportunity to clarify the Bill for 

public record.  And I'm sure the minister would like to just 

make that clarification. 

 

We find the Bill is based on a number of objections which the 

Law Society had to 1992 amendments.  And you mentioned in 

your second reading speech . . . talked about amendments never 

having been proclaimed because of the number of technical 

issues being raised.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you 

just would explain, for the sake of everyone involved, what the 

technical issues were that were raised, and why did these 

objections not come forward until after the '92 Bill was passed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member will recall that we passed 

rather extensive amendments to The Land Titles Act in 1992 

and this was one of the areas where we were heading off in a 

new direction with the summary mortgages. 

 

We had had a great deal of consultation prior to those 

amendments and they were enacted, of course, and then the 

system went into the implementation stage and some problems 

emerged after that.  The way in which the 1992 amendments 

were worded gave rise to real concern that the amendments, as 

I said in my second reading speech, might prohibit the ability to 

register, by way of caveat, an interest in land that was 



948 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

created by a mortgage document. And we were sufficiently 

concerned about that concern that we thought we ought to 

amend the Bill, as we propose to do in the Bill that is before the 

committee this afternoon. 

 

Those same provisions appeared to create format requirements 

which were . . . the concern was that they might serve to 

prohibit certain mortgages which really ought to be accepted.  

They were rather conventional mortgage instruments that had 

been negotiated out of province, for example, that were 

presented for registration in Saskatchewan, that were sufficient 

mortgage documents but which did not appear to meet the 

format requirements contained in our amendments. 

 

So we have to provide enough flexibility in the Act so that the 

master of titles of the land titles system can accept these 

documents which are sufficient mortgages but which might not 

meet our own requirements in the strict sense in The Land 

Titles Act. 

 

So just to sum up what I've said, we're trying to make the 

system practical and flexible enough to cover real life situations 

and the original amendments seemed a bit strict in order to 

accomplish those ends. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm glad you used the 

words, sum up, because I think there's a lot of people like I am.  

Sometimes when we look at the technical data, and we can look 

at the Bill that's in front of us and it doesn't look that large and 

it doesn't look that encumbering, but many times legal detail 

around it, it's difficult for most people to understand what the 

intent of the Bill is, or any piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, when the Act was introduced in 1992, was there 

an attempt at that time, through the '92 Act, to simplify the 

process?  Is that what the intent was?  And possibly in trying to 

simplify it we missed out on a few areas that you had to clarify 

through this Act that you've brought in this year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce some special visitors in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we have at your gallery some 

members from the Saskatoon Open Door Society.  We have 

Mrs. Jeanette Dean, Patti Hertz, as well as Sherry Klymyshyn..  

I'd like all members to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Yes, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- In the west gallery I'd like to introduce to 

members of the Assembly, Barrett 

Halderman of Humboldt and his son who are visiting the 

legislature today.  I've forgotten the son's name and I apologize 

for that.  Barrett was the New Democrat candidate in the last 

federal election for the constituency of Saskatoon Humboldt 

and we welcome them to the legislature here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 23 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, now I'll try and deal with the 

question raised by the member.  The amendment in 1992 was 

meant to simplify the system and in fact has had that effect.  It 

provided for a summary kind of mortgage which just contained 

the essential information about the particular transaction and 

incorporated by reference a master document which was on file 

with the Land Titles Office system.  So that you or I in 

negotiating a new mortgage today would not have to file the 

whole, big, thick mortgage document.  We would file a 

summary form which would be a complete mortgage because it 

would incorporate by reference this master document that had 

been previously filed. 

 

That's a good step in our quest to simplify the system.  It also is 

an important step to prepare the system for its eventual 

computerization, because these summary forms will become 

more and more the order of the day as we move towards the use 

of computers in simplifying and making much more efficient 

the operation of the Land Titles Office system. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman.  So 

what you're basically saying then is through the summary 

forms it simplifies the system as far as individuals -- and I 

would take it it would be people dealing with the mortgages, 

like lawyers or individuals selling houses, what have you -- it 

just simplifies when they go to . . . as people are looking at, 

whether it is purchasing property, whether it's a house or land, 

it just makes it a little easier.  I understand that you can get 

away from the long format of always looking up the full 

details; you can refer back to if I hear completely. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, are these summary form mortgages 

available today or were they put on hold pending this present 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I think the member's question 

indicates that he's aware that the system was put on hold while 

this matter was left to be cleared up, and this Bill clears it up 

and will pave the way for these summary mortgages. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Mr. Minister, when will the summary 

mortgages then be available?  As soon as the Bill is enacted 

and declared? 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have, Mr. Chair, a consultation 

group that is ready to go when these amendments become law.  

And we have to consult with the financial institutions and the 

legal community and other persons with an interest.  And then 

we want to give about three months notice to the system that 

this will become the way of doing things.  So all told, we think 

it'll take about six months from the date of passage of this Bill 

to be ready. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, in section 

125(2) several Acts are cited in reference to this Bill.  And I'm 

wondering if you could describe and then give examples of 

how these would affect mortgage holders in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member was asking about section 

125(2), and this provision is proposed for insertion in this Bill 

to clarify that the owner of an easement can use that easement 

as security for a loan or for a debt in the form provided in the 

Act, which is form Q.  And that may be a Crown corporation.  

The question arose, for example, when the SaskEnergy 

privatization was being considered by the former government, 

the question arose as to whether easements could be used as 

part of the security in financing the requirements of 

SaskEnergy.  But it also applies to individuals or corporations 

who have easements for pipelines -- maybe private 

corporations -- as well as for Crown corporations. 

 

I'm also advised that the provision is not new; that it was in the 

Act before and is simply carried forward. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, in section 

125(1), subsection (1), I notice under the explanatory notes 

there is some significant wording changes.  And I'm wondering 

what the significant difference is regarding the 125(1) in, I 

would take it the original Bill, versus the Bill that we have 

before us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The before and after provisions -- the 

previous provisions and the present provisions are the same.  

It's restructured a bit from a stylist's point of view.  The main 

change are the words "or to the like effect" that appears in both 

paragraphs (a) and (b).  And that is to give some flexibility to 

the system again.  The mortgage shall be in form Q or to like 

effect.  And that is introduced precisely for that reason, for a 

little flexibility and clarity. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  So what 

you're saying then, basically really the intent of the legislation 

hasn't really changed; it's just a different way of wording the 

subsections. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain the difference 

between registered and non-registered interests on a piece of 

property. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The words themselves really provide the 

answer if you think about it.  A registered interest is interest 

that is registered pursuant to the Act, either as the instrument 

itself being registered or a caveat being registered to protect an 

interest under some kind of transaction -- perhaps an agreement  

for sale, perhaps an hypothecation, or something like that. 

 

An unregistered interest is an interest that is not registered.  

And it will . . . it could be anything.  It could be an agreement 

for sale where a caveat has not been filed.  It could be a 

lease -- long term, short term -- any kind of lease which is not 

registered under the Act.  It could be an hypothecation which is 

not protected by caveat; could be anything. 

 

So as I say, the names themselves suggest the distinction. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder does this legislation affect 

or change the legal rights of the different forms of ownership, 

i.e., certificate of title, caveat, or registered interest?  And if so, 

I wonder if you could describe that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could just . . . 

just a couple of quick questions here.  In concrete terms, I 

wonder if you could describe how this legislation will improve 

the legal rights of property holders. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Sorry, Mr. Chair, to take a moment 

there, but this required that I refresh my memory about an 

Alberta decision of the Court of Appeal which expressed some 

reservations about the position of registered interests other than 

the registered owners of property.  The registered owner is an 

idea, of course, that's clear to all members of the committee. 

 

The question arose in this Alberta case as to the position of, for 

example, I think in that case it was a lease, it was a mineral 

lessee, which is not a registered owner but is a registered 

interest, which is, we have always assumed, entitled to the 

protection of the Act. 

 

The Alberta case raised the question of whether the wording of 

the Alberta legislation was sufficient to protect those interests 

against non-registered interests -- which are an interest as 

between two parties which doesn't appear anywhere in the 

Land Title's records. 

 

So it is in that context that we're wanting to amend the 

Saskatchewan Act to make it clear that registered interests can 

be taken, can be dealt with, subject only to what is known on 

the records of the Land Titles Office by way of registered 

instruments, and the so-called non-registered interests won't 

take precedence over the registered interests. 

 

We therefore tried to expand the protection under the Act, 

under the Torrens system, from simply protecting registered 

owners to protecting all manner of registered interests so far as 

the possible existence of these non-registered interests may 

arise in some future case to question their particular interest. 



950 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

So I know that's terribly complex and let me try and answer 

then the member's question.  We are trying to ensure that The 

Land Titles Act works in the way in which we have always 

conceived it to work; namely, that in order that a registered 

interest of any kind in the Act is a secure interest and is the 

kind of interest that it is supposed to be under the Act without 

regard to non-registered interests, of which no notice has been 

given to the parties affected. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I guess 

that's one of the reasons I raised some of the questions and 

concerns.  Because even though the Bill itself doesn't seem to 

be that complex, certainly it's not a lengthy document, yet some 

of the technical wording . . . and I can understand why we 

basically need to look to legal minds when it sometimes . . . 

even legal minds have a difficult time determining what interest 

or non-interest or the different aspects of a piece of legislation 

mean for those of us who are strictly maybe just in the habit of 

buying and selling property. 

 

So I can commend the minister for trying to simplify the 

process and make it much simpler, much easier to understand.  

I think I can see from what the legislation before us, it should 

simplify the matter of handling land transactions and 

mortgages, and I commend you for that.  And I really have no 

further questions. 

 

Just in case your staff are going to change when we move to the 

next piece of legislation, I would like to thank the staff in 

attendance for addressing this Bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act respecting the Convention on the Law 

Applicable to Trusts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- My official today is Mr. Darcy 

McGovern, Crown solicitor with the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Again, 

Mr. Minister, I just want to indicate that we'll not be taking a 

long time discussing the Bill before us.  As I indicated in my 

second reading speech the other day, we don't have any major 

objections. 

 

I believe, Mr. Minister, you indicated that this legislation does 

involve some complex aspects of international trust convention.  

And we would just like you to take a moment maybe to clarify 

what you were saying in your speech the other day. 

 

You also pointed out that the problems addressed by this Bill 

have been long-outstanding ones between common law and 

civil law jurisdictions, and that six of the nine common law 

provinces of Canada have already joined the international 

convention on trusts. 

 So I guess, Mr. Minister, what I would ask is maybe just give a 

bit of a clarification of what you meant in your statement the 

other day, and also maybe just indicate why it has taken us this 

long to join the convention. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With respect to the last part of the 

member's question, we went through a consultation process 

with the legislative review committees and the law reform 

committees of the Canadian Bar in Saskatchewan, both in the 

northern part of the province and in the southern part of the 

province, before bringing this Bill.  It is a technical piece, as 

the member will have seen. 

 

It addresses a conflict between the recognition given to trusts in 

common law as opposed to civil law countries.  And in 

common law jurisdictions, such as the province of 

Saskatchewan and most provinces in Canada except for 

Quebec, the common law applies.  And it is recognized in law 

that the trustee holds property on behalf of beneficiaries, and 

the trustee has no personal interest in the property other than as 

trustee for these beneficiaries.  In the civil law jurisdictions 

they don't recognize this concept; they have no concept of a 

trust.  And this has led to many serious problems involving any 

number of people. 

 

So as a result of the position that the civil law systems have 

always had with respect to trusts, a trustee is treated as though 

he or she is the legal owner.  And therefore the trust property is 

attachable, for example, by creditors of the trustee.  It can be 

seized by creditors of the trustee, even though it was never the 

intention that the trustee would have a personal interest in it. 

 

So the convention that is referred to in this Bill, the Hague 

convention on international trusts, tries to address this legal 

confusion and tries to straighten out the conflict.  And the 

present Bill adopts in effect that convention.  It establishes a 

protocol, an international protocol, for the recognition of the 

administration of trusts so that courts in civil law jurisdictions 

will recognize trusts.  And that will only be to the benefit of 

any citizens of this province that are the beneficiaries with 

respect to trusts in any of the civil law jurisdictions of countries 

signatory to this convention. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, then does that simplify the process 

that you're talking of?  Does it make it a simpler process that 

we're dealing with here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer to the member's question is 

definitely yes.  Without the convention the beneficiaries are in 

for a long, tough court battle in the civil law jurisdiction of the 

country where the trust is located. 

 

With this, it is a much, much simpler procedure and the courts 

will simply adopt the process as set out in the convention and 

adopt the rules set out in the convention which are, in effect, 

common law rules.  And the trust property will be protected 

from any of the personal problems of the trustee and the 

property will be protected for the beneficiaries so far as the 

trustee is concerned. 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

Now that works in countries that are signatory to this 

agreement and they include civil law countries like Italy and 

France, for example, where many Canadians hold property and 

where no doubt there are many trust arrangements. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In light of the last comment about Canadians 

holding property, I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, out of curiosity, 

do you have any estimate of the number and value and trusts 

held by Saskatchewan residents that would be affected by this 

particular piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, we don't know how many 

Saskatchewan people might be affected by this.  We make 

assumptions in this area considering the extent to which 

Canadians are involved in France, and we know that there are 

many.  And in recent years in Italy, with the flow of 

immigrants from Italy to Canada, there are countless situations 

that we're aware of but we can't put any numbers to that 

statement. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, have there been any incidents in the 

past of Saskatchewan-held trusts being seized in civil law 

jurisdictions, or is this piece of legislation we've got before us 

more a preventive measure to try and address what may come 

down, or are we looking at addressing something that's already 

happened and protecting people in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We are not aware of any situations in 

Saskatchewan.  The problem has come up countless times in 

Ontario and we're aware of those cases, but we haven't 

encountered one in Saskatchewan yet.  So the member's 

correct -- we're moving here to strengthen the position of any 

Saskatchewan people that will come in conflict as they 

certainly would at some point in the future. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, does 

the definition of trust set out in the legislation differ any 

significant way from the definition currently in use in 

Saskatchewan or other jurisdictions? 

 

And secondly, is it safe to assume that all the definitions 

relating to trust and administration set out in legislation 

conform with the provisions of the international convention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The concept of a trust as it appears in 

the convention, which the legislation adopts, is entirely 

consistent with the common law understanding of trusts and 

definition of trusts.  The characteristics are set out under article 

2 of the convention and, as I say, those are entirely consistent 

with the common law concept. 

 

In article 11 of the convention, right at the bottom of the page 

and continuing on to the top of page 4, there are a number of 

implications of the recognition of trusts, and they are entirely 

consistent with the law in Saskatchewan.  For example: ". . . 

personal creditors  

of the trustee shall have no recourse against the trust assets" 

and ". . . the trust assets shall not form part of the trustee's 

estate upon . . . insolvency or bankruptcy" and so on.  There is 

a precise consistency. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, in chapter IV in article 16 it states: 

 

If another State has a sufficiently close connection with a 

case then, in exceptional circumstances, effect may also be 

given to rules of that state which have the same character 

as mentioned in the preceding paragraph. 

 

This clause is a little confusing, I would think, and I guess the 

use of the words "exceptional circumstances" make us a little 

nervous.  Could the minister explain the kind of situations this 

clause applies to and why it is necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Very testing question.  I have here a 

report prepared by Professor Waters on this convention and he 

discusses Article 16 . . . actually discussing Article 15 and 16, 

but the part I'm quoting zeros right in on Article 16.  And I 

quote: 

 

Article 16 goes even further (that's just referring to the 

previous paragraph).  It concedes to the Contracting State 

as the forum the right to ignore the applicable law, not 

only when its law demands domestic adherence, but 

adherence also in an international context.  Moreover, the 

forum may give priority over the applicable law to similar 

obligatory laws of another State, if it considers that State 

to have "a sufficiently close connection" with the trust 

issue before the court of the forum. 

 

These two articles do have the effect of rendering the 

Convention less predictable in its operation, but at least 

the Fifteenth Session recognized this, and in article 16 

extends the opportunity to a Contracting State to declare, 

on adoption of the convention, that it will not apply the 

obligatory laws of any other State than its own.  The hope 

of the Fifteenth Session is that, as non-trust jurisdictions 

acquire experience of the operation of trusts within their 

borders, articles 15 and 16 will be more and more 

sparingly invoked, in the spirit of the convention. 

 

Now I take it from that that article 16, which in effect gives a 

state an out by saying that in exceptional circumstances, it can 

give effect to laws which they say must be applied to 

international situations, irrespective of rules of the conflict of 

laws that they gave concessions to those states in the 

negotiation of this treaty -- of this convention -- and went 

through a number of sessions, obviously with this on their 

agenda, and disposed of it in this manner. 

 

Doing that, they concluded the convention with the expressed 

hope that, as the civil law jurisdictions got more experience 

with the idea of a trust, they would be more sparing in the 

invocation of their national 



952 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

laws which, on an exception basis, they could apply to these 

trust situations. 

 

So the member is quite right to be concerned about that.  It 

does provide some flexibility in the civil law countries to apply 

some other rule which they feel has to be applied irrespective 

of the rules of conflict of laws and indeed the rules of this 

convention.  And other countries having a sufficiently close 

connection with a case may, as you pointed out in the second 

paragraph of article 16, makes some allowances for these home 

laws. 

 

So all I can say in answer to the member's very testing question 

is that, as indicated in the quote from Professor Waters's 

document, they hoped that these situations will vanish over 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And after listening to 

your response, certainly if I could understand all the technical 

aspects of the response, there's probably a number of questions 

that could still arise.  But I'd like to move on to . . . In article 17 

at the top of page 5, it says: 

 

In the Convention the word "law" means the rules of law 

in force in a State other than its rules of conflict of laws. 

 

And I'm wondering what that specifically means or . . . as we 

have specific pieces of legislation, a lot of times you'll have a 

word will be brought out and saying, whenever you see this 

word this is what it means.  And I'm just wondering what we're 

specifically talking of here, especially what the rules of conflict 

of laws refer to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That simply clarifies that when you're 

talking about the concept of law in relation to this convention, 

you're talking about the domestic law of the court of that 

country.  When you talk about the conflict of law rules, you 

then get into an area where in certain circumstances that home 

court will recognize the law of another country as being the 

applicable law in a case. 

 

For example, and this is no longer a valid example, but in days 

gone by your capacity to marry may depend upon the country 

in which you're domiciled.  That's a rule of the conflict of laws, 

that domestic courts would apply.  So if you were born and 

raised in Iran and you've just come to Canada six months ago, 

and you're here in front of the courts and your capacity to enter 

into a marriage is an issue, the Canadian courts may apply the 

Iranian law to the question. 

 

This simply says that law means the home law and doesn't take 

into account those rules where international law may become 

applicable in the case.  This document tends to jump over those 

conflict rules and provide a new way of dealing with the trust 

concepts that had nothing to do with the old conflict rules. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I think that's only 

fair and it's probably wise in our changing 

times. 

 

In article 18, I wonder if the minister could give us an example 

of circumstances under which article 18 would come into force. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll use an extreme example just to make 

the point.  If the French courts were confronted with a trust that 

was set up in order to promote slavery, let us say, if you could 

imagine such a thing, then the French courts could disregard 

the application of that trust on the basis that it's manifestly 

incompatible with the public policy of France.  That's an 

extreme and impossible example, but that's the idea. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So basically that article is just in there, like you 

say, to try and address some of the extreme circumstances that 

could evolve, not necessarily that are presently in place today 

as we look at it. 

 

(1630) 

 

I notice in article 20: 

 

Any Contracting State may, at any time, declare that the 

provisions of the Convention will be extended to trusts 

declared by judicial decisions.  This declaration shall be 

notified to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom 

of the Netherlands and will come into effect on the day 

when this notification is received. 

 

I'm wondering why we've referred to the Kingdom of the 

Netherlands.  Is this simply the location of the registry office of 

the convention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- In Articles 20, 21, and 22, I wonder if the minister 

again could explain how they could affect Saskatchewan-held 

trusts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member's question was article 21 

and 22.  I'll deal first with article 21.  What that means is that a 

civil law country, for example, could decide that it will apply 

the chapter 3 provisions concerning recognition only to trusts 

which are governed by the law of another country which is 

party to this convention. 

 

Now they could take another tack and say, we'll recognize 

trusts no matter where they are and no matter where they arise 

or under whose law their validity is governed if they want to, 

but they may reserve the right to restrict that to trusts that are 

made or governed by the law of another country that is a party 

to this convention. 

 

Article 22 speaks to the question of the date of the instrument.  

And the general rule is that the convention will apply to trusts 

regardless of the date on which they were created.  But a 

contracting state may decide to apply the convention only to 

trusts which are created after the date on which the convention 

enters into force so far as that state is concerned. 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

We have opted in this Bill -- as is the case with Alberta and 

Saskatchewan for example -- to take advantage of the exception 

and to apply the convention only to trusts that come into force 

after the convention is ratified.  So we've taken advantage of 

the exception under article 22 in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I really don't have any 

other further questions, other than to state that I think it's . . . 

for the sake of residents of Saskatchewan, it's something that 

maybe they certainly want to take careful note of before they 

enter into any agreements or are carrying . . . holding trust 

agreements for out-of-province residents. 

 

To be honest with you it's a fairly complex document to me, 

and I'm sure that if you were talking to people with a legal 

mind you may even find at times, and no doubt that even 

amongst jurisdictions there would be differences of opinion.  

But I think the more we can do to try and simplify processes 

would certainly be beneficial to each one of us as individuals, 

residents certainly of our province and our country. 

 

I would like to extend a thank you to staff person Darcy for 

being here to explain some of the process.  And at this time, 

prepared to move on, unless there are any other areas about the 

legislation that you feel would be appropriate to just bring to 

the attention of the floor or the public in general. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedule agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'd like to thank Mr. 

McGovern for coming and assisting the committee this 

afternoon. 

 

Bill No. 25 -- An Act to amend The Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As I did on the previous Bill this 

afternoon, I will introduce Brent Prenevost, Crown solicitor 

with the Department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and welcome again 

to your official, Brent.   As I indicated the other day, Mr. 

Minister, this is certainly a piece of legislation that I'm not sure 

how many times it will actually come into effect, but no doubt 

there have been circumstances in the past and will continue to 

be circumstances in the future whereby families are left in a 

position of having a difficulty in trying to come to grips, not 

only with the loss of a loved one, but with the hardships of 

trying to put together a funeral and the resulting expenses that 

would come about due to the costs of holding a funeral for that 

loved one.  And I think certainly the intent of the Bill, I believe 

is good, it's noteworthy, and that we would take the time to try 

to alleviate some of the difficulties and the hardships that 

families face. 

In your second reading speech, Mr. Minister, you indicated 

that: 

 

the proposed amendment will provide for the payment of 

reasonable funeral, testamentary, and administrative 

expenses before the claims against an insolvent estate are 

paid. 

 

Now I'm wondering what you really mean by reasonable.  Does 

the Bill lay out what is reasonable, or how would that be 

determined so a family would kind of know where they're at or 

does the family ask to . . . after they've say gone through the 

format of arranging for a funeral and having laid out these 

expenses, who do they go to?  How do they find out as to what 

is reasonable or who do they contact?  I guess I've got about 

three or four questions all in one there, Mr. Minister, and I 

wonder if you could just lay that out for us please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- First of all, let me say that the system 

operates pretty much as though this is already the law; has for 

years.  And everyone, almost everyone, recognizes that an 

administrator can pay the funeral expenses and the 

testamentary expenses, administration expenses before turning 

to the creditors.  But that is not the law and we're moving to 

make it so.  So in other words, it's not going to be a big shock 

to the system to have this provision become embedded in our 

statutory law. 

 

As to the member's question, it is up to the executor or 

administrator to do what has to be done here, and up to the 

family to decide what kind of funeral is appropriate.  And the 

only test of that would come if creditors challenged the 

legitimacy of some of these expenses.  And in order to do that, 

creditors would have to get the matter before a judge and have 

a judge determine it. 

 

So if I were advising the family or an executor or administrator, 

I would tell them to behave normally, tell them not to do 

anything outlandish but to behave normally and in good faith 

and nothing untoward will happen to them.  But we don't want 

to prescribe by legislation how much can be spent on a funeral 

or what an executor should or shouldn't do.  We just expect 

people to behave normally and in good faith. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if an executor of an estate and 

a family planning a funeral find themselves with some 

difficulties in arranging the funeral and possibly some of the 

costs they're going to incur, what is the process?  Who would 

they contact?  Is there a contact person or someone that they 

could talk to before they really get into all the details of 

arranging for a funeral and the costs that might be incurred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, they just behave normally.  They go 

about arranging the funeral.  They pay for it as they do now, 

whatever that may mean in a family situation, you know.  

Families handle these problems of funerals and they find 

resources within their families to manage these things.  This 

simply provides that that expense is a priority expense and can 

be taken care of before any creditors are considered for 



954 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 1994 

payment or before any creditors have a claim against the estate.  

It's just trying to ensure that by giving priority to these claims, 

the families get back the funeral costs and the executors or 

administrators get back the administration costs before they 

have to worry about the creditors of the deceased. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think I understand a 

little clearer now.  I was understanding that if there was undue 

hardships in trying to cover the costs of a funeral that there was 

a way of maybe trying to find some reimbursement for that.  

But what you're really saying is that the costs of the funeral for 

the executor of an estate, really those costs would . . . the 

executor has the right to cover those costs first before any other 

person could lay claim to whatever funds are left in that estate 

so that you're not left there with either the funeral home or the 

director or some other aspects of the funeral, all of a sudden 

being left out in the cold while someone comes and challenges 

the estate and goes to recover costs.  I think that's what I 

understand you're saying right now.  Is that true, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, that's exactly correct, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't really have any further 

questions.  I think we have a pretty good understanding of what 

you're implying in the Bill, and therefore I'm ready to move on.  

And again, thank your assistant for being here and for helping 

us this afternoon. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act respecting Frustrated Contracts 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, it's hard 

not to have a smile on your face when you look and see the 

wording of this contract . . . in fact my colleagues were just 

wondering how long I was going to keep them and hold them 

so that they can refrain from becoming frustrated with the 

process. 

 

My understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill would bring us 

in line with every other province except for Nova Scotia and 

that it was suggested by the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan.  And I believe the Bill also binds the 

government to adhering to these changes, and given the record 

of your government and contracts, I must say that this is a bit of 

a surprise.  In fact, I think there are many frustrated people in 

the province of Saskatchewan who would like to have had this 

Bill implemented two or three years ago so that some of the 

problems that have been taking place around Saskatchewan 

could have been addressed. 

I also understand that while the government has, in the past, 

brought forward a number of Bills that are retroactive, this Bill 

will not be retroactive.  In any case, could the minister give me 

a bit of detail explaining how Saskatchewan people will really 

benefit from Bill No. 26. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I will resist the invitation to 

respond on a wider front, as was suggested in comments from 

across the floor.  I want to say that when this matter first came 

before the cabinet it was described as the frustrated contractors 

Act, and so we've been laughing about this ever since.  And the 

members of the House picked up on that and we should have 

some fun in this place. 

 

The idea of a frustrated contract is a very old and troublesome 

common law idea and the doctrine of frustration is something 

that law students for generations have had to fight their way 

through at law school to try and understand the rules that apply 

to the doctrine of frustration.  The truth is that the common law 

never did figure out a very satisfactory way of dealing with 

these situations. 

 

Let me start by just briefly talking about when a contract . . . 

when the doctrine of frustration arises.  It is where a contract 

becomes impossible to perform through no fault or action of 

either party but because of a change in circumstances. 

 

For example, let us say that the hon. member from Moosomin 

contracts with Centennial Auditorium to give a singing concert 

and then before that event takes place gets . . . contracts a 

serious case of laryngitis and is unable to sing.  It's not his 

fault.  It's not anybody's fault.  It's just that you're not able to 

perform the contract. 

 

Similarly, and I wouldn't use the member's name in connection 

with this example, but some party to a contract may die so 

they're not able to perform the contract. 

 

Or it may be that an act of God intervenes.  You agree to buy 

my house, but before the sale is completed a tornado comes 

along and wipes out my house; so that an act of God in that 

example has made it impossible for me to sell my house to you. 

 

Now what the law has never been able to grapple with is what 

happens when that happens.  Who is to bear the consequences?  

And to put it in a very simplistic way, the law just sort of 

freezes the situation right there and says well, if you've gained 

any benefit, that's yours.  And if you have suffered any loss, 

that's yours.  So the chips sort of fall wherever they happen to 

have fallen on the day of the frustrating event -- in the case of 

my example, the day on which the hon. member gets laryngitis.  

So that any deposit that's been paid is not recoverable, any 

expenses that have been undertaken are not recoverable; 

everything is just frozen in place at that point in time. 

 

Now judges and lawyers have known that this is not a very 

satisfactory way of dealing with these situations. 



March 16, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

And there have been no rules developed around the concept of 

frustration to sort out what should happen to the benefits and 

what should happen to the expenses. 

 

This Bill is an attempt to . . . well it will be effective in 

providing the court with the ability to sort out that question, to 

ensure that no unjust benefit is received or that anyone has 

profited from the frustration or that anyone has to bear unfair 

expenses as a result of the frustration and will allow the court 

to apportion benefits and apportion expenses and try and deal 

with those situations in a just and fair way rather than the 

present arbitrary rules. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you don't 

know how truthful you were regarding laryngitis and being able 

to speak.  I was just fortunate I didn't have a major contract to 

have to live up to. 

 

What you're saying then is contracts are basically just held in 

abeyance and at the end of the day, the funds are then 

apportioned on what's available at the time regarding the 

contract.  I gather that's what you're telling us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The short answer is yes, that's exactly 

right.  It's a new and just way of approaching it.  It's in 

accordance, as the member has already observed, with the law 

reform ideas on the subject and the legislation of practically 

every other jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One further question, Mr. Minister.  You talked 

about an arbitration clause in a contract.  Who appoints the 

arbitrator?  Is this Bill basically laying out the guidelines for an 

arbitrator to be appointed?  And if so, who would that arbitrator 

be, or is it someone that the parties agree to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This refers to arbitration clauses that is 

already in a contract.  And it's quite customary and they will 

have either identified somebody or they will have identified 

some method of appointing an arbitrator, and this simply keeps 

alive that provision notwithstanding that the contract has 

collapsed on account of the frustrating event. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I'd just like to take a moment to 

thank the minister and his officials for joining us this afternoon 

and providing responses to our questions.  I'm not sure how 

technical -- whether they were too technical at times or weren't 

as simple as we could have made them, but some of the detail 

was quite technical, and we appreciate that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'd like to join my friend in thanking Mr. 

McGovern.  It's always a pleasure to have him here and he's 

always very quick with his advice.  And as I was saying, Mr. 

Chair, we are going 

to miss further debate on this Bill.  It is almost a pity to pass it. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 23 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 24 -- An Act respecting the Convention on the Law 

Applicable to Trusts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 25 -- And Act to amend The Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 26 -- An Act respecting Frustrated Contracts 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


