




















































Hansard: April 18, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1607 

 April 18, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy today to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and 

I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the cost 

involved with digging up underground storage tanks and 

replacing them, and instead offering alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative 

agreed upon by all parties affected. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are from the Saltcoats, Bredenbury areas of the 

province; looks like the east side of the province.  We have 

even one from Edmonton, I noticed on here, which is 

significant to know that people from outside the province are 

also concerned.  We've got Yorkton and quite a few other areas 

just along the east side of the border. 

 

And I'm happy to present these today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today dealing with the underground storage 

tanks.  These petitions come from the Manor, Alida, Carlyle, 

the very south-east corner of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

Redvers, Beaubier; also a number from the MacNutt, Calder, 

Wroxton area, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to present today. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

pages dealing with the same subject.  And as the prayer has 

been read, I won't do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come across the province right 

from Luseland, Major, over to Saltcoats, Saskatoon, Esterhazy, 

Regina, Stockholm -- I don't know if that could even be 

Sweden, Mr. Speaker.  So as my colleague said, there's a lot in 

interest in this -- Riverhurst, Yorkton, Esterhazy, I think that . . 

. Churchbridge, Langenburg.  It's with some degree of pleasure 

I lay this on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

with regard to the underground storage issue, Mr. Speaker.  The 

petitioners come from Canora, Buchanan, Kamsack, Weyburn 

areas of the province, Mr. Speaker, as well as some from 

Regina city, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm pleased to present them 

today on their behalf. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

today.  These are petitions, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the 

question of underground storage tanks and are people who 

agree with the thousands that have already presented petitions 

in front of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have individuals from the city of Regina; 

communities such as Frontier, Saskatchewan; Weyburn, 

Annaheim, Saltcoats, Saskatoon, Nipawin, Springside, 

Whitewood, Turtle Lake, Yorkton, Lanigan; community of 

Moosomin, Mr. Speaker; Saltcoats, Churchbridge -- petitioners 

from all over the province, Mr. Speaker, that I do present today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join my 

colleagues in presenting petitions on behalf of those people 

who are concerned about the costs of replacing the 

underground storage tanks.  And my petitions come from a 

variety of areas, mostly from Waldheim -- pages from 

Waldheim, Mr. Speaker; also from . . . a couple of pages from 

Saltcoats, Bredenbury, Saskatoon, and Lloydminster; and I 

want to put these on the Table at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of Saskatchewan praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker. it's my privilege and 

pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of 

the Assembly, a group of 23 grade 12 students from Martin 

Collegiate.  They're seated up here in the Speaker's gallery.  I 

want to welcome them here today to observe question period 

and look forward to meeting with them after question period. 

 

Along with them is their teacher, Doug Bolander, as well as a 

couple of chaperons, Darlene Kreklewich and Moses Lukwago.  

And I want to welcome them as well because I know this is part 

of the teaching experience and look forward, as I mentioned, to 

meeting you after question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I too would like to introduce some guests 

today.  It's not very often that the Speaker has guests in from 

his constituency, but I'm very proud today to be able to 

introduce Sam and Gertie Gross and their son, Murray, who are 

seated in the Speaker's gallery.  I ask all members to welcome 

them to the Assembly and give them a good hand of applause. 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Curling Champions 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's true 

that we throw many rocks in this House, but I rise today to 

recognize individuals who do a much better job than we do. 

 

Curling has a long history in Saskatchewan.  Following suit of 

the European and Scottish rural workers who began curling 

with drystone rocks and frozen loch or moors, Saskatchewan 

people have grown to develop their own curling tradition, and 

those traditions have continued on for generations. Keen 

competition, spirited audience participation, and strong, 

friendly heritage are key ingredients to the success of this sport.  

Such is the case in Saskatchewan. 

 

It isn't every day that athletes from a province receive 

worldwide recognition, but this weekend is an exception.  

Callie Curling Club's Sandra Peterson and her curling team 

captured the attention of Saskatchewan people and the world 

last year by winning the women's curling championship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they did it again in Oberstdorf, Germany, 

yesterday.  Sandra, Jan, Joan, and Marcia made history by 

beating Scotland 5-3 in the final and becoming the first 

Canadian women's team to win two world titles. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, our former colleague, Rick Folk, 

captured the men's world curling title this weekend.  And Rick 

has been well known in Saskatchewan for years since he 

captured his first men's world title in 1980. 

 

Coupled with the recent victories of the Saskatchewan junior 

teams at the junior world championship, these achievements 

prove that while Scotland may have invented curling, 

Saskatchewan owns the sport. 

 

We are all very proud of them, Mr. Speaker, and look forward 

to congratulating them all in person.  May I request that all 

members of this Assembly join me in recognizing these great 

Saskatchewan athletes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Canada's Women's, Men's and Junior 

World Curling Champions 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you for recognizing me, Mr. 

Speaker.  Today we can all be proud and delighted with the 

news that Canada's women's and men's curling teams have 

joined the junior curling teams as world champions.  All teams 

played valiantly in dramatic games against worthy opponents.  

I am sure that everyone in our province is proud of the 

accomplishment of our women's team.  Sandra Peterson, Jan 

Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia Gudereit, along with fifth 

Anita Ford, made history by becoming the first Canadian 

women's team to win 

back-to-back world titles when they beat Scotland's Christine 

Cannon 5-3 in the women's final. 

 

Meanwhile, Kelowna's Rick Folk, who played out of Saskatoon 

in 1980 and was a member of this Assembly in the early '80s, 

won the men's title in dramatic fashion by beating Sweden 3-2. 

 

Also let us not forget the fine victories of our junior teams.  

With these four championship teams, it was truly a sweep for 

Canada this year, and we can say the best curlers come from 

Canada and many from the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like the Assembly to join with me in congratulating the 

Canadian women's, men's, and junior world champion curling 

teams.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to the Canadian Women's World Curling 

Champions 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

Liberal caucus, I would also like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate Regina's own Sandra Peterson for winning the 

second world curling title in two years.  Her rink of Jan, Joan, 

Marcia and Anita are the first Canadian team to win two 

consecutive world titles, and they accomplished this feat by 

beating Scotland yesterday. 

 

I am sure all members of the Assembly will join me in 

applauding these athletes, and agree that the Peterson rink 

represents the best of Saskatchewan's winning spirit.  They 

really raised our spirits as we had the honour of watching them. 

 

To win two world championships in a row, and to be part of the 

Canadian sweep of the world championships, is a tremendous 

boost to the morale of our province.  This kind of teamwork is 

an inspiration to all of us to work as a team to accomplish great 

things at home and around the world. 

 

To Sandra, Jan, Joan, Marcia, and Anita, and to their families, I 

want to express our heartfelt thanks and congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Last Mountain District Music Festival 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like to 

inform the Assembly about a very exciting and a very special 

event in Last Mountain-Touchwood -- the Last Mountain 

District Music Festival. 

 

The festival, which started on April 11 and is going to April 22, 

is taking place in the town of Southey again this year.  The 

event, organized by the Saskatchewan Music Festival, travels 

throughout various districts biyearly.  The Last Mountain 

District Music Festival of 1994 marks the 31st anniversary of 

the district music festivals throughout Saskatchewan. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

This year's music festival attracted over 430 participants, all 

with various musical interests.  It was very important for the 

community to pull together, which it has done, in order to make 

the event run smoothly.  Organizers and volunteers alike should 

be congratulated for a job well done. 

 

The Last Mountain District Music Festival is an optimum 

opportunity for the youth of our province to show their abilities 

in music.  It also provides a chance for many children who 

would normally, for various reasons, not be able to compete in 

such a big festival.  The winners of the district festival go on to 

the provincial level, and then those winners go to the national 

level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to once again inform this Assembly 

of the ongoing Last Mountain District Music festival in 

Southey and to encourage all those interested to visit.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Women's World Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

Canada's success on the ice yesterday was not only limited to 

curling.  Canada also won its third consecutive title yesterday at 

the women's world hockey championship at Lake Placid, New 

York.  I would like to congratulate all members of the team, but 

in particular 15-year-old Haley Wickenheiser who played most 

of her hockey career in Shaunavon. 

 

Haley is the youngest member of Canada's national team and a 

good example for all young people in rural Saskatchewan.  

Before moving to Calgary, Haley was our babysitter and is a 

big reason why my two boys are so involved in hockey as they 

are. 

 

Her parents, Tom and Marilyn, are very good friends and I'm 

sure, very proud parents today.  I would like to have all 

members of the Assembly join me in congratulating Haley and 

the other women on Canada's national hockey team. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Head Heroine 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like to 

tell the Assembly about a young hero from Indian Head.  

Charity Kopp, 12 years old, is credited for saving the life of 

20-month-old Brandon Racette.  The incident happened on 

Saturday, April 9, when Brandon wandered into a nearby creek. 

 

Charity discovered the boy's body floating face down in the 

water much later.  It is still unknown how long the toddler had 

been submerged in the icy water.  She quickly jumped into the 

water herself and pulled the lifeless boy out.  She then 

performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation on the young boy, 

which she had learned from swimming lessons. 

Brandon still was not breathing, nor did he have any sign of a 

pulse 30 minutes after he was pulled from the water.  Others, 

including some volunteer fire-fighters, a medical technician, 

and Brandon's grandfather all came to help Charity resuscitate 

the child.  The child was finally rushed to the hospital where he 

miraculously survived.  Brandon is presently doing fine and is 

expected to recover fully.  If it had not been for the fast 

thinking and brave action of Charity Kopp this story surely 

would have ended in tragedy. 

 

This is the type of spirit and character which defines the people 

of Saskatchewan, and it is through people like Charity Kopp in 

which it shines through.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- A few years ago a prominent Regina lawyer 

said, and I quote, that the spirit of volunteerism in 

Saskatchewan is dead.  And he went on to give a line that we 

have all heard before, that as the government tries to do 

everything for everybody, there will no longer be any room for 

volunteers.  He was wrong then and he is still wrong today, as 

the previous member indicated today in the House. 

 

In recognition of volunteers' contribution to the Saskatchewan 

life in so many ways, the week of April 17 to 23 has been 

declared National Volunteer Week in Saskatchewan.  We urge 

those to take this official week and recognize the work of 

volunteers. 

 

In the past few weeks, Mr. Speaker, all of us have been 

contacted in one way or another by volunteers -- the Kidney 

Foundation, the fire-fighters association, or volunteer amateur 

sports associations.  We are familiar with the work done by 

those in Meals on Wheels or exhibition societies.  We are 

familiar as well for the hundreds of community fairs and sports 

days that are put on by volunteers. 

 

It would take a week to list the activities of the volunteers in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And rather than dying, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the spirit of volunteerism is alive and 

prospering in the province today.  And on behalf of all of us 

here, I would like to thank them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Expansion of Gaming 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This afternoon we 

want to begin by having a series of direct viewer mail questions 

asked by the citizens of this province to the Premier. 

 

I have a question here from Jerry Thomas from Mervin.  And 

he says:  Mr. Premier, I heard a report on CNN (Cable News 

Network) that U.S. (United States) casinos are losing money.  

Oversupply of casinos is 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

depriving all of enough money to operate.  Has the government 

considered this in deciding to open still more casinos? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, I want to say to the question 

that was raised, Mr. Speaker, that we quite clearly have looked 

at the market conditions throughout North America and 

throughout Saskatchewan's jurisdiction, and when we were 

putting together the analysis of the markets in Saskatchewan, 

we took all of those figures into account. 

 

The person who asked the question is quite right in that casinos 

are expanding all over North America; there appears to be a 

consumer demand.  We will ensure, in Saskatchewan, that we 

don't overbuild.  We don't want to oversaturate the 

Saskatchewan market and we'll clearly make sure that we don't 

do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vehicle Inspection Program 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Gordon Gherasium of Regina:  I 

want to know why the government, through SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), decided that they 

should inspect all vehicles coming in from out of province to 

make sure that they haven't been totalled off or anything else, 

and yet they allow all kinds of junk to be licensed in this 

province and go out on the road.  Every time I've had an 

accident in the city of Regina, I've been hit by a $50 piece of 

junk. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the 

research done on automobile insurance, approximately 1 per 

cent are from faulty vehicles.  But, Mr. Speaker, we still take 

this into serious consideration and that is the reason why we 

added the inspection program, you know, for vehicles coming 

in from other provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower President 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question as well is 

to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, I want to know what the Premier 

himself plans to do about the issues surrounding Jack Messer.  

It's an issue that really concerns me as I sit home and watch the 

news.  I'm really concerned about what he's been allowed to get 

away with over the past couple of years. 

 

I'd like to see the Premier take a stand and actually do 

something for a change about issues that he himself has talked 

about in the past as being immoral.  I had hoped to see that he 

could stand up and make some decisions about this. 

 

And this question, Mr. Speaker, comes from Darcy Paul of 

Regina. 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 

question, and the member who wrote it in.  I think that as much 

as anything, the questions that have been asked in the 

Legislative Assembly concerning Jack Messer have been more 

of innuendo than anything to do with fact. 

 

And I'd like the person who sent in that particular question to 

keep this in mind.  SaskPower is an important Crown 

corporation.  They provided good service to the people of 

Saskatchewan by any stretch or any standard compared to other 

utilities.  SaskPower is a very good utility, providing reliable 

and cost-effective service. 

 

If you look at the rates at SaskPower for example, putting them 

together with the SGI package, with the gas utility and the 

telephone rates, combine those four together, we likely have the 

cheapest and most efficient package of utilities anywhere in 

western Canada.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Labour Standards Act 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

comes from Gail Tiefenbach from Regina. 

 

I quote:  I would like to ask a question about The Labour 

Standards Act.  I am a group-home worker and I'm working 

about 75 hours a week with no overtime.  And I would like to 

know why group-home workers are such a class of workers that 

they don't belong in The Labour Standards Act like the rest of 

the workers. 

 

We are exempt from the hours of work provisions of the Act 

and I want to know what makes us different, other than the fact 

maybe that group homes are funded by the provincial 

government.  So the provincial government makes rules that all 

other businesses and people have to abide by as far as labour 

goes.  But they can't make special rules for themselves.  I don't 

think that's quite right.  Mr. Minister, what do you think? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This is indeed a great day.  What I 

think I heard the member from Maple Creek saying was that 

greater protection is needed through labour standards; I think 

that's what I heard him say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

from the very beginning of this debate I've defended the 

member from Maple Creek, and I've said he's a fair-minded 

man -- he's open to an argument.  I'm glad to see you're proving 

me right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Re-assignment of Co-op Employees 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today comes from Mr. Elmer Laird of Davidson, 

Saskatchewan.  And his question is:  Mr. Premier, I want to 

know why Mr. Lingenfelter has 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

discharged the senior adviser and five regionals coordinators, 

all of them, of the co-operatives branch? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would tell Mr. Laird, 

who many of us know, that in fact these people are now 

working in the area of the regional economic development 

authorities, and as most of the co-operative organizations in 

rural Saskatchewan know, this is an integration of business 

co-operatives in order to keep their communities working. 

 

My friend and colleague, the member from Maple Creek, we 

were in Gull Lake the other night at an opening of the regional 

economic development authority in the south-west part of the 

province.  There were a number of co-op people there, and he 

will know that the people doing that work are from the co-ops' 

area and doing an excellent job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, one of 

the reasons that the official opposition hoisted the provincial 

government's proposed changes to The Labour Standards Act 

was to allow the business and employers' community an 

opportunity to review the House amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after only a few days the results are in and they 

are unanimous.  The House amendments brought in by the 

Minister of Labour can best be described as a betrayal.  As 

usual, Mr. Minister, you told them one thing and then you 

delivered another.  In fact many of your changes make matters 

worse for business and job creation. 

 

Mr. Minister, why does the proposed list of House amendments 

which you described to the business community, differ so 

widely from the final House amendments?  Who or what got to 

you that you . . . after you had committed to improving the 

situation?  What happened, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm a little disappointed, Mr. Speaker.  

Having gained an ally in the member from Maple Creek, it 

appears in the space of a few seconds I've lost him again.  I've 

seen some backsliding but not quite that rapidly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Nevertheless, I think the series of questions from the member 

from Maple Creek points out the complexity of this whole issue 

actually, to be fair to the member, who I think has been fair to 

the issue today.  I think this simply points out the complexity of 

the issue. 

 

There are people such as the group-home workers who 

genuinely need protection, and this Act will extend that to 

them.  There are also concerns in the business community and 

we think we can meet those concerns as well.  So I guess I'll 

have to ponder for some time the exact position that the 

member from Maple Creek's taking. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

business community is using the term double-dealing quite 

often in reference to you and your government.  I guess that 

should come as no surprise.  The word is out that you can't be 

trusted. 

 

Mr. Minister, with your tongue firmly planted in your cheek 

you said last week that the majority of businesses and 

employers agreed with your legislation.  Well on Saturday, 

dozens of concerned businesses and organizations placed a 

full-page ad telling you how they really feel.  They paid for that 

-- I didn't. 

 

Now among other things, the ad said, quote: 

 

 New labour laws are about to be passed . . . that will scare off 

investment and result in fewer jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, let me ask you the question which the business 

associations ask in the ad: 

 

 Is this any way to establish a positive climate for economic 

renewal??? 

 Is this any way to encourage new business investment or 

create new jobs??? 

 Is this any way to build a partnership??? 

 

What do you think, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make it very clear, first of 

all, what the process here is.  This legislation is not the preserve 

of business, it is not the preserve of labour -- it is the preserve 

of the public.  And the end beneficiary of this legislation is not 

either one of the those groups, but the public themselves.  And 

at the end of the day, they're the only people whom we really . . 

. that's the only group whom we really ask for approval. 

 

Having said that, I want to point out to the minister what I think 

the questions he has asked today points out, and that is there are 

concerns by labour, there are concerns by business.  We have 

tried to strike a reasonable balance in meeting those and 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the member is asking 

questions from both sides, indicating concern from both sides, 

perhaps that indicates that we have struck a balance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, perhaps it indicates that your 

balance is somehow out of balance. 

 

Mr. Minister, it is not just organizations of business, the 

umbrella groups and the employers who are against your plan.  

Hundreds of individual businesses are also speaking out.  Let 

me give you a small example of this.  If this Bill is passed as 

proposed, it will mean the death of many Saskatchewan jobs 

and many Saskatchewan businesses, says one businessman 

from Kindersley.  Many part-time workers will likely end up 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

not having a job at all, writes the reeve from Corman Park.  

This Bill will restrict any type of expansion and growth by 

small companies in Saskatchewan, says an oilfield businessman 

from the Kindersley area. 

 

Mr. Minister, you say you know more about their business than 

they do.  Very simply, can you tell them what part of your Bill 

will create new investment and what part will create 

employment?  Can you point these out, Mr. Minister, for the 

people of Saskatchewan who are really concerned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- While creating new investment is not 

the primary function of this Bill, nevertheless we think it does . 

. . nevertheless we think it will contribute to that in an indirect 

way. 

 

It is our belief, Mr. Speaker, that the future belongs to those 

companies which can restructure, which can adapt to new 

technology, and which can, in doing so, gain the cooperation of 

their employees.  They're more likely to do that if their 

employees have some minimal protection. 

 

On that basis, we think, Mr. Speaker, that progressive labour 

legislation is an essential part of economic restructuring, 

although as I say, attracting investment is not the primary 

function of this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm happy, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister has finally been able to get serious 

this morning about this very serious problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, even part-time workers are telling you that they 

are concerned.  Your office has received a letter from a 

part-time worker in a fast food chain in Regina.  She said, and I 

quote: 

 

 I, and I am sure many others, would prefer a job without 

benefits as opposed to no job at all.  Please, for the sake of 

the part-time workers in this province, do not allow this 

legislation to pass. 

 

This is from a young, part-time worker, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's time you recognized that you botched this 

process from the very start.  In the name of jobs and business 

investment, will you commit to scrapping The Labour 

Standards and The Trade Union Acts and start all over again, 

this time with real and meaningful consultation and with a view 

to creating a positive job creation and investment climate in the 

province? 

 

Will you do that, Mr. Minister, for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The answer, Mr. Speaker, is 

no, we will not withdraw it.  We do not think that would 

contribute to a better climate, as you put it. 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that we have attempted a financial 

restructuring of this province and we have a balanced budget 

plan which is coming into place which will accomplish that. 

 

We have attempted to do that in other areas, and we are 

attempting to do it in the area of the economy.  Unlike 

members opposite who squandered enormous sums of money 

with one hare-brained project after another -- and I will not, 

Mr. Speaker, take time to name those hare-brained projects; if I 

were to name them by name I would go over the limit in time -- 

unlike members opposite, we have sought to work with the 

Saskatchewan economy to restructure it and to provide a basis 

upon which Saskatchewan will not just survive in the '90s but 

will thrive in the '90s.  We think that's in place. 

 

But I do want to say, Mr. Speaker, we will look elsewhere than 

members opposite for advice on how to manage the economy.  

Your record speaks for itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Underground Storage Tanks 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the Environment minister.  I've been receiving 

several phone calls in my office about the requirement to dig up 

underground fuel storage tanks.  A constant complaint is the 

apparent randomness of testing sites in requiring tanks and soil 

to be dug up. 

 

Mr. Minister, is there a plan for how your department is 

identifying potential sites, and will you table that plan today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question.  I 

want to thank the member opposite for the question.  The issue 

of underground storage tanks is less one of identifying which 

sites are responsible. Every business person in Saskatchewan 

that owns a service station knows that the risk one needs to 

avoid is the risk of an underground storage tank leaking and 

causing further contamination. 

 

So the objective of the regulations that are in place are to help 

businesses with guidelines that allow . . . that identify ways of 

protecting those tanks if they're relatively new tanks; or 

providing guidelines for when they should be replaced, should 

they be of an older age and at risk of leaking, to avoid further 

contamination and public risk.  The department has guidelines 

with which it works for helping to identify those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We raised 

questions in March of this year on behalf of the independent 

service station owners who face enormous financial costs of 

digging up tanks and 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

replacing them.  There appears to be a total disregard of the 

cost and impact on the people involved.  In at least one case I 

know of personally, because of the random choice of your 

department, a family's life savings have been wiped out to dig 

up a tank. 

 

Mr. Minister, will the government consider giving 

Saskatchewan businesses some form of financial assistance to 

help defray the cost of digging up and replacing these tanks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I know that for businesses 

who have decided that they should upgrade their facilities there 

is a cost involved, as there is a cost involved with operating any 

facility.  But I want the member opposite to know that when we 

looked at this issue shortly after we took office, we examined 

the issue of the upgrader requirements and decided that it was 

first important to offer an extension of deadlines to allow more 

time for planning and to review the issues that are of concern to 

people. 

 

The deadline has been extended to April 1, 1995 for all service 

station owners except for those who are of class A sites.  And I 

want to say that I want to express appreciation publicly to the 

class A site owners; 95 per cent of them have now complied 

with the need to upgrade by April 1 of this year.  And they 

deserve credit for the decision they've made. 

 

And what we are going to be doing is continuing to consult.  

The member opposite may not be aware that we've set up an 

advisory committee about a year ago to advise on the details of 

the upgrading, the details of the soil contamination standards.  

And we are listening to the industry and the concerned owners 

to make those regulations sensitive to their own business needs 

and to the public safety of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, my question 

was not regarding the advice you give to people or some of the 

sites that you say have been dealt with.  My question had to do 

with the enormous costs that these people are finding. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a copy of a bill from the Yorkton School 

Division.  It will cost a total of $150,000 to exhume one tank 

which is buried beside a school building.  To the Regina Public 

School Board the cost will be in excess of 200,000.  In Melville 

the cost is at least 20,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, in every case the cost for this will come out of the 

budget for education.  Mr. Minister, what is your priority -- 

education or digging up underground tanks that we can't 

afford? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is a bit 

of an amusing study.  He fully supported the revision of the 

standards about which he now asks questions, only a year ago. 

 

The fact is that it doesn't cost $100,000 to dig up any 

tank simply for removing the tank.  The costs begin to mount 

when there's contamination resulting from leakage.  And the 

only reason there's costs attached to cleaning up contamination 

is because, if there's gasoline or other substances that are 

components of gasoline in the soil that are either cancer risks or 

fire hazards or at risk of contaminating and putting the public at 

risk or environmental considerations at risk; water supply and 

municipal infrastructure; water lines; telephone lines; that it is 

important that you not make the situation worse by allowing 

the contamination to put the public at risk and put the facilities 

at risk. 

 

So the question is a, very simply, financial balance between 

getting the job done at minimal cost without adding further risk 

to that variety of elements in society that are at risk if there's 

contamination in the soil. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

my question is, why wouldn't the cost come out of your budget, 

and why does it have to come at the expense of the educational 

budget? 

 

We spoke with the staff at the Yorkton School Division offices 

and they tell me that the $150,000 cost will be reduced by 40 

per cent, thanks to a grant to the school division from the 

Department of Education.  That's a grant of $60,000. 

 

Mr. Minister, are there going to be grants to all the school 

divisions across the province, as well as the universities, 

regional colleges, hospitals, and other public institutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the funding of costs within 

any sector I will leave up the departments concerned.  The 

reality is that owners of equipment that is wearing out are 

responsible for the replacement of that equipment.  It is our 

goal to work with owners. 

 

And it's my understanding from my discussions with them that 

they generally would agree that we ought not to leave tanks in 

the ground until they leak.  That means that when they 

approach the risk of leaking, then one needs to either protect 

them from further corrosion -- which is the idea of the action 

plan to put in cathodic protection and to put in collection trays 

for collecting leaks to avoid further contamination -- to either 

do that upgrading or to replace the tanks and when the new 

tanks are put in place to have a high standard of protection of 

those new tanks, which then can go for a long time.  If you can 

achieve that level of protection then the public is not at risk. 

 

Now does the member argue, does the member argue that we 

ought not to upgrade tanks to protect them or we ought not to 

remove them when they leak?  I don't understand the point of 

the member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Appointment of Lieutenant Governor 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, on Friday, Liberal 

fund-raiser and strategist Jack Wiebe was appointed Lieutenant 

Governor of Saskatchewan by the Prime Minister.  This 

appointment was made by the Prime Minister, as I understand 

the process, in consultation with the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, why did you agree to this obvious patronage 

appointment, the exact kind of appointment that Mr. Chrétien 

and the Leader of the Third Party have spoken against in the 

past?  Why did you agree to that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to answer, 

on behalf of the Premier, the member's question.  Let me, first 

of all, make it very clear that in this appointment there was no 

consultation by the Prime Minister or by the federal 

government. 

 

But I think that this appointment -- and I look forward to 

working with the new Lieutenant Governor, who I am sure will 

dispose of his responsibilities in the same way as the former 

Lieutenant Governor did; and I want to commend her for the 

tremendous service that she provided to Saskatchewan -- but I 

think that this appointment nevertheless is a revealing 

commentary, Mr. Speaker, on the so-called new politics of the 

member for Greystone, who I know, in the process . . . because 

it is the process has been always carried out, where the Leader 

of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan was no doubt consulted 

and had some input and advice on the appointment of the new 

Lieutenant Governor.  And I think that the member from 

Greystone and the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party 

has an awful lot to explain in this particular circumstance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Deputy Premier, then.  Mr. Deputy Premier, are you telling 

me that the Leader of the Third Party okayed this appointment, 

even though we see obvious criticism from her in the weekend 

newspapers, and the Prime Minister consulted with the Leader 

of the Third Party, but not with the Premier in making this 

appointment?  I think, isn't the process supposed to go the other 

way around, Mr. Deputy Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the comments 

from the member from Thunder Creek are comments worth 

noting, in that indeed is the process.  But as far as I know, Mr. 

Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan was not consulted 

for recommended names on who should be appointed, or 

whether the present Lieutenant Governor should be the choice 

of the Prime Minister. 

 

I'm sure though, because the member, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party in Saskatchewan, has so often said 

how she is in almost daily contact with the office of the Prime 

Minister and the federal members, that she was consulted.  And 

I really think, Mr. Speaker, that this is an interesting revelation 

as to what we really mean, or what we really should understand 

about what the new Liberal politics in Saskatchewan is really 

all about.  And it's about patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf 

of the Premier and the government, I rise to pay tribute to the 

Most Reverend Charles Halpin, Roman Catholic bishop of 

Regina, who died on April 16. 

 

And I know that all members of the legislature will join with 

me in my comments and in the tribute paid to someone who we 

knew and who made such a tremendous contribution to this 

province and to the people of the church which he led. 

 

Born in Manitoba, Charles Halpin was fifth bishop of Regina 

and metropolitan of Saskatchewan for over 20 years until his 

untimely death at the age of 63.  His vocation to the priesthood 

came at an early age, and he served his church faithfully and 

with distinction in many senior positions in Winnipeg before 

his move to Saskatchewan. 

 

Archbishop Halpin was a beloved and popular leader for 

Roman Catholics in the archdiocese of Regina and the province 

of Saskatchewan.  He was respected and admired by people of 

other churches and faiths for his genuine friendship and 

openness to dialogue. 

 

At the time of his death he was the senior religious leader in 

our province.  Mr. Speaker, Charles Halpin led his people 

through challenging times.  Following Vatican II, the Roman 

Catholic church faced major changes in its worship, its 

structure, and its ministry.  Archbishop Halpin rose to those 

challenges with his customary vigour and good humour.  He 

thoroughly involved lay people, clergy, and religious in the 

activities of the church.  He established the first lay ministry 

program in western Canada, as well as an adult education 

centre.  He spoke out for social justice.  He firmly supported 

the farmers of our province during the agricultural crisis of our 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Charles Halpin earned the affection and the 

respect not only of his own church members, but of people of 

many faiths and different walks of life across the province.  He 

will be sorely missed by us all. 

 

On behalf of the government -- and I'm sure I can say on behalf 

of all of us -- I extend sincere condolences to his mother, his 

sisters, and his brothers, and I convey to the clergy and the 

people of the archdiocese of Regina, our deep sorrow at the 

loss of their archbishop. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Deputy 

Premier to say a few words about the late 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

Charles Halpin, the archbishop of Regina diocese.  Our 

daughter, Camille, is about to take Communion for the first 

time this month, Mr. Speaker.  And we were all looking 

forward to the opportunity to enjoy that celebration with the 

archbishop. 

 

As the Deputy Premier has pointed out, Archbishop Halpin was 

respected, he was admired.  I particularly enjoyed his good 

sense of humour.  He was very much interested in policy and 

politics and family and in rural life, urban life, enjoyed 

exchanging stories.  He was a man who was very, very 

compassionate. 

 

He was instrumental in the involvement of changing policy in 

the church.  And again, as the Deputy Premier pointed out, it 

was a time when the church had been changing, and he was 

instrumental in allowing his good advice and the support of the 

church to be involved in those changes. 

 

The respect of the community, Mr. Speaker, will undoubtedly 

be reflected in the respect that will be shown on Wednesday at 

his funeral.  And he will be missed.  And from this side of the 

legislature, let me sincerely provide our condolences to his 

family, his mother and brothers and sisters, and say, Mr. 

Speaker, that we will miss a very powerful and a very 

compassionate and a very religious individual. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

Liberal caucus, we would simply like to add our words of 

condolence to all of the friends and the family of the 

archbishop of the diocese of Regina.  I did not have the 

privilege of meeting him, but did have an opportunity to read 

about his accomplishments in the paper just this past weekend.  

So we do wish to pay honour to an individual who has added so 

much to the life of Saskatchewan society.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Government 

Organization Act (Executive Council Reduction) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Government Organization Act 

(Executive Council Reduction). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting Representation in the 

Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Representation in the Legislative Assembly be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to rise 

in the House today to move second reading to The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation exemplifies how careful study and 

consultation work together to meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people.  This Bill addresses major concerns, not only for SGI 

and its ability to operate a sound fiscal insurance program.  

More importantly, it gives all victims assurance that they will 

be properly cared for when injured in an auto accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we found through a comprehensive study that a 

good number of accident victims are receiving inadequate 

rehabilitation and other benefits.  As well, the priority in which 

they are receiving those benefits is backwards.  This means that 

many victims with similar injuries can receive quite different 

compensation depending on who is responsible for the 

accident.  Under this proposed Bill, those problems and 

concerns are addressed.  Instead of going through a lengthy, 

complicated legal process to assess benefits, victims are 

automatically compensated. 

 

The priority in which they receive those benefits also changes.  

In the future, accident victims will receive immediate benefits 

with medical rehabilitation being the top priority, followed by 

loss of income, and still provide recognition for pain and 

suffering.  This ensures that a victim's health is restored quickly 

so he or she may return to work and resume normal life after 

suffering injuries in an auto accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe auto accidents are just that -- 

accidents.  The people of Saskatchewan should be compensated 

properly regardless of fault.  This legislation accomplishes 

those goals.  So not only have we improved benefits but we 

have ensured that the fairness of how those benefits are 

delivered meets the needs of all injury victims. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is a reflection of this 

government's commitment to fiscal integrity.  While we believe 

that accident victims deserve immediate and improved benefits, 

we also believe that the people of Saskatchewan shouldn't have 

to pay more for those improvements in auto insurance.  This 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, ensures that benefits are delivered 

with compassion and fairness while maintaining fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what was once a subjective system of 

compensating auto accident victims will now be turned into one 

that is more objective in nature.  However, Mr. Speaker, if a 

victim disagrees with the compensation being offered, they 

have the ability to appeal through the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

We do not propose this without careful consideration 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

and planning.  The due diligence applied to this legislation was 

exhaustive.  Two years of careful research and study has gone 

into the drafting of this Bill.  Equally as important, Mr. 

Speaker, input from those who hold an interest in this program 

was included.  Consultation with affected interest groups is a 

key ingredient in this proposed legislation.  We explained the 

problems; we offered the possible solutions.  In other words, 

we consulted, listened, and now we have acted. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, we believe this legislation will solve 

concerns with respect to the level of benefits offered to auto 

accident victims, the fairness of how they are delivered, and the 

cost of providing those basic benefits.  Those three foundations 

are the basis for the proposed legislation before the House.  It 

will ensure in the future that all accident victims receive 

immediate and improved compensation for their injuries 

without having to bear increased costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, no it 

wouldn't be wise for us to allow for a question on this Bill at 

this time; it's just too early to allow a Bill to proceed into 

committee without at least raising some concerns -- although 

after listening to the Premier the other day, maybe a person 

should sit down because you might be perceived as standing up 

here supporting all the lawyers in this province.  But I think, 

Mr. Speaker, we want to support the taxpayers of the province 

of Saskatchewan and there are a number of concerns with 

regards to the no-fault insurance that it would seem to me that 

we must raise, that go far beyond just the legal community 

versus the average consumer across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One would wonder why the government would be coming with 

no-fault insurance at this time.  The minister has indicated that 

there has been an extensive two or three years of consultation 

regarding the no-fault insurance and regarding the proposals 

that have been brought forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I was viewing the minister's statement, or 

the press release that came out last week, one would wonder 

where the government is really going to save money. 

 

And the reason I raise that question is because in one place it 

talks about the fact that loss of income benefits will rise from a 

maximum $200 per week to a maximum $550 per week -- 

that's a $350 increase.  Now I think to the general consumer out 

there, they would say, well it's about time we're going to get 

some compensation -- at least some would be perceived as fair 

compensation -- right up front; we don't even have to go and 

fight for it; it's automatically given to us. 

 

And another point that was raised was rehabilitation benefits 

will increase from a maximum $10,000 to a 

maximum $500,000.  Now if that's an automatic and if people 

can expect to receive that, I don't perceive that as being a 

saving to the general insurance side or the auto insurance side, 

as the minister has been talking about. 

 

And I guess the greatest concern I have here as well, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that victims who suffer severe, permanent 

injuries will qualify for a maximum payment of $125,000 for 

pain and suffering but smaller payments for less severe injuries.  

That is a cut-back of 125,000 from 225,000. 

 

There's also another area that caught my attention, Mr. Speaker, 

and I was reading about it, the fact that people who are 

quadriplegics who would be left with just that 125,000.  When 

you think of the fact that a quadriplegic doesn't have the ability 

to use their arms and legs any more, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 

me that $125,000 is a paltry sum when a person may, even as 

we've seen, just in the last little while, a couple of hockey 

players who have had severe neck injuries and have become 

quadriplegics.  In fact I believe both of the individuals were 

under 20 years of age, their whole lifetime ahead of them.  And 

they're just supposed to accept, or anyone in that situation, 

expect $125,000 would maintain them for the rest of their life?  

And I think those are some questions that we're going to have 

to raise. 

 

(1430) 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there's no question that we have at look at 

ways in which we can make the auto fund more accountable, 

and ways in which we can protect the consumer out there who 

is looking at buying insurance that is economical that will meet 

their needs. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that maybe we need to 

look at expanding the mediation process that the Minister of 

Justice is talking about bringing forward in one of his Bills. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to court challenges, 

there's no doubt that courts have awarded suits or lawsuits or 

compensation to individuals which I think most people in 

general would argue that are very large, and probably are much 

larger than necessary. 

 

At the same time, when you look at going through the courts, 

Mr. Speaker, you find that the cost of going to court is very 

expensive as well.  And so therefore it's imperative that people 

receive a fairly substantial sum so that they can pay for the 

legal bills that have built up while they've gone through the 

extensive process of going through court. 

 

And so I would think, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at 

no-fault insurance and the SGI auto fund, maybe the 

government should have looked at a process of mediation that 

would have allowed for individuals to sit down and come to a 

consensus as to what would be fair compensation rather than 

going through the courts and rather than facing the challenge of 

possibly 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

a high settlement at the end of the day, which may or may not 

meet the needs of the individuals involved. 

 

The other thing, the big reason, the government gives for 

changing the auto fund is the fact that they had a $18.8 million 

loss in 1993, mainly due to the increased cost of injury claims.  

Now I'm sure each and every MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) in this Assembly has had people call them because 

they have had a difficult time dealing with Workers' 

Compensation, especially when it comes to head and neck and 

back injuries. 

 

And there's no doubt that it's very difficult at times trying to 

determine whether or not an injury sustained today can relate 

back to a possible injury that was 10 or 15 years old, regarding 

maybe relating to an accident that person was involved in or 

whatever the circumstances.  And that has become a major 

concern.  It's a very difficult one to determine whether or not 

back injuries are persistent.  And every time a person may run 

into a back problem, does that relate back to an injury that was 

sustained let's say in an auto vehicle accident or on the job a 

number of years previous. 

 

I'm not exactly sure that the Bill before us is going to address 

that concern.  What it's going to do is limit the ability of that 

individual to get proper compensation for the loss of ability to 

provide for themselves because of their health problems. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that SGI CANADA, 

the competitive general insurance side of SGI, realized a profit 

of $2.4 million in 1993.  And I find that very encouraging.  I 

think it shows that the argument that took place in this House, 

the debate that took place five years ago, was indeed the correct 

argument.  The government of the day was right in saying that 

it's time we expanded and allowed SGI a larger role.  And by 

allowing SGI CANADA into the competitive general insurance 

market, it has given them that ability to realize some profit 

rather than just staying within a local market that they 

monopolize. 

 

And I think maybe that's part of the problems with our auto 

fund.  It's a monopoly.  There really aren't a lot of other 

alternatives.  And as a result, the auto fund is facing some 

problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a lot of other things that I 

could raise and I will raise the next time I have a chance to 

speak before this Assembly -- a number of concerns my 

colleagues and I want to raise.  But at this time I would move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill 

No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, once 

again I enter debate on this particular Bill with a great deal of 

concern.  Because as I started to point out on Friday last, Mr. 

Speaker, it seems that this piece of legislation, in tandem with 

the changes to The Labour Standards Act, have gone forward in 

this province without the proper kind of consultation and due 

diligence that one would think necessary in a province that 

currently has some really big problems in front of it. 

 

And I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that has been pointed 

out in this House many times, that there are now over 81,000 of 

our citizens on welfare; there has been a net job loss of over 

12,000 since 1991.  And the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 

people in this province are increasingly having difficulty 

finding a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we talk today, there are Saskatchewan citizens 

looking outside of this province to seek employment. 

 

It's been pointed out in this House that university students, in a 

short two weeks, will be hitting the job market.  Tens of 

thousands of young people, Mr. Speaker, are going to be out 

seeking employment so that they can continue on and further 

their education.  The prospects, Mr. Speaker, are incredibly 

dismal in the spring of 1994 for very many of them achieving 

that objective. 

 

That objective, Mr. Speaker, is a very laudable one.  All of us 

that have had the opportunity to go past our post-secondary 

education into other institutions of higher learning know that 

there is a significant cost attached to that.  If I hadn't had the 

ability, Mr. Speaker, as a student to find employment in things 

like the housing industry, certainly in agriculture, often just 

working week by week, the opportunity and at that time an 

economic downturn, the early 1970s, would have meant that 

university simply would have been out of the question. 

 

In the face of this, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we do have over 

81,000 of our citizens -- that's getting awful close to an 

uncomfortable 10 per cent of the population -- the fact that we 

have a net deficit on the job side, along with our students 

coming into the workforce, means that bringing in two pieces 

of legislation which time after time have been challenged by 

people both inside of this legislature and out to point out where 

there will be one new job created, we have had a deafening 

silence from the members of the government. 

 

The government continues, Mr. Speaker, to stand in their place 

and say oh, we've done such a wonderful job of understanding 

all of the ramifications that go along with these two pieces of 

legislation and particularly the one that we're dealing with here 

today, the changes to The Trade Union Act.  The minister 

stands in his place and he says that I have 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

consulted broadly with people; that I have not just talked to 

business and I have not just talked to labour; that I have talked 

to the people of the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province increasingly are 

sending a message back to this minister and this government 

and they're saying no, you have not talked to me, you have not 

listened, you simply do not understand the economics of 1994 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I refer you, Mr. Speaker, and all Saskatchewan people 

today to the ad taken out in most of the major newspapers in 

the province on Saturday, an ad that was sponsored by a 

number of organizations, Mr. Speaker. And I would just once 

more read them into the record because I think it's important 

that the Minister of Labour understand who in this province is 

complaining about the job that he's doing. 

 

This ad, Mr. Speaker, was sponsored by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, the Canadian Restaurant 

& Food Services Association, the North Saskatoon Business 

Association, the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association, 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, Saskatchewan Home Builders' 

Association, Saskatchewan Restaurant & Food Services 

Association, Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, and other 

Saskatchewan businesses and organizations. 

 

The only ones that aren't included in here, Mr. Speaker, at 

present -- and I say at present -- are the public sector 

employers.  And as we all know, Mr. Speaker, on the changes 

to the labour standards, those public sector employers were also 

very vocal, very vociferous in their opposition to what is being 

proposed in this House because they also cover another 50,000 

employees.  The SUMAs (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), the SARMs (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), the SAHOs (Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations), the organizations, Mr. Speaker, that you 

and I depend on and our families depend on so much for the 

delivery of service in this province. 

 

All of these groups have said to the Minister of Labour who 

claims to have talked to them in the last 16 months, you are 

wrong.  At the end of the day you are absolutely wrong.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, it's not going to take one or two changes to 

change the minds of all of these people. 

 

I have here a list, Mr. Speaker, that goes through segments of 

this particular piece of legislation, and I won't get into that 

because that is better left to the clause by clause study of the 

Bill.  But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there is substantial 

opposition to the entirety of the legislation.  It isn't just one 

point or two. 

 

I think some of the government members like to think that if 

for instance we deal with the issue that surrounds the benefits 

going to people on strike, that the company has to keep on 

paying the benefits if this 

is going to solve the problem.  Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is much deeper than that.  It is much deeper than the 

minister simply tinkering with the legislation. 

 

There is a fundamental flaw at work here, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the flaw is, I think, that the minister travelled around this 

province for 16 months on his own agenda rather than the 

agenda of the people that he is charged with serving.  Because 

if in that 16-month period he did not detect the degree of 

opposition that we see here in this province today, then he only 

had one thing in mind, and that was some type of political 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, that meant that the session of 1994 had to 

be the one that made the changes; not because those changes 

were going to, one, create any more employment in the 

province.  I think that's pretty well conclusive.  We've pointed 

out that there isn't an opportunity here for one new job both in 

1994, '95 and '96 . . . as far down the road as you want to go.  

So we can almost dispense with that not being on the agenda. 

 

Two, the minister says that there are certain segments in our 

society that have a prime need to have their issues addressed, 

particularly part-time workers, people that the economy of the 

1990s and beyond are putting in a state of flux.  Well as I said 

the other day, Mr. Speaker, if we were simply dealing with the 

ability of having bereavement leave because one of your 

grandparents has passed away, I think there is no one in our 

society that isn't prepared to deal with that, no one at all. 

 

The question of asking people to double-shift, the questions 

surrounding those in our society who by necessity can only 

achieve part-time employment because of family 

considerations and things surrounding the family circle -- I'm 

sure that we could come to some kind of agreement on them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the simple fact is, what the government has done here . . . 

and I believe there is that third agenda, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

to satisfy the wishes and the wants of some of the labour 

leaders in this province who also happen to be big-time 

supporters of the NDP (New Democratic Party) Party, big-time 

contributors to the NDP Party, big-time sources of labour at 

election time for the NDP Party. 

 

And the minister has done nothing to disprove that, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely nothing at all in the remarks that have been 

made in this House so far, that would allay that suspicion one 

iota from someone in the public. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is the primary consideration, if that 

is, and the government is afraid to bring in honest to goodness 

change in 1995 or 1996 because that may interfere with some 

election forecast, then we're doing this for all of the wrong 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, absolutely all of the wrong reasons. 

 

Changes to labour legislation in this province in 1994 or 1995 

or 1996 should be targeted.  It should fit in, 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

Mr. Speaker, with what the government has already proposed.  

You know, they bring forward these high sounding proposals -- 

the Partnership for Renewal, Ag 2000, and others -- and they 

say that this is how we are going to achieve through 

cooperation and renewal a new spirit in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, I say to the government, then why 

are you not applying your own legislation to the standards that 

you've already set? 

 

(1445) 

 

I mean the Minister of Health has launched us off on a health 

care reform package in this province, Mr. Speaker -- very 

ambitious program, deeply flawed, has been obvious already to 

those of us in the province; we have got hospital closures all 

over the place.  But in regards to the workforce, Mr. Speaker, it 

is very evident that there has not been the proper kind of 

forethought here. 

 

We have the situation where we have dozens of hospitals in this 

province having role changes occur.  Those role changes, Mr. 

Speaker, affect the employees, the very employees who the 

Minister of Labour, in these changes, says are going to be 

better off.  The simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that they aren't 

going to have a job, period; that we've got a net loss of jobs 

being projected in the health care sector.  A lot of those people, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the areas in which they live, don't have 

the opportunity to travel to other areas of the province to work.  

In effect, a net loss. 

 

On top of that, the Minister of Health has said that one of the 

reasons we're doing health care reform is that we centralize, we 

consolidate, and we put power in the hands of locally, we hope, 

elected boards, Mr. Speaker -- we hope elected boards -- the 

ability to cost save at the local level because they are far better 

at it than the provincial bureaucracy.  That essentially is what 

the minister gets at. 

 

And yet we look at the legislation, the proposed legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and we are going to see those very people -- health 

care boards, hospital boards, school boards -- now prohibited 

from doing just that.  No more contracting out, Mr. Speaker.  In 

other words, if they already have a unionized workplace, the 

agreements are signed, these people will have to go to the 

Labour Relations Board in order to propose a different system 

of delivering service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've had example after example brought 

to this House by my colleague from Kindersley, where in one 

particular community you will have a hospital and a nursing 

home, you may have other facilities surrounding the delivery of 

home care, all being coalesced, for instance, into one particular 

facility.  You have a number of boards being amalgamated and 

you have a number of bargaining units, Mr. Speaker, also being 

amalgamated into.  And that has necessitated things like 

bumping privileges; it has meant that there has been changes in 

shifting for the employees affected. 

At the end of the day, this is all being done, Mr. Speaker, in the 

words of the minister, to give us a health care system that will 

go into the next century, that we're going to save medicare. But 

the bottom line is we're going to save dollars -- that the health 

budget has to be pared back for the government to meet its 

balanced budget target.  We're going to save dollars.  At the 

end of the day, when push comes to shove, Mr. Speaker, it is to 

save money. 

 

So here we have a set of criteria that have been laid out over 

the past year in this province, Mr. Speaker, to save money.  

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, we pointed out circumstance 

after circumstance in this Legislative Assembly where that 

saving of dollars in effect creates a two-class system of health 

care in this province and indeed has put some people at risk as 

far as their medical care. 

 

But we are forging ahead, Mr. Speaker.  We're even forging 

ahead so far as we'll go out and get the former chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and pay him 500 bucks a day to run 

around the province and tell us why we shouldn't 

democratically elect these people.  And that extra $200,000 is 

justifiable because that is a worthwhile cause, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at the end of the day the Minister of Labour, after 16 

months in consultation, comes back and says, I am proposing 

that none of these newly created regimes in health care are 

going to have the ability to truly save money; they can't go and 

contract out because they find that that is a better delivery of 

service. 

 

No, they will have to go through the bureaucratically and 

politically appointed board set up by the Minister of Labour.  

And as I pointed out on Friday, Mr. Speaker, the minister, the 

Premier, the cabinet, by order in council, can appoint an 

individual shortly before the end of their term which the 

succeeding administration would be forced to live with for the 

entirety of their term -- for the entirety of their term, Mr. 

Speaker -- unless that administration was prepared to bring in 

legislation which declared all of this null and void. 

 

Now I tell you, and I ask you, does that seem logical?  Is that a 

logical progression for a government that says that they are 

cooperating, that they are working with the various parties in 

this province to deliver a cheaper system of government?  I 

don't think so.  I don't think that makes any sense, Mr. Speaker.  

The left hand doesn't know what the right is doing. 

 

I wonder some days, Mr. Speaker, if the head knows what 

either hand is doing, because that's what it appears.  That's why 

you get people all over this province spending very large 

amounts of money, Mr. Speaker, to point out to Saskatchewan 

citizens in this ad on Saturday that there is folly at work here.  

There is absolute folly at work. 

 

I hope the minister, the next time he has the opportunity, can 

show us for instance in the health care sector, where there will 

be one new job because of this legislation -- one new job.  I 

don't think he can 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

do it, Mr. Speaker.  I honestly don't believe he can do it. 

 

I would ask the Minister of Labour, show us where the current 

jobs in health care will be preserved because of this legislation.  

I don't think he can do that either, Mr. Speaker.  I honestly 

don't.  So far there's been no indication at all from that minister 

that that is a fact. 

 

The same goes, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of Agriculture.  

The Minister of Agriculture brings into this House a proposal 

called Ag 2000.  And I know, Mr. Speaker, there's been a lot of 

jokes around the province about whether that is an agricultural 

plan or if that's the number of farmers that'll be left in this 

province in the year 2000.  Given the way that these people 

operate and after their promises to the agriculture community, I 

suspect it's the latter rather than the former. 

 

But the simple fact is that I've taken the opportunity to read Ag 

2000. And what it emphasizes, Mr. Speaker, to you and me and 

everyone else in this province, particularly those of us in 

agriculture, is that we must diversify; that we must key on 

those areas that will garner Saskatchewan producers bigger 

shares of export markets; that will garner for Saskatchewan 

producers higher dollar volumes because we are now adding 

value to various projects and products. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's nobody that disagrees with that -- 

nobody disagrees with that at all.  But the simple fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, as I go through this legislation I try to look at the red 

meat industry which has been one of some stability in this 

province in the last few years.  I look at both the cattle and the 

hog sector.  And I believe that hogs, for instance, is the number 

two export in dollar volume right behind grain in this province, 

as far as agricultural products go. 

 

I look at the hog sector and I look at everything that surrounds 

the raising of pork, both for domestic and export uses, Mr. 

Speaker, and I look at this legislation and I say to myself, is 

there anything here that will ensure that there are more jobs 

going to occur in that industry?  Are there any more jobs?  Mr. 

Speaker, I can't find a single new job in the hog sector because 

of this legislation.  In fact what I see happening, Mr. Speaker, 

what I see happening are Saskatchewan packing plants being 

put at a disadvantage to other packing plants, particularly in 

western Canada and the United States, because of this 

legislation. 

 

In other words, if you're one of the several hundred hog 

producers in this province that have gone out and expended 

very large sums of money in order to build new, modern 

facilities, take their sow herds up from small levels to medium 

or very large levels; and I say, what are the prospects 

surrounding that industry in the future, given what might 

happen with this labour legislation?  And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

not believe a single word in Ag 2000 when I make that 

comparison. 

 

I raise the issue surrounding the meat packing plant in Moose 

Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  That packing plant has been 

shut down by strike action for over a year and a half.  There's 

five and a half million dollars of taxpayers' money potentially 

tied up in this facility.  We used to have the only boxed beef 

operation in the province, Mr. Speaker, the very thing that the 

Minister of Agriculture talked about in Ag 2000 -- adding 

value. 

 

Today, culled cows in this province, Mr. Speaker, are shipped 

to killing plants in western Alberta.  In other words, they're put 

on a semi-trailer truck and then trucked 450 miles before they 

reach their destination.  The economics of doing that, Mr. 

Speaker, are nearly negligible.  So all the producers in this 

province that have a culled cow that has to go to market are 

facing a very serious problem.  It used to be that they went to 

the facility in Moose Jaw; that cow was killed and went 

through the boxed beef operation and back into the restaurant 

trade.  That's where she went to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I look at this labour legislation and I say, is this labour 

legislation going to put that packing plant back to work?  Is that 

packing plant going to be competitive with the ones in Alberta, 

with the ones in North Dakota, South Dakota, and further south 

because of this labour legislation, Mr. Speaker?  Do you know 

what the answer is?  No. 

 

If anything that packing plant will almost assuredly be shut 

down for ever, Mr. Speaker, because of the proposed changes 

of the minister.  That 170 jobs in my community -- and if there 

were another shift added, 220 jobs -- will assuredly not happen.  

That plant will stay closed, Mr. Speaker, because the 

economics of running that operation when you tack on the 

added costs of this labour legislation, mean that that plant is 

uncompetitive in the western Canadian context. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the day that it went on strike, it had the highest 

wages of any packing plant in western Canada in the beef side 

-- the highest wages on the beef side of any plant in western 

Canada. 

 

Now I read the words, Mr. Speaker, I read the words in Ag 

2000, but when I read the words and I stack them up against 

what else this government is doing, that's all they are, is simply 

words.  There's no meaning there, Mr. Speaker.  There is no 

intention, there is no intention to follow through on Ag 2000 

and implement this legislation at the same time.  It simply 

doesn't work, Mr. Speaker.  It simply doesn't work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the largest grain company in the province of 

Saskatchewan today is Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and their employees are now on a 

collision course.  The Grain Services Union in this province is 

prepared to go on strike for the first time in 50 years. 

 

Sask Wheat Pool's construction division, Mr. Speaker, is being 

wound down, and it's being wound down for a very good 

reason, because the farmers that that construction section is 

charged with servicing can no longer afford the costs of 

building the new-style elevators in competition with other 

companies who build theirs by contracting out.  Mr. Speaker, 

there, I 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

am told, is a full 20 per cent difference in what Sask Pool is 

paying today and what their competitors are paying. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 350,000 on an average elevator. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My colleague says to me that's $350,000 on 

the average elevator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ramifications of that strike and the prevention 

of change in Sask Wheat Pool hold tremendous ramifications 

for every agricultural producer in this province, particularly 

those that patronize Sask Wheat Pool elevators, livestock yards, 

farm service centres, and others. 

 

I look, Mr. Speaker, I look back at this legislation and I say to 

myself, given that grain in Saskatchewan is primarily exported 

-- in fact about 80 per cent outside of the country and most of 

the rest into our own domestic market - 

_ the fact that those prices have not dramatically changed over 

a fair period of time, why would the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the largest grain producing province in Canada, 

bring in labour legislation that would raise the cost of 

production for each and every producer in this province. 

 

Because in effect, Mr. Speaker, that's what will happen.  That's 

the only thing that can happen if this legislation in its current 

form is applied against the current labour dispute at 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool.  Because it will prohibit, Mr. 

Speaker, the very contracting out which the Pool is talking 

about.  It will mean that the certification process, Mr. Speaker, 

will have to stay in place rather than be abrogated. 

 

(1500) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, does that fit with Ag 2000? Does that mean 

that a pasta plant will ever be built in this province?  I say to 

you, no, because it makes this province uncompetitive against 

all other jurisdictions in western Canada and those close to us, 

the United States. 

 

Western Canadian farmers, in particular Saskatchewan farmers, 

have dreamt about the ability of having a pasta plant in this 

province for decades.  Every major farm organization has 

supported it.  Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it'll be a frosty 

Friday, I think, before any company, in the face of what the 

Minister of Labour is proposing here, will choose our province 

as the jurisdiction to build that. 

 

Why would you do that when you inherently add on costs, Mr. 

Speaker, which in the pasta business they tell me amount to a 

few cents a box, a few cents a box?  And the minister has the 

gall -- the Minister of Agriculture -- to stand up and say that 

here is the window of opportunity for agriculture in the 

province of Saskatchewan when his own colleague, the 

Minister of Labour over here, is busy pulling the plug.  Pulling 

the plug, that the document that was paid for with thousands 

and tens of thousands of dollars of Saskatchewan taxpayers' 

money and held up to Saskatchewan producers as the NDP 

way, is being 

backsided by the Minister of Labour. 

 

It doesn't make a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker.  It doesn't make a 

lot of sense.  I don't think there's an agricultural producer in the 

province of Saskatchewan, if he were shown everything that 

was in the changes to The Trade Union Act and Labour 

Standards, would go along with it. 

 

I haven't had the Minister of Labour say one thing in this House 

about agricultural groups and their support for his proposed 

changes.  I see lots of NDP back-benchers around this place, 

Mr. Speaker, that come from rural ridings and I've heard 

absolutely nothing from them. 

 

Have they been out talking to their hog producers and their beef 

producers and their grain producers and their canola producers?  

Have they done that?  And those people support the changes 

that are going to add cost to each and every one of those 

products?  Maybe, Mr. Speaker, that's why we hear so much 

silence from them.  This big, huge majority NDP government 

that is full of rural back-benchers all sitting on their hands in 

dead silence. 

 

It will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see the member from 

Biggar rise to his feet and defend this legislation as it applies to 

Ag 2000.  I'd love to hear it. I would like to hear the minister, 

the former minister from Rosetown, stand and tell me how this 

legislation makes Ag 2000 a better Bill.  I don't think so, Mr. 

Speaker. I don't think they've got the courage. I don't think 

they've got the courage. 

 

I really wonder why we hear such a deafening silence.  All 

we've heard so far, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this minister 

here went around the province for 16 months and he attended 

breakfast and lunch and dinner.  And we know that he lectured 

the folks about British labour law in the 1830s and American 

labour law in the 1930s.  We know that for sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we don't know much else, because every group that he 

claims to have consulted with have said no, he didn't consult.  

He came in and he told us some things, and at the end of the 

day he brings forward two Bills that have no relationship at all 

to the economy in which we live.  That's all we've heard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And now those people are having to take out full-page ads in 

the newspaper -- full-page ads in the newspaper to try and bring 

this government to its senses.  That is what we know, Mr. 

Speaker. That is what we know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Labour could have come in here 

with even one of the groups attached to this ad, saying the high 

praise of the minister and the job he's done, I think somebody 

would have given pause.  But so far all we've had is the 

minister stand up in here and introduce his friends in the gallery 

one day, and we know who his friends were, Mr. Speaker.  As 

one of the columnists said in a recent editorial, at least he didn't 

say brothers and sisters.  They would give the Minister of 

Labour that, that at least he didn't 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

about his brothers and sisters; they were just his friends. 

 

And it was quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of 

Labour was here to please his friends.  Well as I said earlier on, 

Mr. Speaker, the pleasing of your friends is something that 

these people are very good at.  I mean we've had the spectacle 

in this House, Mr. Speaker, this session, of the big friend from 

over at SaskPower being pleased on a very regular basis, 

pleased on a regular basis. 

 

And we've had the other big friend who used to be the president 

of Sask Wheat Pool being pleased on a very regular basis.  I 

mean 500 bucks a day is a great way to please, Mr. Speaker.  

And I can go on and on and on about former NDP candidates 

and past MLAs and those kind of people that are pleased in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, on an almost weekly basis. 

 

But the simple fact is, that isn't what we should be all about 

here, Mr. Speaker.  What we should be all about here is 

designing labour legislation that is good, that keeps 

Saskatchewan in the forefront of what's going on in the 

changing world we live in, makes us competitive, and allows 

Saskatchewan people to obtain a far higher degree of 

employment than what we see here today. 

 

I mean it is an absolute disgrace, Mr. Speaker, that over 81,000 

of our citizens are on welfare -- an absolute disgrace.  This 

from a government that two and a half years ago promised the 

end of poverty, the end of food banks, that they were going to 

put in place regimes that would eliminate all of that, Mr. 

Speaker.  They were going to do it just by being a New 

Democrat.  Poof, it was gone; gone from the face of existence 

in this province.  And the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that it 

continues to grow and is fostered by these people.  And then, 

Mr. Speaker, and then they bring in two pieces of labour 

legislation that almost guarantees that all 81,000 will stay right 

where they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a short, four years ago there were eight people in 

this province working for every person on social assistance.  

Today the number is five people working for every person on 

social assistance.  That's a real big change, Mr. Speaker. That's 

a real big change.  Every taxpayer in this province bears that 

proportionate change of burden.  And you know, Mr. Speaker, 

none of us mind bearing that burden because we all know 

somebody in our life that has misfortune, that has to have the 

ability to get back on their feet. 

 

But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why would any government, faced 

with those kinds of statistics, any amount of that human 

tragedy, then decide it was the appropriate time to bring in 

legislation that would keep them there.  Why would they do 

that, Mr. Speaker?  Why would a government that was pledged 

to removing poverty in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

removal of food banks, bring in legislation that almost 

guaranteed those functions would continue to exist for years 

and years and years to come.  That doesn't make any sense. 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, if they had tipped entirely the other way 

and got 20 or 30,000 people off of those welfare rolls, off UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission), jobs back in the 

province of Saskatchewan, I'm sure there would be some 

criticism; but by and large, I think most people would say, we 

agree with what you're doing.  Even though you are taking 

perhaps some chances, we'd agree with that. 

 

But what we have here simply is the satisfaction of friends, Mr. 

Speaker, at the expense of all else -- at the expense of all else.  I 

mean, Mr. Speaker, you know what one of the outcomes of this 

debate has been.  We get a full-sized headline here in the paper: 

Union fines will now be debts.  Union fines will now be debts.  

That's a real big issue, Mr. Speaker, to the folks on welfare, to 

the folks on UIC, to the folks that have to flee to another 

province -- union fines will now be debts.  That's a big issue 

with those folks, isn't it? 

 

Is there anybody over on the other side of the place, the guys 

who are supposed to be in charge of this government, Mr. 

Speaker, that can tell me of someone out there today that is 

really concerned about union fines in 1994, other than a couple 

of dozen union leaders, and what ramification that has on the 

Saskatchewan economy?  I don't think so. 

 

I don't think that's a real high priority, at least in the 

constituency of Thunder Creek.  I bet I could drive for about 

two days around this province, Mr. Speaker, and I could look in 

every restaurant and hotel, every small-business corner, and I 

wouldn't find anybody that thought that was a big issue.  But in 

the new legislation proposed by the minister, it's a big issue. 

 

The minister needs to put more hands in the power of his 

friends, so that they can fine people who disagree with them.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the spectre in my community of a 

Woolco store being closed because the people that worked 

there couldn't decertify the union.   And they're out on the 

street, because that store most definitely is going to close, Mr. 

Speaker.  So another 100-and-some jobs in the community of 

Moose Jaw are gone -- gone.  I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that 

most of what I see in this Act will give any of those individuals 

any comfort at all. Because you know what? The mortgage is 

still going to have to be paid and the kids are going to have to 

be educated and three squares a day put on the table.  There is 

nothing in there, Mr. Speaker, that is going to help those people 

keep that job. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, you've got the entire retail trade 

sector of the province of Saskatchewan taking out paid 

advertising saying to you people over there, wake up, look 

what you're doing to the province of Saskatchewan in 

relationship to everywhere else that we do business.  

Everywhere else. 

 

Look at what you're doing to the Labour Relations Board and 

the power that you're giving it.  Not power that this Legislative 

Assembly can temper in any way. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

Not power that the members who are duly elected to represent 

everyone in the province of Saskatchewan, regardless of their 

political stripe, can in any way adjudicate that process.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, this board will have more power than it has ever 

held in the province's history.  And I am told from those that 

understand the process that this board will have more power 

than any other board in the country of Canada. 

 

Is there any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that those that will have to 

deal with the board in the future are fearful?  Is there any 

wonder that those that will have to deal with the board in the 

future say, my costs of business are going to go up?  And at the 

end of the day, at the end of the day, have we achieved a more 

democratic society because of it?  No. 

 

As I said on Friday, Mr. Speaker, where in this legislation does 

it talk about the fact that 50 per cent plus one in a 

democratically elected legislature or workplace is there?  

Whatever happened to the idea, Mr. Speaker, of secret ballots 

administered in neutral places by people with no vested 

interest?  Where did that go to?  Where did that concept go to? 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, is the workplace any different than any 

other part of our society?  I mean we go to the polls and we 

elect our school boards and we elect our city councils and our 

RM (rural municipality) councils.  We're going to elect our 

health boards some day, Mr. Speaker, mark my words.  And 50 

per cent plus one is going to be the rule. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even this NDP government, when they changed 

the boundaries of the province of Saskatchewan, didn't mess 

around with the concept at the end of the day that you still got 

elected by 50 per cent plus one vote.  They might have liked to 

have touched that, Mr. Speaker, but even they didn't have the 

courage to fool around with the democratic process when it 

came to electing this Legislative Assembly.  So tell me what is 

different about the workplace.  Tell me what is different about 

the workplace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

And now we will put in the hands of this Labour Relations 

Board, people appointed by that government for five- and 

three-year terms, the power to certify, decertify, impose a first 

contract -- power that this Assembly has never even vested 

unto itself, Mr. Speaker, power that this Assembly has never 

even vested unto itself.  Because in the case of labour 

stoppages that has come before this House, almost always there 

is a mediation process put in place that listens to both sides, 

that puts it in the hands of a neutral party. 

 

Now the minister says, well I've got mediation in my Bill.  But 

you know what, Mr. Speaker?  This Labour Relations Board 

proposed by the government doesn't have to pay any attention 

to that.  They don't have to pay any attention at all. 

 

And the minister says, well just wait, just wait.  We'll 

get the legislation through and then we'll bring in the 

regulations.  That's what he said with labour standards, Mr. 

Speaker.  Just wait; trust us; we'll bring in the regulations later.  

Well nobody bought into that, Mr. Speaker.  Absolutely 

nobody bought into that.  They don't trust this minister and they 

don't trust this government.  Because those regulations can be 

changed by order in council.  Mr. Speaker, they never have to 

see this Legislative Assembly.  There's nothing there that you 

and I, as legislators, will deal with. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, there is very little of The Trade 

Union Act handled by regulation -- very little handled by 

regulation.  But the fact it is, Mr. Speaker, when you put The 

Trade Union Act in tandem with labour standards, which is 

controlled by regulation, then, Mr. Speaker, you have the 

ability to influence the process far beyond what the minister is 

prepared to tell this Assembly. 

 

That is dangerous, Mr. Speaker.  It is even more dangerous 

today than it would have been 10 years ago or 20 years ago 

when this province, Mr. Speaker, was far more insular in its 

outlook.  Today you have no choice but to compete, and you 

have to have a global outlook.  Even this bunch over here that 

were against free trade in 1988 and 1992 have come to realize 

that trade will mean the survival of this province. 

 

And I always watch with some interest, Mr. Speaker, when the 

current issue involving durum wheat and American subsidies 

and how our products are shipped in the United States becomes 

a topic in here, because the bunch that couldn't trade are now 

the bunch that want to protect free trade. 

 

Remember that, the bunch that didn't want to trade are now 

protecting free trade.  And you know why, Mr. Speaker?  

Reality has come home and has hit them square between the 

eyes.  That if this province doesn't trade, if the durum wheat 

doesn't go south of the 49th, then Saskatchewan farmers are 

going to hurt.  And if the hogs don't go and the beef don't go 

and the canola oil and the crush doesn't go, farmers in this 

province are going to suffer.  They know that, Mr. Speaker, as 

sure as I'm standing here.  And that's why today they defend it. 

 

But the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that what they propose here 

today with The Trade Union Act, in some ways can be every 

bit as prohibitive, Mr. Speaker, every bit as prohibitive as our 

American friends down there putting duty on our durum wheat. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if they stifle investment, if they stifle the 

ability of Saskatchewan men and women to create new 

undertakings here and new jobs and use the expertise that we 

have in this province to put those things in place, if that capital 

isn't available, if those jobs flee to other jurisdictions because 

we have priced ourselves out of the market-place, then it will 

never happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there's a number of ministers over there that need to stand in 

this House and give an accounting.  The Economic 

Development minister here, the guy that 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

brought the plan forward -- you know, the Partnership for 

Renewal _- needs to stand in this House and tell us the how the 

Partnership for Renewal squares with the labour legislation of 

the member from Churchill Downs.  He needs to tell us how 

the tourism industry in this province, Mr. Speaker, is going to 

cope with the proposed changes and how many jobs are going 

to be added or how many jobs are going to be lost.  He's got 

that challenge in front of him, Mr. Speaker, and he had best do 

it while this legislation is being debated here. 

 

The Minister of Health, as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, has the 

exact same obligation to stand in this House and point out to 

the health boards around this province how this proposed 

labour legislation is going to affect the people that are already 

faced with more change than they can cope with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture minister has the obligation 

and the duty to stand in this House and explain how this labour 

legislation is going to affect each and every agricultural 

producer in the province of Saskatchewan and how this labour 

legislation is going to make that farmer and his family's life 

easier and how he is going to fulfil his mandate as Minister of 

Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan as regards this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

Now that might be a pretty tall order, Mr. Speaker, for some of 

these people, but I think it is their obligation as ministers of the 

Crown and as people who are charged with guiding very large 

segments of our population over the next two years or two and 

a half years, that that obligation is real, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

one that they should not shirk lightly.  They should not shirk 

that responsibility to stand in this House and tell us how those 

segments of our society are going to be affected by the changes 

proposed by the member from Churchill Downs. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon the 

Finance minister of this province -- the minister charged with 

continuing on our debt reduction plan, the minister who has 

made projections in her budget about employment levels three 

years in a row now -- it is incumbent upon that Finance 

minister to stand in this House and tell us how this proposed 

labour legislation is going to affect the bottom line of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the jobs that she has forecast, 

the income tax which she says will be paid, and how it affects 

Saskatchewan in the Canadian context. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think those are unreasonable goals for a 

government to undertake.  Is there anything that I have outlined 

here today, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly that those members 

find onerous?  Is it beyond the capability of the minister from 

Saskatoon to do that?  Is it beyond the capability of the Ag 

minister from Canora to do that?  Is it beyond the capability of 

the minister from Elphinstone/golf course to do that?  Is it 

beyond the capability, Mr. Speaker, of the Minister of Health, 

the former member from Regina, to do that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think it is.  I don't think that that is 

something that any citizen or taxpayer in the province of 

Saskatchewan would find onerous.  I don't think the people that 

elected these people in those constituencies would find that 

onerous.  In fact I think they would expect it. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I think the people that elected this 

very large, massive NDP majority in the fall of 1991, would 

expect all of these NDP back-benchers that inhabit this House, 

Mr. Speaker, to be prepared to stand on their feet and tell us on 

behalf of the constituencies that they represent, that people 

agree with the changes being proposed to labour legislation in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would find that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, very, very 

interesting, to watch most of them get on their feet and talk 

about the communities in their ridings and the people that work 

there and how this legislation is going to make them better.  

That would be a very interesting exercise, Mr. Speaker, very 

interesting indeed. 

 

The one minister in this whole place, Mr. Speaker, that might 

be able to pull it off is the minister of gambling.  The minister 

responsible for booze and gambling in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, can probably tell us about a net job increase.  Now I'm 

not sure that all the people that are going to be building these 

proposed casinos have had a look at this labour legislation yet, 

Mr. Speaker, with all their part-time workers.  But I would 

guess right now, Mr. Speaker, that the only minister that can 

claim that there's going to be a net job increase in this province 

is the minister involved with gambling. 

 

And at the end of the day, even that sector, Mr. Speaker, is 

going to have something to say about what the minister from 

Regina here is proposing.  Because as I understand the gaming 

industry across North America, Mr. Speaker, it isn't exactly the 

most heavily unionized sector that I've come across.  In fact, if 

anything, it is probably the opposite. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there you go; there's the challenge.  There's 

the challenge.  The challenge is for all of those ministers to 

disprove all of the people that take out the paid advertising, to 

stand on their feet and say that we have consulted and this is 

how it's going to work, and support the minister from Regina, 

the Minister of Labour, support him in what he says to this 

Assembly. 

 

And maybe if all of those ministers have that courage, Mr. 

Speaker, and they identify with their portfolios and they tell us 

how it's going to come down, then maybe there will be some 

confidence in this government.  But I can tell you right now, 

Mr. Speaker, there is no confidence.  There is no confidence 

that these people can deliver anything other than helping out 

their friends, other than helping out their friends, Mr. Speaker.  

We know they're good at that.  They do it on a weekly basis. 

 

The challenge, Mr. Speaker, is to help out the average taxpayer 

in this province.  The challenge is to help the over 81,000 on 

welfare.  The challenge, Mr. Speaker,  



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

is to get back some of those 12,000 lost jobs.  The challenge, 

Mr. Speaker, is to convince young people to stay in this 

province and work and build, not be driven out.  That's the 

challenge, Mr. Speaker.  Let's see if they've got the courage to 

pick it up. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to enter the debate this afternoon with respect to this 

important piece of legislation, Bill No. 54. 

 

It seems that the NDP government is worried that their support 

is slipping, Mr. Speaker, amongst unions.  And so as a result of 

that, it's payback time and pay for the favours through 

increased powers to the unions.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

that's exactly what we're seeing with respect to this piece of 

legislation. 

 

If that isn't the case, why was it necessary for the government 

to bring forward amendments that represent an unwarranted 

intrusion by government into the collective bargaining process, 

Mr. Speaker?  I think that the business community is telling us 

-- and I'm sure they're making representations to the 

government with respect to that, Mr. Speaker -- and saying that 

this Act simply isn't necessary. 

 

These amendments will significantly enhance the ability of 

unions to organize workers, obtain and expand certification 

orders and bargaining rights, and secure first collective 

agreements, Mr. Speaker.  So much for the consensus approach 

which this government promised through the Priel and Ish 

committees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the government isn't paying back union favours, why did the 

Department of Labour propose additional amendments in all of 

the areas where the Priel committee could not reach agreement, 

Mr. Speaker, with the sole exception of replacement worker 

legislation? 

 

The government says this Bill is the result of consultation 

between government, business, and labour -- NDP-style, I 

guess that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Because business says 

that this Bill No. 54 is a failure, an absolute failure, of the 

consensus-building process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Trade Union Act gives sweeping powers to a politically 

appointed board, the Labour Relations Board.  The board will 

now be able to grant automatic union certification or to stop 

decertifications regardless of the number of union cards signed, 

and notwithstanding any vote of the majority of workers which 

results in rejection of union proposals. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm sure Moose Jaw Woolco employees 

who worked hard . . . pardon me, who worked towards a 

decertification for a year and a half, find it hard to imagine that 

the NDP government is making decertification even more 

difficult. 

 

But The Trade Union Act doesn't even stop there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  The appointed board will decide whether a union 

contract remains in effect when a 

company is sold, creates spin-off companies, or re-tenders a 

service contract held by a union shop.  They will determine 

whether contracting out from any unionized employer to other 

non-unionized employers shall be prevented. 

 

(1530) 

 

They'll also be able to unilaterally impose a first union contract 

upon a newly certified employer and determine successorship 

obligations to continue the unionized status and contracts to the 

business -- after sale, spin-off, or transfer, Mr. Speaker.  Other 

sweeping powers given to this board include the right to make 

interim or rectification orders or order of fiscal compensation, 

amend court orders and more. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are very, very important 

considerations that have be looked at.  These are the kinds of 

things that make a difference to employers, whether or not 

they're going to expand their business or whether they're indeed 

going to continue with their business.  We've heard from a 

number of businesses around Saskatchewan, employers -- and 

employees within those business, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- that 

don't believe that these kinds of things are necessary in a free 

and democratic society. 

 

There's immense powers will be vested in full-time political 

appointments that will be locked in with absolute immunity and 

job protection for up to five years.  The Labour Relations 

Board, Mr. Speaker, will have tremendous power in those 

regards, and they'll all be political appointees -- no question 

about it, Mr. Speaker.  And as a result of that, I think there's 

great deal of concern in the business community about the 

kinds of rulings we're likely to see as a result of that. 

 

While increasing the power of political appointed bureaucrats, 

the new Act does not given individual workers the fundamental 

democratic right to mandatory secret ballot votes, or the basic 

rights of full informational disclosure about the costs and 

implications of union fees and other operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is one of the fundamental things with respect 

to a democratic free society, is a ballot that gives people 

opportunity to vote in secret, Mr. Speaker.  It's an important 

consideration.  We all know what happens from time to time in 

circumstances where it's just a show of hands, Mr. Speaker, 

where people use it against you if you voted against the 

majority of people.  And people are intimidated by that type of 

process.  And that's why, in a free and democratic society, we 

don't have that type of thing where just a show of hands is good 

enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I think it's important to 

recognize that principle, where everyone doesn't have to be 

concerned about the fear of reprisal.  They have the opportunity 

to vote behind a . . . in a secret fashion, and no one knows how 

they voted, rather than the strong-arm tactics that we often see 

from strong unions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think that that is a principle that unions, they would do 

well to follow, Mr. Speaker, and they would 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

do well to recognize how closely held and closely respected 

that type of secret ballot is, Mr. Speaker.  Where is the fairness 

in that?  Where is the balance? 

 

In addition, huge fines and penalties can now be imposed by 

unions on individuals, which add to the big union intimidation.  

It seems incredible to me that any government would want to 

allow a union to be able to discipline its members with fines, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  You can only envision the kinds of 

things that may result out of that kind of thing, where the union 

leadership has in their control then a very tremendous lever on 

the union membership that they represent. 

 

Who needs replacement worker legislation when a union can 

impose massive fines on workers who feel they have to cross a 

picket line, and then enforce them through the courts? 

 

So you would have examples, I would foresee, Mr. Speaker, 

where a person decides not to report to a picket line or decides 

to cross a picket line, and then the union leadership is able to 

impose fines on them, upheld by a court.  And so it's a 

tremendous tool that would be used against the union 

membership by the union leadership.  And often I think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we see those kinds of things where the union 

bosses are wanting more and more increased powers so that 

they have more and more control over the membership that 

they represent. 

 

And unfortunately, without secret ballot type of voting, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it becomes increasingly difficult to remove the 

leadership within a union -- almost impossible, I would say, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

People cross picket lines for many reasons.  Some are single 

mothers and believe that feeding their children is more 

important than walking a picket line.  The same is true for 

many fathers with families at home who cannot afford to lose 

any income.  Or how about nurses or other professionals that 

cross lines to ensure the safety of others? 

 

There are people who don't believe in strikes, Mr. Speaker.  

There are many, many reasons why people cross picket lines, 

and now they cannot stand up for what they believe because the 

NDP government has taken that right away from them. 

 

I was reading about a circumstance, Mr. Speaker, out in Alberta 

over the weekend about a gentleman who held strong views 

with respect to abortion, very strong views with respect to 

abortion, and he belonged to a union, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And he found that part of his union dues were being used to 

support abortion rights type of movements, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and he was opposed to that.  And he spoke out about 

that.  And the union . . . there was a great deal of union reprisal 

against him as a result of that. 

 

Essentially it comes down to a question I guess of conscience.  

Should the union leadership be able to do things that are against 

the good conscience of people within those unions?  And he 

believes that when you're looking at those types of issues, that 

they 

shouldn't be able to do those kinds of things.  And I believe he's 

. . . I support him in that view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I support that view that the union leadership is not always right.  

But now we will find circumstances as a result of this 

legislation where the union would be able to impose a fine on 

someone such as that gentleman if they spoke out against the 

union leadership.  So you see all kinds of circumstances that 

could present themselves as a result of the union leaders getting 

increasing power at their disposal. 

 

In the bereavement leave section of The Trade Union Act, 

provides a new definition of spouse.  We have received legal 

opinion that this definition would clarify the same-sex partners 

have the right to bereavement leave benefits even when the 

minister promised otherwise.  And we see the spectacle of one 

minister suggesting that that isn't the case and the other one 

saying he doesn't know whether it is or not the case.  And your 

government seems to be all over the map on this question.  And 

I think it's important, I think it's important that that type of 

thing be cleared up before you go any further with this type of 

legislation. 

 

What about the costs to businesses for this section alone?  Add 

to that over $14 million tacked onto businesses by The Labour 

Standards Act and the additional cost to The Workers' 

Compensation and Occupational Health and Safety Acts.  

Continually increasing the costs to business, Mr. Speaker, will 

not result in business investment in this province.  It won't 

result in jobs; it results in exactly the opposite -- loss of 

business investment, loss of jobs. 

 

And we've seen examples of that where people have written to 

us.  I can think of one letter that came to me from a constituent 

of mine that was planning on hiring some people for 

employment this summer.  And he said, as a result of the 

changes in The Labour Standards Act and in this Trade Union 

Act, he no longer sees that as a viable alternative for him to 

hire additional staff.  And he's a small-business man; I mean 

he's only got half a dozen employees, something like that, in 

the town of Kindersley. 

 

But nevertheless, he provides a good service, and he provides 

employment for those six families and provides a good 

standard of living for those people.  And I think the people 

within his employ feel he's a good employer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  And I don't think that they believe he would do 

anything that would harm their interests. 

 

But nevertheless, he isn't going to expand his operations 

because of these types of legislation.  And he says that in his 

letter.  And the letter is very explicit, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It 

makes it very plain for anyone to understand that that is exactly 

the way he views these pieces of legislation. 

 

The NDP government has created an unstable labour climate 

that will further weaken investor confidence in our province 

and cost our province jobs. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

Considering the fact that there are already 12,000 fewer jobs in 

Saskatchewan since the Romanow . . . since the NDP 

government took power, they should be looking at creating 

jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a positive business atmosphere, 

rather than eliminating both of those. 

 

And that's what the fear is, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And we're 

beginning to see that kind of thing happening where people are, 

employers are, writing to us.  And we're seeing full-page ads 

being taken out by business groups saying that that is exactly 

the case. 

 

And why would they do that if that isn't going to be the case, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker?  It's my belief that they're doing it 

because that's exactly what they fear is going to happen and 

they know is going to happen because they've been talking to 

the people that they represent. 

 

There are tremendous number of concerns with this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker.  And in order for us to have 

opportunity to hear from as many people with respect to this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, many letters are coming in, 

phone calls, and I can only expect more after seeing over the 

weekend's events of full-page ads being taken out; where 

business groups and business leaders and people who own and 

operate operations, as well as the people employed in them, Mr. 

Speaker, have to have an opportunity to have a say in this type 

of legislation. 

 

In order to get as much input as possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I move that we now adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 33 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 33 -- An Act 

to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Deputy 

Speaker, and I welcome the opportunity to participate in the 

debate.  Following the comments made by my colleague, the 

member from Moosomin -- there we go, from Moosomin, Mr. 

Deputy Deputy Speaker -- and following also the comments 

made by the minister responsible for the Gaming and Liquor 

Commission, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, what we're doing 

here is dealing with Bill No. 33, An Act to Amend The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act. 

 

Now I hope that at the conclusion of my remarks that the 

minister will indeed be able to take some consideration back 

into cabinet as to the direction in which his government is 

going.  Unfortunately, I believe that the horse has got the bit in 

his mouth on this particular Act and it's going to be rather 

difficult not only to rein him in completely, but even to deflect 

some of their intentions. 

 

Now my understanding of this Act is simply that there is going 

to be a major shift or change in who 

administers the horse-racing in this province.  Now I know also 

that during our administration we chose to have the Horse 

Racing Commission involved in the Department of Agriculture.  

And what this Act proposes to do, among other things 

obviously, is to revert and put that aspect of gambling into the 

same sin bin as all the other kinds of things that this minister is 

responsible for, namely the Liquor Commission, the Gaming 

Commission, and now the Horse Racing Commission is going 

to be thrown into that same bin. 

 

And I don't know, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, if that is 

particularly a great concern of mine because there are some 

specific advantages in doing that.  And I know that we as a 

government always wrestled with the idea, where is the best 

place to have the Horse Racing Commission.  And I guess what 

this does it epitomizes the difference in the philosophy of our 

side as opposed to their side, and that is that we looked at the 

horse-racing as an agricultural component being the 

predominant factor; whereas this government is looking at it 

more from the gaming perspective, that it is gambling more so 

than the agricultural component of it.  Now there's one thing to 

be said of the gaming minister and his colleagues in cabinet, 

and that is, at least they are being consistent.  The emphasis is 

totally on the gambling dollar, with this government. 

 

And I guess if I have a concern about this Act and the intention 

of it, is not so much that it proposes to help the Horse Racing 

Commission and all those thousands of people that are 

involved in horse-racing, particularly from the agricultural side 

of it -- and I think that is a commendable step -- but I draw the 

line when I take a look at the larger perspective and the total 

picture of the direction in which this government is going.  And 

even from here I can almost see those dollar signs flashing in 

the eyes of the minister, because that is the underlying, 

overbearing motivation that those folks have in introducing this 

Act. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now there may be some advantages to the horse-racing 

industry, to the tourism industry.  I don't dispute that.  I have 

his second reading speech, the minister's second reading 

speech. And I noticed as I went through it that there is an 

attempt to justify this particular step.  And that attempt is to, by 

tracing the history of gaming and alcohol in this province, 

starting during the 30s . . . or was it maybe the 20s, pardon me, 

probably, where we had prohibition. 

 

And the reason that he's giving, well listen folks, we in 

Saskatchewan among other places, try to stem the consumption 

of alcohol by putting in and making it illegal through the 

prohibition era. And that didn't work.  Then of course, notice is 

also made of the fact that in 1969 the prohibition that existed 

on gaming was lifted, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, by the, at 

that time, federal Liberal government.  And then for the first 

time we find that year-round racetrack betting was legalized. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, if we could take a 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

look at what he's trying to do and make it as a rational move on 

their part, a progressive move I guess, where in a series of steps 

we have come a long way from the 1920s, where it seems to 

me that the message from this government now is that it's the in 

thing.  We have progressed so far.  And I guess in the 

demoralization of our society, that at one time while legal . . . 

betting was illegal and drinking was illegal, we are to a point 

now where it's hunky-dory; in fact it's the in thing to do. 

 

Now if that's what the people want, then of course I am in no 

position to stand here and argue, because I suppose our 

democratic society is based on the premiss that the people are 

right, and what they want, as a majority, is what they get.  But I 

don't like the motivation behind this because it rings through 

very, very clearly that the real motivation is to fight the deficit, 

to fight the next election, to fight the next election on the 

spoils, as it were, the loot, the booty of the gaming industry 

amongst the Crowns.  And we could get off and branch off on 

some of these other issues where this government is trying to 

put the best face possible on the deficit situation and ultimately 

the debt situation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, I find it almost abhorrent to 

have to stand here and debate a Bill where a government is 

putting its best foot forward.  And I'll just quote you another 

part from his speech, where he says, ". . . this Bill is the next 

step . . ."  Notice the progression once more.  I guess he could 

have said, this is the ultimate step.  No, but maybe he couldn't 

say that this was the ultimate step because we don't know for 

sure what they have in store for us in addition to how far we 

are. 

 

But none the less, Mr. Speaker . . . and welcome back to the 

Chair.  It saves me a tongue-twister here.  So, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill, the minister says: 

 

 . . . is the next step in this government's plan to build on our 

economic strengths as a province . . ." 

 

Well now, Mr. Minister, you are going to build on the 

economic strengths of this province by doing what?  By 

emphasizing gaming, by building on the gambling of this 

province. 

 

Now that is why I am taking a few extra moments in this 

adjourned debates debate on this particular Bill 33, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  Because for a government to build on the strengths of 

gambling indicates to me that they are on perilous, shaky 

ground, particularly when that same minister gets up and on the 

day where he announces this particular step, he says that, and I 

quote again from the Leader-Star Services from March 16, 

1994, where the minister says: 

 

 The bottom line is we've got to get people out to the track to 

wager on the horses because that's where the dollars are. 

 

I guess I could rest my case right there, Mr. Speaker.  They're 

going to start advertising and promoting gaming.  And they're 

doing it, what is more 

disconcerting yet, in such haphazard fashion, where day after 

day when we get up and we ask, well where are your studies?  

How do you know how much you're going to make?  How do 

you know what the concomitant downsides are?  How is this 

going to affect the social life in Saskatchewan when you start to 

promote this kind of gaming.  What are the impacts?  Are you 

really going to make money? 

 

And I ask the minister this question:  is the horse-racing history 

a year from now or two years from now going to be any better 

off by making this move than they are now, recognizing that it 

is a struggling industry?  And I'm not picking on the industry. 

 

But simultaneously, while you're doing that, what is happening 

in some of the other areas of gaming in this province?  You are 

promoting casinos.  We're going to have full-fledged, Las 

Vegas-style casinos in Saskatchewan.  And you're banking on 

the fact that there's an unlimited gaming dollar out there -- an 

unlimited gaming dollar. 

 

And I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that that is not the case.  I'll 

agree with you there's going to be more money spent on 

gaming, because I'm a firm believer in the concept that supply 

creates demand -- supply creates demand, the converse of the 

normal way of putting it.  If you put one of these gambling 

shops on every street corner, of course there's going to be more 

gambling, of course there's going to be more bread money and 

milk money spent on the gambling dollar. 

 

But ultimately, I ask you this question:  with this proliferation 

of gambling opportunities in the province, does this mean that 

ultimately the Horse Racing Commission is going to wind up 

as the beneficiary?  I don't think so.  I don't think that it 

necessarily will.  Are the charities, are the local charities going 

to be the beneficiaries of this ultimately?  And I don't think so 

either. 

 

And I think that if you were going to be totally honest with us, 

you would get up and say, we are on probably shaky grounds; 

we're not quite sure what we're doing because we have not fully 

assessed the impacts of a government sponsored . . . no, not 

only a government sponsored, Mr. Speaker, but a government 

advocated gaming system where you are going to go and 

advertise and ask people to come and spend their gaming 

dollar.  Because in the end, it's going to make the Consolidated 

Fund and your fund in this government that much richer at the 

expense of the poorer people.  And I don't think you've thought 

your policy out fully. 

 

In fact I don't think I very often quote from these connoisseurs 

of politics,  what we call the . . . Well we call them by different 

names, but here is a  column and we call him a columnist -- 

we'll call him a nice name -- and he states this, and this is the 

headline: The government gambling policy flying seat of pants 

. . . by the seat of pants. 

 

And that's our concern here, Mr. Minister, is that you are 

thinking this policy up as you go along.  You're 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

flying by the seat of the pants, and the only people I know of 

that were good at flying by the seats of the pants are the 

renowned northern flyers and the bush pilots of this province.  I 

don't think that you're as good at it.  And I don't think that you, 

as a government that is relying on the almighty gambling 

dollar, have the right to put at risk and at peril this province of 

Saskatchewan in crashing in your plan. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I have quite a few specific questions I want to 

ask you on this particular Bill as we get into the Committee of 

the Whole, and as far as I'm concerned then, Mr. Speaker, we 

are going to let this Bill go to committee. 

 

I know that the minister has a burr under his saddle somewhere 

and when I read this other March 16 headline it says that 

"Lautermilch spurs on horse race betting".  Spurs on horse race 

betting.  Well what we're going to attempt to do is to dull those 

spurs a little bit, Mr. Minister, and if possible take that burr out 

from under your saddle.  We'll do that in the Committee of the 

Whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 49 -- An Act to 

amend The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 

1988/Une Loi modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur le Tribunal de la 

sécurité routière de la Saskatchewan be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister stated in his second reading speech that this 

amendment will repeal the appeal provision in The Traffic 

Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988, so that the general 

appeal procedures for provincial offences will apply to traffic 

offences heard in the traffic safety courts. 

 

And after listening to the minister, it would seem to me that 

there really isn't a major change, this isn't a major change, more 

of a housekeeping role.  And as an opposition, we certainly are 

more than prepared to move this into committee. 

 

I think a couple of things I might add though is the minister has 

also made it clear that the current appeal process is confusing.  

And there's no doubt about it, I think our discussions in 

estimates the other night kind of inferred that, and I would tend 

to concur with him. 

 

I understand that this amendment is being brought forward at 

the request of lawyers and judges throughout the province.  

And on that basis I wonder if we should be taking a second 

look at this or we'd better be just a little careful as to how we 

review this legislation. 

 

As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, there certainly doesn't 

appear to be a  significant amount to do with 

the Bill that we need hold it up any longer, and  therefore I 

would allow the Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 50 -- An Act to 

amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As with the former Bill, 

Bill No. 49, 

An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Court, this Act as well 

doesn't have a lot of significant changes to it that would require 

that we take a lot of time just sitting in the House and debating 

the issues, but there are a couple of things I'd like to bring 

forward to the committee. 

 

This Bill includes a number of amendments to The Summary 

Offences Procedure Act, 1990.  And I understand it will give 

police officers the authority to authorize the interim release of a 

person who has been arrested on a warrant to appear in court.  

And I believe following our discussion that we had with the 

Minister of Justice the other day on a concern that had been 

raised through me and that I brought to the attention of the 

minister, where an individual had been picked up and had been 

arrested after he had given out his licence and was arrested for 

something he didn't even have any knowledge of, and then the 

process and the rigmarole that had to be followed where the 

individual was taken at 2 o'clock in the morning to the police 

station -- happened to be a farmer looking after cattle -- and 

was told he'd have to be arraigned until morning until they 

could contact the justice of the peace.  And he said, well it just 

wasn't possible, somebody would have to go and look after his 

livestock.  And so they did get a justice of the peace up in the 

middle of the night and he came over and gave the release.  

And at the end of the day they found that certainly there was no 

reason for that warrant to have still been in effect. 

 

However it was there and I think, as I understand this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, it'll address some of those concerns in that very issue.  

I think what this Bill does, the change will simplify the 

procedure.  Previous to this amendment, a justice of the peace 

would have to be called in to authorize the release of the person 

arrested. 

 

(1600) 

 

And I would think that in the case scenario that was raised the 

other day in Justice estimates, if the police could have had the 

opportunity of using their discretion -- they were dealing with a 

local person who was of good repute and was well-known in 

the community -- they could have just allowed the person to go 

home, double-checked everything in the morning, and found 

that at the end of the day certainly 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

it wasn't a big matter and there was a problem with the courts 

and with the justice system in not striking this warrant off the 

record. 

 

If the justice of the peace . . . we find as in this case that the 

justice of the peace was not available, the person would have to 

spend the night in jail and, as I indicated, that individual in the 

Montmartre area just about found that's what he was doing. 

 

This Bill will repeal the municipal by-law appeal procedure.  I 

think there may be some inequity in the system as it currently 

stands.  Depending on where you live, your appeal process 

differs.  This amendment will allow for the same appeal 

procedures to be applicable in all parts of the province.  And 

the minister also mentioned that there are some housekeeping 

amendments as well. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we can get further clarification by 

allowing this Bill to proceed to Committee of the Whole so that 

we can get on with some specific questions rather than just 

tying up the debate in adjourned debates at this time.  So 

therefore I'll allow the Bill to move into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister to reintroduce the officials 

to the members of the committee as the last consideration of 

this department was before the committee on April 6.  So if the 

minister would reintroduce her officials, and then if she has 

anything she would like to add. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I'd like to 

introduce -- starting on my left, immediate left -- Mr. Duane 

Adams, the deputy minister; Ms. Kathy Langlois, the acting 

executive director, management support services; Mr. Rick 

Kilarski, the acting executive director of finance and 

administration; Mr. Dan Perrins, associate deputy minister; Ms. 

Glenda Yeates, associate deputy minister.  Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

welcome to your officials this afternoon.  I wanted to just start 

off with dealing with the concern about the questions, the 

global-type questions that we provided your department with.  I 

wonder if you'd provide us with the answers to those global 

questions at this time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that the written 

answers to those questions have not yet been completed, but 

they should be very soon. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Mr. Chair, it's my 

understanding that those questions have been provided to you 

some time ago, and I'm disappointed to hear that you haven't 

got them. But we'll patiently wait for them.  And I'm sure 

Health estimates will be around for some time yet, so we'll 

have lots of opportunity to deal with them as we get to them. 

 

I wanted to discuss . . . we discussed at some length the other 

day, the problem that we see and that a lot of organizations 

across the province see with the lack of direction with respect 

to the health board elections that had been called for, Madam 

Minister.  And at that time, the last opportunity we an 

opportunity to discuss this, you provided a couple of editorials 

from around the province that backed up your case, I guess, of 

not holding them for a while. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, it appears to me that there's beginning 

to be overwhelming evidence that that's the minority view.  I 

have a number of them here, editorials from around the 

province from both large and small newspapers, Madam 

Minister, that suggest that the health board elections should be 

dealt with as soon as possible. 

 

And I wonder if you would care to comment on that again for 

us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, Mr. Chair, as I have 

pointed out in the past, this issue is under review by an 

independent individual, and the whole issue of health board 

elections will be decided, as to when it is going to occur, very 

soon we hope. 

 

As I pointed out to the member opposite, it isn't simply a 

question of looking at editorials, it's a question of consulting 

broadly with the Saskatchewan public, and as well with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, its 

membership consisting of numerous boards and associations 

throughout the province, who have advised us that they feel it 

would be premature to proceed to elections at this point in time.  

And all of this input and advice has to be considered and we've 

asked for broad consultations on the issue. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Well it was you 

that said to the people of Saskatchewan that there was people 

around the province backing your claim up not to hold the 

elections.  It wasn't me who provided that little piece of 

information to the public of Saskatchewan.  It was you who 

used the argument that you have a couple of editorials from 

around the province to support your contention; as well as the 

only other one that I can find, and you used as an example 

again here this afternoon, SAHO.  And I can hardly . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, I think that most people would 

look at it and say their opinion is a little bit checkered and a 

little bit biased when it comes to looking at this kind of thing, 

Madam Minister. 

 

And as well I want to make the point this afternoon that this 

independent individual, as you call him, for those people that 

are watching this afternoon and 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

paying any attention to the proceedings this afternoon, that's 

code for NDP partisan Garf Stevenson, is what that is code for, 

Madam Minister. 

 

I wonder if you can confirm for us this afternoon what the cost 

on a per-day basis is for Mr. Stevenson, both in terms of his 

salary or his remuneration, whatever it's going to be, as well as 

cost of travel, staffing, all of that kind of thing.  Surely your 

department, prior to putting this road show together, has come 

up with some costing for the whole thing.  And we would be 

interested, and I'm sure the people and the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan would be interested, in knowing what it's going 

to cost for all of that operations, both in terms of Mr. 

Stevenson's salary and everything else involved. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, I can't let your comments go, 

your slanderous comments with respect to Mr. Stevenson, that 

somehow he's a partial person and not impartial.  I can't let that 

go by.  I think it's wrong that you would make derogatory 

comments of that nature of an individual, in this Legislative 

Assembly.  I think it's wrong. 

 

I think that Mr. Stevenson will conduct himself in a very 

impartial manner, and he will come forward with 

recommendations that he believes are correct.  I think it's 

highly inappropriate that you would use your immunity as a 

member of the legislature to slander an individual while you're 

within the four walls of this building.  I think that's 

inappropriate. 

 

Now with respect to Mr. Stevenson's remuneration, the details 

with respect to travel and expense are still being worked out.  

The total that we expect to pay in terms of remuneration for 

Mr. Stevenson would be in the range of approximately 

$50,000. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Well, well, well, 

we touched a little chord with you, it seems.  When you call 

into question one of your NDP financial contributors, you all of 

a sudden seem to have a problem with that.  When we call into 

question someone who puts up NDP lawn signs, a well-known 

NDP supporter, all of a sudden, somehow or another, we're 

slandering that individual. 

 

You people didn't seem to have any difficulty this afternoon 

talking about Jack Wiebe and his appointment, Madam 

Minister -- no problem whatsoever -- or past governments' 

appointments.  No problems whatsoever about discussing those 

kinds of things, Madam Minister.  But you sure have a lot of 

problem when we talk about someone that you appoint to a 

commission. 

 

Madam Minister, the last time we had opportunity to discuss 

this question of health board elections, you sat there, or you 

stood in your place and told the people of Saskatchewan that 

your department, your department was working on it, and that 

you would be coming up with some kind of recommendations 

and that you'd be dealing with it shortly. 

 

And after taking a raking over the coals that day, the 

very next day, the very next day you come in with this 

commission -- I believe it was the very next day -- and set it up, 

probably a hastily arranged phone call with Mr. Stevenson that 

evening is my guess, and said to him, do you think 500 bucks a 

day will be enough to satisfy you, Mr. Stevenson?  Is that the 

way it was arranged, Madam Minister?  Is that the way it was 

arranged? 

 

What other jobs does he also have that the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan is paying for?  Apparently he's on the SaskTel 

board of directors, is that not correct?  He's also on another 

commission with respect to health care.  Is he receiving a salary 

for that as well? 

 

And on top of that, Madam Minister, I'd also like to know what 

the total cost of his road show is going to cost.  Not just what 

he is going to get, the $50,000 you talked about, but what will 

be his expenses on top of that, anticipated expenses on top of 

that?  What will be his staffing requirements?  What will be the 

cost of his report?  All of those kinds of things, Madam 

Minister, if you please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the member opposite has a show of 

his own here in the legislature.  I just want to tell the member 

opposite that with respect to the appointment of Mr. Stevenson, 

he had agreed to this appointment some time before you ever 

raised the question in the legislature.  We were unable to 

announce his appointment until later on because there were a 

number of things the department wanted to get into place 

before we proceeded with the announcement . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, that's true. 

 

The member opposite is suggesting we're not telling the truth.  

It's the absolute truth.  Mr. Stevenson had been consulting with 

the department on this and had agreed to take on the 

responsibility some weeks before you raised it in the 

legislature.  So prove it, prove it.  Don't be so petty.  Let's get 

down into some serious questioning here about health care 

estimates. 

 

Now I'm not going to belabour this point, except to simply say 

that the Department of Health has been working on this issue 

and has been talking to Mr. Stevenson for some time before his 

appointment was announced. 

 

Now with respect to the total costs that are going to be . . . the 

department estimates that there will be, in addition to his 

personal remuneration, an additional 50,000 in terms of rental 

of space and travel costs and so on.  We will also be using 

departmental staff to do as much work as we possibly can to 

support Mr. Stevenson.  So there will be no additional cost 

from the use of departmental staff. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, you suggested earlier on that 

the cost of this would be in the neighbourhood of $200,000.  

Now you're saying it's not going to cost that much; it's going to 

cost $100,000. And you're also suggesting to us that that's, to 

use your words, a 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

petty amount of money.  I would suggest to you, Madam 

Minister, that the people of Saskatchewan would think that 

that's a substantial amount of money to do something that's not 

necessary, that could have been done a long time ago by your 

department. 

 

Madam Minister, $200,000 for that, a couple hundred thousand 

dollars for other delays, $500,000 for the cost of holding the 

elections outside of the municipal process -- $900,000 is what I 

come up with in terms of the delays.  I wonder if you could 

confirm that this afternoon, that it's going to cost in that 

neighbourhood if the elections are held outside the municipal 

process. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The additional estimate of $200,000 took 

into consideration staff that Mr. Stevenson may want.  We are, 

however, using departmental staff and so it will not be -- the 

extra 70 or 100,000 that we were talking about will not be an 

additional cost to the government or the Department of Health 

because what is happening is we're using departmental staff. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So what you're saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan is, is that you've got too much staff; they've got 

time on their hands that they can deal with these kinds of thing. 

Or what are you saying? 

 

There always is a cost, Madam Minister, whether the people . . 

. if they're not doing the appointed work that they normally 

would be doing and are seconded and put into this process, 

there's a cost to that, because someone has to back-fill for them.  

How do you get around that, Madam Minister?  How do you 

deal with that problem, that these people are going to be doing 

work that they normally wouldn't be doing.  There must be a 

cost to it. I'd like to know the answer to that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- In any business or in any government you 

make priorities in terms of what work is going to be done by 

employees, and you priorize.  And today this may be your 

priority and something else may come along and that happens 

to be the priority.  It's not a question of having staff sitting 

around doing nothing; it's a question of the choices you make 

as to what the priorities are. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well what's not getting done? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think my 

colleague makes a good point.  So what priorities has this 

process overtaken?  What things are being set on the back 

burner that you aren't dealing with as a result of these staff 

people having to do other, what you consider priority items? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The staff person that has been assigned to 

this is someone who was working on health reform in the 

policy analyst branch and . . . or she is a policy analyst.  She 

will be doing this aspect of health reform as a priority over the 

next few months. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And how much money will that cost, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well it'll cost the salary that we 

ordinarily pay, which I think is about 40,000 in this particular 

case, and that's annualized. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So you've come up with what you would consider 

a reasonable figure of $50,000 for Mr. Stevenson's salary and 

benefits and all of that sort of stuff, and then another $50,000.  

That would be all encompassing; we can take that to the people 

of Saskatchewan. A hundred thousand bucks is going to be the 

total cost of this whole exercise.  And have you set a budget for 

them, Madam Minister?  Is that, you know, the type of thing 

that you've done, that they are told that here's the amount of 

money that's available, and we'd appreciate it, Mr. Stevenson, if 

you don't go any higher than that?  Or how have you dealt with 

that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm informed that a target budget has 

been set for them and that the department will have to absorb 

all these costs. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Do you not feel, Madam Minister, that this is 

such an important consideration, such an important thing, that 

the money would be better spent in the delivery of health care 

services compared to these types of things?  And I'd like you to 

comment on that for us, Madam Minister, this afternoon. 

 

Because that's an important thing, I think, that the people of 

Saskatchewan must recognize -- that are interested.  Talking 

with people around the constituency that I represent and the 

letters and stuff that we've been receiving from municipal 

councils and town councils and all of those kinds of things, 

Madam Minister, they feel that the money would be better 

spent on the delivery of health care services.  And I wonder if 

you'd care to comment on that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think the member opposite has never 

completely understood what has to be done before we move to 

elections in health districts.  First of all we have to define the 

boundaries.  We have to determine what sort of formula we 

make with respect to population and geography.  That has to be 

determined.  Then the specific boundaries have to be 

determined.  We also have to determine whether we build in 

any sort of formula for minority groups and to achieve gender 

balance on the boards.  So there are a number of different 

questions that have to be dealt with, as opposed to simply 

drawing boundaries. 

 

Now the member opposite will know that when the provincial 

Constituency Boundaries Commission met, there were how 

many -- three people on that?  And it took them a year to draw 

those boundaries.  And the Department of Health is asking one 

individual to deal with that entire question. 

 

In order to achieve the proper boundaries within districts and 

the proper mix of urban and rural representation on the boards, 

we're looking at something like $3,500 per district in terms of 

the actual costs laid out, plus the departmental staff.  So I do 

not think that it's unreasonable to take the time and spend that 

amount of money per district in order to come up with the right 

formula. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, I 

think all of that . . . and you know very well that all of that was 

possible and could have been in place a long time ago.  And I'd 

like to read to you this afternoon an editorial from the Star-

Phoenix in Saskatoon of April 13.  And they believe that that's 

the case as well, Madam Minister, and I think people all over 

Saskatchewan believe that's the case. 

 

The headline is "Why the stalling?"  And I'll read it into the 

record this afternoon because I think it emphasizes the points 

that we've been trying to make with you, Madam Minister, and 

emphasizes the lack of understanding that you seem to have, or 

lack of.  You don't seem to care about this, simply don't seem 

to care about it. "Why the stalling?" 

 

 It would be interesting to know why the government of 

Saskatchewan is going to such pains to stall on the election of 

members of district health boards. 

 

 Both the rural and urban municipal associations want the 

elections held this fall.  That is a logical and common-sense 

position for the obvious reason that this is a municipal 

election year.  Doing anything other than holding health 

board and municipal council elections at (this) . . . time 

would complicate things needlessly and waste a lot of money. 

 

 Health Minister Louise Simard, however, seems determined 

to make this process into something terribly complicated.  

She claims the subject of health board elections is complex, 

(and) with a lot of details to be worked out.  Those 

"complications" include borders for wards and deciding who 

can run for (the) positions on health boards. 

 

 To suggest these are great mysteries is nonsense.  Where 

wards exist, use the same borders that have been drawn for 

elections of councillors.  As for determining who can run, use 

the qualifications already laid down for candidates for 

councils.  There might be some small room for debate about 

whether a person can run for both.  All the government has to 

do is take a deep breath and make a simple decision. 

 

 According to Simard, her department is consulting widely on 

how to implement the electing of health board members.  

What for?  All it has to do is tell us when the elections are 

and when (the) nominations close.  It is also looking at the 

best way to run the elections.  (Again) What for?  You hand 

out ballots, let people mark them and the job is done. 

 

 "Consulting widely" and looking at "the best way to run the 

elections" sound like excuses for foot-dragging.  The minister 

should stop dithering and get on with the business of keeping 

a government promise to hold the health board elections this 

fall. 

Madam Minister, I think that sums it up very, very well.  I 

think that the person who wrote this editorial has dealt with the 

subject extremely well, Madam Minister.  The common sense 

position is for elections held this fall.  The minister suggests 

that complications -- these are not great mysteries, Madam 

Minister, as the people here suggest.  These things could have 

been put in place. You could have dealt with this problem had 

you wanted to and had your department wanted to, Madam 

Minister. 

 

What is the real reasons behind your not wanting to hold these 

elections this fall?  What is the real reasons for coming up with 

a commission staffed by a NDP partisan, Mr. Garf Stevenson, 

at $500 a day?  What is the real reasons behind it, Madam 

Minister? 

 

As this editorial suggests, stop your foot-dragging and 

dithering and get on with the business of keeping a government 

promise. 

 

Madam Minister, it was you and you alone who made those 

promises and commitments to the people of Saskatchewan.  It 

was you who said health board elections would be held as soon 

as possible.  It was you, Madam Minister, who now feel that 

isn't necessary. 

 

Madam Minister, why don't you do the right and honourable 

thing and get on with the process, as the people of 

Saskatchewan and editorials all over this province are 

suggesting? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I had told the member last time he was in 

estimates that we did not promise that there would be elections 

in October 1994.  I did say at that time that I didn't expect him 

to acknowledge that because the accuracy is not . . . accuracy is 

not his forte. 

 

So I'll say it again for the record:  there was not a promise to 

hold elections in October 1994.  What there was, was 

speculation on that being the first possible opportunity and a 

possibility that we could move to elections on that date.  Yes, 

we did talk about October '94 being a potential election date.  

There was not a commitment to have them under any 

circumstances.  What the commitment was was to have board 

elections.  And that commitment's written into legislation. 

 

The issue then becomes not simply a question of drafting 

boundaries, as I mentioned to the member opposite on 

numerous occasions in this legislature.  It also becomes an 

issue as to whether the structural changes that are required by 

health reform are adequately in place to enable us to move to 

elections.  It is not a good idea to have elections for the sake of 

elections if the health reform structures have not been 

adequately put in place. 

 

I have pointed out, and I will again to the member opposite, 

that some of these boards were not up and running until late 

1993 because they did not . . . we didn't even know what the 

boundaries were till the end of August 1993, and then there was 

the 120-day 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

amalgamation clause before the boards triggered in and took 

over.  And that took us into late 1993 before many of these 

boards were even up and running.  Okay? 

 

So for the member opposite to say that we've known for a long 

time what these districts are and what sort of boundaries we 

could have, is again an inaccurate statement.  We haven't 

known for a long time.  We allowed community groups to 

come together and define their own boundaries, unlike what 

happened in Alberta where the Alberta government moved in 

and has put forward a map of what the boundaries will be.  This 

in face of extensive consultation people around Alberta have 

had, thinking they would have input, and in the final analysis 

were dictated their boundaries. 

 

(1630) 

 

That wasn't the process in Saskatchewan.  The process of 

dictation took place in Tory Alberta.  We did not know what 

the boundaries were or what the board's complexion was going 

to be until August of 1993. 

 

So I'd want to put those points on record.  It's a question of 

looking at the districts, defining the boundaries, but it's also a 

question of the readiness of the boards to hand over the reins to 

another group of people and have elections in the province.  It's 

a question of readiness and that's important, unless your desire 

is to try and undermine health reform, which I believe it is, 

because quoted in Hansard, I believe, you have simply said 

that your intent is to use the elections in a political fashion and 

to cause mayhem throughout the province.  I think that's 

implied in the comments you made in Hansard.  That's your 

intent; it's not to improve the health care system for future 

generations. 

 

And so I think the member opposite, if he's genuinely 

concerned about the improvement of the health care system, he 

will be working with his board to get them into a state of 

readiness where they can move to elections.  As opposed to 

simply grandstanding and haranguing for elections, he should 

be working constructively with the people in his district to 

move to elections. 

 

I want to point out as well to the member opposite that the Tory 

government in 1988 to '89, I think it was, paid some $1.8 

million, not a hundred thousand or a hundred and seventy 

thousand, if you take staff and other things into consideration, 

to look at how we're going to design the districts.  They paid 

$1.8 million for that.  And what did they do with that report 

that designed districts in the province?  They shelved it and did 

nothing with it.  $1.8 million -- I tell you that's a long cry from 

100,000 plus staff and office staff expenses. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam Minister, 

you've gone through all of this kind of health care reform up to 

this point, and you've closed hospitals around Saskatchewan -- 

that didn't seem to be a problem.  You've done a whole bunch 

of things 

with health care reform and the people of Saskatchewan asked 

for time in a lot of cases in those circumstances and you just 

kept on pushing ahead. 

 

The train left the station, the Premier kept on saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and it wasn't prepared to back up.  No 

way, we're not going to back up.  We're on the road to health 

care reform and that's the way it's going to be, was the way it 

was interpreted. 

 

And she accuses the opposition of causing mayhem when it 

comes to health board elections.  Well, Madam Minister, it isn't 

me that's delaying the elections.  It isn't me that is asking now 

that they be delayed.  It isn't me that's causing the frustration 

out there in the people of Saskatchewan when it comes to these 

types of things.  It is you and your department that is causing 

these delays, Madam Minister. 

 

Here's another editorial that I'd like to read to you this 

afternoon, and this one comes from The Eston Press.  You'll 

be familiar with Eston, Madam Minister; you spent an evening 

out there in Eston where there was 15 or 1,600 people there that 

were concerned about the health care reform to begin with.  

And the editorial reads: Health board elections should be held: 

 

 Most people in the province want elected district health 

boards.  The exception, it appears, is the members of the 

district health boards, their excuse being that they're not 

ready.  Granted, the boards have not been operating for that 

long and that the members have had a lot of administrative 

details to attend to and a lot of learning to do. 

 

 However, had experienced people been appointed in the first 

place, the task would have been easier.  This is no reflection 

on the people appointed.  We have no doubt that they are 

taking their task seriously and doing the best job possible 

under the circumstances.  However, while the argument that 

they bring no past baggage to their task may have some 

merit, experience also has merit. 

 

 The main reason for wanting elected health boards is not to 

do away with the current appointees but rather to make them 

accountable to the people who are paying for the health 

boards, the taxpayers of this province. 

 

 At the moment the boards are in no way accountable to the 

taxpayers.  Their meetings, unlike the meetings of elected 

bodies such as town and rural municipal councils and school 

boards, are not open to the public.  There is not even a 

responsibility, as there is with other bodies mentioned, to 

give details of salaries paid to top officials or the amount of 

money paid to board members for expenses in attending 

meetings. 

 

In fact when the editor of this newspaper asked one health 

board for that information, she was told it was a  



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

rude question despite the fact that part of her salary as well as 

the salaries of her readers goes to make up the very expenses 

she was asking about. 

 

 District health boards are obligated to hold two open 

meetings per year. Both the Midwest Health District and the 

Prairie West Health District have announced dates and places 

for the holding of those meetings.  It should be noted that 

neither is opening one of those regular meetings to the public.  

Rather, special public information meetings are being held. 

 

 It is hoped that the people in these areas affected will attend 

those public information meetings and they will ask the 

questions that are needed to be asked -- elected or not -- these 

health boards and the health care systems which are being 

dealt with. 

 

Madam Minister, and I again point to that type of editorial 

where the people in Saskatchewan, all around Saskatchewan . . 

. The first one was from the Star-Phoenix, an urban newspaper; 

the second one was from a a rural newspaper in Saskatchewan, 

Madam Minister, and they believe that these type of problems 

that you've identified can be overcome. 

 

And SUMA and SARM agree that those kinds of problems can 

be overcome, Madam Minister.  Let them lend their expertise 

to the process.  They have . . . SUMA and SARM have both, I 

understand, agreed to lend their expertise to the process of 

setting up wards, and they have a wealth of experience when it 

comes to dealing with these kinds of concerns, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, we brought in a piece of legislation that 

would help you with that as well.  We brought in a piece of 

legislation that asks that those elections be dealt with as soon as 

possible, this fall.  And we've also, within that legislation, 

believe that all members of the board should be elected. 

 

And we wonder, Madam Minister, if you could give us some 

kind of rationale this afternoon as to why you would oppose the 

legislation that we've brought forward -- private members' Bill 

-- as to why that these elections can't be held as soon as 

possible, as well as having all members of the board elected, 

and then the chairperson elected from that body of elected 

people.  Why can't they deal with it that way, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, with respect to your 

allegations that the district boards aren't accountable to the 

public, once again your statements are totally inaccurate.  The 

district boards are completely accountable to the public.  They 

have dual accountability -- accountability to their residents and 

accountability to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

They're accountable to their residents through The Health 

Districts Act which requires them to have two public meetings 

a year.  And at these meetings they must present to the 

residents of their district an 

operation and expenditure plan for the next fiscal year, and a 

report on the health of the population of the district, and the 

effectiveness of their boards' programs. 

 

Now this is unique.  It's a first in the history of this country, 

that boards have to go to the public and table not only their 

budget, but also a report on the health status and the 

effectiveness of their programs, on the health status of the 

citizens in the district. 

 

This never happened before.  Your government had 10 years to 

make hospital board meetings open to the public and you chose 

not to -- 10 years to do that.  This government has moved to 

appoint district boards that requires them to have two public 

meetings a year.  They are also accountable -- and eventually 

they will be accountable through the election process -- the 

district boards are also accountable to the Government of 

Saskatchewan through the submission to the minister, in 

advance of each fiscal year, of the detailed estimates of the 

board, the sources of any revenues and the estimated revenue 

from each source, and the details of any proposed services or 

activities and their estimated cost. 

 

They must also submit the following reports to the government 

on an annual basis: a report on their services and activities and 

their costs in an audited financial statement, which include a 

schedule of investments; a report on the board's internal 

controls; and a report on the board's compliance with 

legislative and related authorities.  They must also submit any 

reports that the minister may request from time to time, 

including: continued separate reporting on a quarterly basis; 

information about health outcome measurement; improvement, 

for example, in the health of district residents; and so on. 

 

The Department of Health will also continue to monitor the 

quality of the programing, and each program is governed by 

standards contained in legislation or regulations which have, 

like The Hospital Standards Act and regulations, which have 

not changed.  Programs delivered by district health boards must 

continue to meet set standards for delivery of those services.  

Responsibility for meeting standards rests with district health 

boards. 

 

So there's a whole range, a whole set of criteria and 

responsibilities that must be met by district boards.  For the 

member opposite to suggest so simplistically that there's no 

accountability, is exactly that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I didn't say that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, you made a statement that these 

boards weren't accountable.  They're accountable to their 

residents and they're accountable to the government.  And I've 

just outlined how this accountability is ensured. 

 

These district boards are far more accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan than some of the former boards that were in 

operation, because these boards have to go to the public, to the 

citizens of the district, 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

twice a year.  And this is a first in Saskatchewan and a first 

across Canada.  So I believe that there is a very substantial 

accountability. 

 

Now with respect to your question about district board 

elections, I also want to make this point.  When we were 

talking about whether or not boards would have the right to tax 

on the property tax base and levy a tax like union hospitals 

were able to do under your government, we had discussions 

with municipal officials.  And some of them said to me, as long 

as they're not allowed to tax on the property tax base, we don't 

care whether they're elected or appointed. 

 

This government still chose to put in legislation even though it 

wrote in that the district boards could not levy on the tax base, 

on the property tax base, it still went on, in spite of what some 

municipal officials were suggesting, to require eight members 

of the board to be elected.  Because we believe this will result 

in more input from communities when we move through the 

election process.  It will also generate debate at the local level 

about health care concerns.  And we think that's good.  And 

that's why we put in the election process. 

 

But at the same time, we put in the legislation a statement to 

the effect that the district boards could not levy on the property 

tax base.  These boards are not municipal boards; they are not 

education boards; they are different.  They get their funding 

primarily from the provincial government.  They don't have the 

right to levy a tax on the property tax base. 

 

They get some funding under the hospital revenue tax Act and 

there may be some local contributions that take place or other 

arrangements that might be arranged which they cannot impose 

on communities, but they would have to talk and negotiate with 

them, coming to some sort of understanding or arrangement on 

a voluntary basis -- in other words, there's room for voluntary 

contributions. 

 

So for people in this debate to suggest that these boards are like 

municipal government is incorrect, because they're not.  They 

don't fit the same niche -- they're different.  However, their call 

for elections, which we think is important and which we are 

committed to do, is to generate the debate about health care and 

to get more local input. 

 

But it is absolutely essential that before we move to elections 

there is a readiness on the part of the interim boards that the 

structural changes that they have been asked to do have largely 

been done. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I find 

myself being drawn into the debate by some of the comments 

that Madam Minister was making and I want to pursue a topic 

and an issue . . . a little bit of accountability.  I could not help 

but to catch part of your strident commentary there that dealt 

with the accountability of the boards.  And you specifically said 

that this board is . . . these health district boards 

will be accountable to the government. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I think that is appalling.  I think that is 

appalling because the government is you folks across the way.  

That is not this legislature.  So what you're telling me now is 

that these health district boards are accountable to you, but not 

to the people of this province through this legislature. 

 

And I want you to answer some questions for me based on that 

premiss.  Specifically I will first of all ask you this question:  

what is the expenditure, the total anticipated expenditure by the 

Department of Health in this current fiscal year?  And 

secondly, what proportion of that total expenditure by the 

Department of Health is going to be funded through these 

district boards?  In other words, what is the total amount of 

money that you will be writing out a cheque to these district 

boards that they will be able to spend in a way that they see 

fitting and suitable? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Now with respect to your first comment 

that these boards are not accountable to the public, I want to 

make this point.  As I said in my earlier comments, they are 

accountable to the citizens in their district.  They have to table 

budgets and justify them; so they're accountable to the citizens 

in their district. 

 

They also have to provide the government with detailed 

information, as I've outlined.  And through the government, 

because that information is available in this Assembly, they are 

accountable to the citizens of the province.  So they are 

accountable to the Legislative Assembly and to the 

government.  They have to provide the Minister of Health with 

reports and they are audited.  So there is accountability by the 

boards to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The health budget is 1.5 million.  The boards receive 873 

million of the 1.5. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That's 1.5 

billion, I assume you meant, instead of million. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you.  And 873 million is the money 

that you turn over to the boards to spend as they deem most 

appropriate, to give the best bang for the health dollar.  Is that 

correct, Madam? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They spend it in accordance with their 

budgets that are presented to the Department of Health and 

approved by the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, you're making my 

point for me.  These boards are not responsible to this 

legislature.  You have just told me that you're going to give 

these boards $873 million, and yet they are not responsible to 

this legislature; they are responsible to the government, and 

that is you.  That's all.  That's where our concern is.  And, 

Madam Minister, it's not just my concern or my colleague's 

concern.  It is the concern of the Provincial Auditor. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

You are telling us now that almost a billion dollars worth of 

government expenditures will never be seen by the auditor.  

That the auditor has to rely on a report of other auditors. On an 

ongoing, continual basis, the Provincial Auditor complains 

about that.  He cannot accept another auditor's report as being 

the total gospel.  Not that he doesn't trust them, not that they're 

not competent, but that they have different ways of doing 

things.  And they have a different piper that's paying them. 

 

So, Madam Minister, that is not sufficient.  The auditor wants 

to audit those books so that there is accountability to the 

taxpayer of this province directly. And the auditor, Madam 

Minister, tells us that he can't do his job.  By law, by the 

auditor's Act, it is demanded of him to audit those books where 

public monies are being spent. 

 

He tells us he doesn't have enough money, and do you know 

why?  Because you are responsible for him being lacking in 

funding; because you sit on Treasury Board.  It is your cabinet 

that makes the decision as to how much money the auditor is 

going to get, and he hasn't got enough. 

 

So he has told us in committee that he has to make a choice.  

Which areas is he not going to audit?  Because he hasn't got the 

money to audit them all.  And the last I heard and the last I 

understood is that this is going to be exactly the district health 

boards that are going to be part of those that will not get 

sufficient auditing. 

 

So, Madam Minister, the accountability is not there.  The 

accountability is not there for $873 million, because the money 

that is spent through this legislature, the money that is 

appropriated through this legislature, the money that you're 

seeking and the process that we're undergoing right now is not 

in place for that $873 million.  And that's what we're concerned 

about, along with the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Now I hope you can get on your feet and say: Mr. Member, 

you've got it all wrong; that we as a cabinet have decided that 

the auditor is going to get enough money that he will be able to 

audit these books, and that we can go on to some new business. 

 

So would you respond to that, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, I want to let the member 

opposite know that there were some 400 health boards out there 

before and that the Provincial Auditor never audited them.  

Four hundred health boards, largely the same budget, 400 

health boards.  And they were not audited by the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

We now have 30 health boards.  And they are, like the health 

boards that were out there before under your government, 

audited by private auditors.  I think the Provincial Auditor is 

auditing some 6 this year of the health boards -- 6 out of the 30.  

The rest are being audited by private auditors.  But this hasn't 

changed since when you were in government.  When you were 

in government, all of the health boards were being 

audited by private auditors, some 400 of them. 

 

Now I want to also state this.  The Department of Health is 

interested in ensuring proper accountability and we have put a 

number of measures in place to assist health boards in meeting 

accountability requirements.  For example, an accountability 

guide which will assist health boards meet their accountability 

requirements was prepared by the Provincial Auditor's office in 

consultation with the department.  And the department has sent 

this guide to all health boards.  An audit guide which will assist 

health boards and their auditors to plan and meet audit 

requirements has been prepared then by the Provincial 

Auditor's office.  And the department sent this guide to all 

health boards for distribution to their auditors on February 10, 

1994. 

 

A reporting and auditing orientation seminar for health boards 

and their auditors was organized by the department and the 

Provincial Auditor's office and was held on March 1, 1994. 

 

A common information systems framework for the provincial 

health system is being developed by the department.  And this 

will be information that boards need to manage and report on 

their activities, and this will be reflected in this framework. 

 

So the government, in conjunction with the Provincial Auditor, 

has taken a number of steps to ensure that auditing 

requirements are properly met and that these boards are 

accountable. 

 

I should point out as well -- and here's what the auditor says on 

this point: 

 

 The Act makes boards accountable to the residents of the 

district and to the Minister of Health for the effective and 

affordable delivery of health services.  The Act sets out 

various accountability mechanisms for boards to follow 

including annual reports, auditing, and public meetings. 

 

Those are the Provincial Auditor's comments on board 

accountability to the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, we're talking about 

accountability and we're counting . . . and we're talking about 

the accountability of an appointed board.  I think that in 

essence summarizes the concerns that my colleague from 

Kindersley has been talking about for the previous half hour. 

 

There is no accountability if you have an appointed board.  

Surely you can understand that.  And surely you can understand 

the concern that the auditor has.  Now I guess one question I 

could ask you: if I'm not right in what I was saying, and you 

can count . . . couch that in some different kinds of . . . well 

rhetoric.  No, I'm thinking of the word that you use when you 

quote . . . from quotes from the auditor's act and so on that 

happen to be appropriate in your estimation at the same time. 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

But then how would you ask the question: if I'm not right, that 

every district board should be audited by the auditor, if he had 

the resources to do it, then why have you got 6 boards out of 30 

in that process already?  That is what the auditor demands and 

that's what the auditor wants -- a direct accountability process, 

and that is not in place.  You've got it out of 6 out of 30, the 

previous 6.  Why is it not going to be 30 out of 30? 

 

Well I'll tell you why.  Because you as a member of Treasury 

Board, you as a cabinet, you as a government, have determined 

that you are not going to supply the auditor with the sufficient 

funds so that he can fulfil his mandate.  And instead of doing 

that, you're adamant in your approach that you are not going to 

allow the citizens of this province to hold those boards 

accountable. 

 

Because right now there are no elections in the offing, as far as 

I'm concerned; from what I've heard about from you this 

afternoon, those many people out there in Saskatchewan -- and 

I dare say by now it's pretty well everyone, whether it's SARM 

or whether it's SUMA or whether it's hospital boards, local 

hospital boards right now -- they're not going to get their way.  

There's not going to be an elected board because, for whatever 

reason, you are delaying the process and you're doing it 

purposefully.  At the same time, you're appointing your own 

friends once more to influential positions at taxpayers' expense.  

And you're spending a goodly sum of taxpayers' money to 

delay these boards. 

 

Now I have nothing against Garf Stevenson as an individual, 

but I think when you take his record and his association with 

the NDP Party, and you appoint him to do a one-man study at 

$500 a day plus expenses, plus your own individuals that you 

are going to appoint and second from your department to be his 

assistants, then I think there's no doubt about it that the citizens 

of this province are being short-changed. 

 

And they resent that, Madam Minister.  They resent your 

approach to this whole issue, where you have always been 

saying, we are in a consultative mode;  we're going to go out, 

we're going to consult with people.  But, Madam Minister, 

whenever you do that, you do not listen.  You do not listen.  

You ask the people, what do you want? And then you go ahead 

in your preconceived way and your preconceived notions, and 

that's what you implement . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order. Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, the 

Committee of Finance stands recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


