




















































Hansard: April 05, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1313 

 April 5, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day 45 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation: (1) has the Titan building in Saskatoon been 

sold by SEDCO, and if so, on what date did this 

transaction take place and what was the final purchase 

price of the building; (2) was the building sold to Home 

Depot of the United States of America, and if not, to 

whom was it sold; (3) was this building sold through 

public tender, and if so, provide a copy of the tender 

documents, all terms and conditions of the sale, criteria 

considered for tenders, and all other information regarding 

offers, including a list of all tenders received; (4) were 

Saskatchewan companies allowed to bid and given equal 

consideration in the sale of this building? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure today 

to introduce someone known to you and to most other 

members, but a long-time friend of the Trew family, a 

long-time personal friend of mine.  I'm speaking to the former 

member of parliament for, call it Regina West, call it 

Regina-Lumsden, call it lots of different names, but a 

gentleman who served with great distinction for 25 unbroken 

years.  The only MP (Member of Parliament) that served longer 

in Saskatchewan, as I understand it, is the late Rt. Hon. John 

George Diefenbaker.  The person that I ask all hon. members to 

join in welcoming is none other than Les Benjamin, the former 

MP for Regina Lumsden. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

indeed a pleasure for me today to introduce to you and through 

you to my colleagues in this legislature, seated in your gallery, 

seven members of the Regina 4-H grain club.  They are aged 8 

to 15, and are accompanied by Wayne and Mary Hart; Ted 

Brown; and David and Primrose Sloan. 

 

I'm looking forward to meeting with them later on this 

afternoon.  I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

them here to Regina today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 

pleasure to introduce my baby sister to the Assembly today -- 

Ruby and her husband, Rob Tretiak, their son, Chris, their 

daughter, Corrine, and their daughter, Lindsay.  They spent 

Easter with us on 

the farm.  It was wonderful to have them there.  On their way 

back to Arborg, where both of them work, my sister with the 

health care system and my brother-in-law with Manitoba 

Hydro. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in welcoming our family. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the legislature a 

couple of people who are fairly special in my life, on spring 

break, my two boys in the legislature -- McLeay and Jordan.  

And I would like all members to welcome them here today.  

And I promise, Mr. Speaker, I'll be on my best behaviour. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Cancer Month 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As members will 

know, April is Cancer Month.  And which of our families, 

which families in the province, haven't been touched by 

cancer?  Cancer of course is a very dreaded disease.  The mere 

mention of the word often strikes terror into the hearts and 

minds of our people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a disease we don't like to talk about very readily.  But 

today, on behalf of all members of the Assembly, I would like 

to express our gratitude to the many men and women across 

Saskatchewan who are fighting this disease, fighting it in their 

families, fighting it in hospitals and in nursing homes.  I think 

of the countless volunteers in our midst, the medical personnel, 

those who provide spiritual care, the palliative care-givers, the 

funeral industry and, last but not least, those individual 

members of our own families who are visiting the sick and 

providing comfort and support to their friends and neighbours 

and family members who struggle with this deadly disease. 

 

And so on behalf of all members of the society, I'd like to 

encourage these people in their efforts and wish them God's 

blessings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Big Sisters Annual Meeting 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to make the Assembly aware of the Big Sisters 1994 annual 

meeting and awards night in Regina, which took place last 

Monday.  The government acknowledges the contribution that 

Big Sister volunteers make within this community. They have 

an impressive history in this province for caring and for sharing 

their time.  The evening paid tribute to Big Sister of the year, 

Sally Parisloff, and special presentation to a very hard-working 

executive 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

director, Carol Brand. 

 

Other awards went to Bi-Rite, Don Babey, Carla Veroba, and 

Karen Kuz.  In some small part these awards pay recognition to 

all Big Sister volunteers within the province who are involved 

with about 450 kids right across Saskatchewan. 

 

Throughout the years, they have been adapting to changing 

conditions with new approaches and imaginative and 

innovative ideas.  However they've always had one objective in 

mind, and that is to help children.  The solid support, positive 

leadership, and the impact of Big Sisters on our families, their 

health and well-being, is living proof of its viability. 

 

Our government, along with Big Sisters, recognizes the need to 

work collaboratively, to work together across boundaries and 

mandates to provide more holistic services and approaches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like again to call attention of the 

Assembly to the importance and for the need of the 

organizations such as Big Sisters.  It is my hope that they will 

continue to work positively together to secure a better future 

for the children and for all people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lloydminster Health District 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like 

to announce some good news to the Assembly: the creation of 

the Lloydminster regional Health District.  This means that 

now the Lloydminster Hospital, Twin Rivers health care, 

Jubilee Home, Dr. Cooke Extended Care Centre, and the 

Lloydminster area municipal ambulance district are under the 

direction of one board.  This was not an easy task.  The health 

district was put into place to serve a dual provincial purpose, 

and the cooperation of both the Saskatchewan and Alberta 

governments was required.  Health care will now be easier and 

much more coordinated than in the past. 

 

It'll focus on three main responsibilities in the operation.  The 

first responsibility is to meet the health needs of consumers; 

second, to supply the resources for those needs and, third, to 

provide the financing for the district.  The real advantage will 

be the coordination of the existing programs to provide a much 

better system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a centralized board should in essence provide an 

opportunity to make health care an extension of the 

community.  The needs of local residents can be assessed and 

priorized, and then appropriate services can be delivered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should also notice the efforts of Cec MacKay, 

Brian Heidt, and the health boards of Saskatchewan and 

Alberta, whose combined cooperation and effort made all this 

possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Theatre in Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I sometimes feel that by 

default I've become the bulletin board of south-west 

Saskatchewan, sort of a regional town crier for events of 

interest to my people and those of surrounding constituencies. 

 

One case in point last week was the ostrich farmers who 

actually live in the Morse constituency.  Another, Mr. Speaker, 

is the Aneroid dinner theatre in the riding of Shaunavon.  We 

are all aware of the great interest in live theatre in our province.  

The member from Bengough-Milestone justifiably boasted of 

her Milestone players last week, and we've heard the Deputy 

Premier announce that Prince Edward will visit the Globe 

Theatre this summer to honour his patronage of that fine 

organization. 

 

And the people of the tiny village of Aneroid have just finished 

four performances of a mystery play, The Clock Struck 

Twelve, all four performances to standing-room-only 

audiences.  I understand that during the intermission the 

audience was asked to identify the murderer, but I've no 

information on the accuracy of their guesses.  Hundreds of 

hours of volunteer work went into this production, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I think all involved should be congratulated by 

us all and, in particular, by the member for Shaunavon.  

Especially we should congratulate Mr. Jerry Ruehs, the director 

of the play, who in his other life was the duly nominated 

Liberal candidate for the constituency of Shaunavon in the 

1991 election.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Powwow 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would 

like to inform the Assembly about a very interesting and 

special event which took place over the weekend in Regina -- 

the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College powwow.  This 

spectacular happening in its 16th year is a beautiful, 

mesmerizing, and compelling tradition which spans back deep 

into Indian history. 

 

This year's SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) 

powwow, like most years, was another great success.  The 

two-day event brought people, both aboriginal and 

non-aboriginal, from all over Canada and the United States to 

the Agridome in Regina.  An estimated crowd of 5,000 people 

were in attendance.  Over 500 dancers and more than 20 drum 

groups from various tribes and bands took part in hundreds of 

different traditional songs, dances, and activities.  The vibrantly 

coloured costumes were seen everywhere.  They did not only 

display their beauty and skilled craftsmanship, but also their 

magical symbolism. 

 

The SIFC powwow is an important celebration of Indian 

culture, and helps keep Indian people in touch with their 

traditions.  It allows them to learn more and become a part of 

their culture -- a culture which goes 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

back to time immemorable.  The powwow also allows Indian 

people to practise their traditions with friends and fellow 

tribesmen.  The event also gives a chance for non-Indian 

peoples to get a glimpse into the beautiful and interesting 

culture of Indian people. 

 

It is through events such as this, events in which people can 

learn more about and understand the ways of others, I am sure 

that the barriers such as racism can be knocked down. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Ringette Championships 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to comment on an 

event taking place in my city of Saskatoon, which is the 

National Ringette Championships.  And I had the pleasure last 

night of speaking to several hundred competitors and spectators 

at the Canadian championships which will be going on all week 

at various venues in Saskatoon. 

 

And one of the very delightful aspects of my visit at the 

opening ceremonies was to meet Mrs. Agnes Jacks, who is the 

widow of Mr. Sam Jacks, and she is from North Bay.  Mr. Sam 

Jacks was the inventor or founder of the sport of ringette in 

Canada -- and the world, because it's become a world sport and 

I think eventually will go to the Olympics -- and also of floor 

hockey. 

 

And I had the chance to say to Mrs. Jacks, what a wonderful 

legacy her husband had left us.  Because here we had 650 

competitors, young women from all over the country, there to 

play ringette, and I'm sure her husband would have been very 

proud to have witnessed that event.  And indeed ringette is 

being played at the world level at the present time and probably 

eventually will be an Olympic sport. 

 

And I just want to congratulate the organizers of this event in 

Saskatoon, and wish all of the competitors a very fun and 

enjoyable tournament. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Fuel Taxes 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My first question on 

viewer mail today is a question from a gentleman by the name 

of Albert M. Longworth from Biggar, and he asked this 

question:  Mr. Premier, I want to know why are taxes of 15 

cents a litre levied against farm bulk gas while no tax is levied 

on diesel being used for the same purpose?  This tax 

discriminates against farm family use and those that use gas 

exclusively. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, thank you 

very much for that question.  The province of Saskatchewan or 

-- I should say -- the taxpayers of Saskatchewan provide about 

$120 million a year in benefits to farmers and other primary 

producers in the province.  The approach has been to allow 

coloured diesel but to ensure that there is adequate controls in 

place that gasoline used on farms has to be accounted for.  

We've tried to make this as easy as possible by ensuring that 

the accounting is done by the dealer, not by the farmer.  In our 

present financial situation we feel that a benefit of a $120 

million per year to these producers is reasonable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Deficit Reduction Surtax 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today comes from Carol Fleece of 1226 Pascoe Drive 

in Moose Jaw.  And she says:  Mr. Premier, I would like to 

know why the NDP (New Democratic Party) government said 

there were no tax increases this year, but as I was doing my 

income tax I saw the deficit reduction surtax had doubled from 

5 per cent to 10 per cent.  How can you explain this, and how 

much money was raised by this surtax in 1993?  Was this 

amount really used to reduce the deficit? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I actually would 

welcome that question.  When that tax was introduced, because 

the budget in the year that was introduced was in May, the tax 

could only be put in place in July '92, so the tax was only in 

place for half a year.  What the federal government forces the 

province to do is, it was always a 10 per cent tax, but because it 

was only in place for six months they forced us to put it on the 

form as a 5 per cent tax.  This year it's in place, as it was 

announced to be in place, at a 10 per cent rate for the full year.  

So it's that particular change. 

 

But I welcome the question because it's a question that I have 

been getting frequently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tax Increases 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

comes from Ivan Biblow of 2626 Cochrane, Regina.  And he 

says:  Mr. Premier, I want to know why you are having all 

these tax increases which reduce how much a person can buy, 

therefore making it impossible for the small businessmen, and 

you have not cut your pension at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

Leader of the Opposition -- I think it's his question; I'm not sure 

whose it is, but none the less it's an important issue. 

 

The question of responsible budgeting has been imposed upon 

us by virtue of the situation which we inherited on November 

1, 1991 when we were sworn in -- a situation where the deficit 

for that year was projected to be $1.2 billion.  And what we've 

tried to 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

do is have a balanced approach to the question of fiscal 

integrity.  We want to make sure that we reduce expenditures 

where possible, and we've actually brought down the operating 

expenditures of government to about $4.1 billion a year, below 

the 4.5, 4.6 that we inherited. 

 

The problem is of course that $850 million have to be added to 

that.  That $850 million are the interest rate charges on the 

public debt which was inherited as a result of the former 

administration. 

 

So what we have done here is we've applied a balanced 

approach, unlike Alberta's, which I think is standing in sharp 

contrast to ours.  And the people of this province, I think, 

accept it as the fair and reasonable one to adopt. 

 

But I might say just before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Leader of the Opposition really can't have it all ways, as he 

tries to have, because he gets . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not my question, Roy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Oh, it's not his question.  This is not 

your question.  Well I should say to Mr. Biblow then that when 

he writes to the Leader of the Opposition he should remind the 

Leader of the Opposition that he can't have it both ways. 

 

He should ask the Leader of the Opposition why it is that he's 

for a 24 per cent pay increase for judges as an example, and 

still would want his taxes reduced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Francophone School Boards 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Doreen Bell from Outlook.  Why 

are we spending millions of dollars, millions on supporting 

official language communities, i.e., French and French school 

boards at a cost to all the taxpayers, of $21.9 million over the 

next five years when we have very few French people in 

Saskatchewan, and yet health boards are strapped for cash and 

getting less in the 1994-95 budget.  French could be taught in 

regular school as an extra class.  Saskatchewan people cannot 

pick up these other school costs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'd like to thank the member for the 

question.  As the member will know, there are two major legal 

decisions in this country that have indicated that where 

numbers warrant, members of francophone communities are 

eligible for francophone school governance. 

 

This province, after we were elected, recognized our 

constitutional obligation and introduced legislation in the last 

sitting of the legislature for the implementation of francophone 

school boards. 

 

The member should also know that there won't be one 

provincial taxpayers' dollar going to the governance of 

francophone schools.  All funds will be coming from 

the federal government as is their constitutional obligation, to 

ensure that francophone people have access to a francophone 

education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Livestock Fund Changes 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

to the Premier comes from Harold Madsen of Redvers.  Why 

are the funds of the livestock horn fund and the livestock 

check-off fund being expropriated when these funds are now 

administered by boards of producers?  Why do organizations 

representing multinational corporations and other political 

philosophies need representation on these boards?  Why are 

you proposing legislation to fix something that isn't broken? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for that question and a chance to clear up any 

misunderstandings.  The funds are not being expropriated; the 

check-off will remain as is.  We are proceeding now to try to 

move to having elected boards and producers decide 

themselves who they want to sit on these boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, there has been much 

speculation and certainly many media reports regarding your 

government's changes to Bill 32.  It is most unfortunate that 

you would not choose to inform this Assembly of those 

proposals. 

 

However we do acknowledge that you have finally recognized 

that there is real and tangible problems with your legislation.  

And now we need to fix it, Mr. Minister.  Would you report to 

this Assembly what changes you have proposed, how they will 

be changed, and when we can expect them to be tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm a little surprised that the member 

doesn't realize that this is on the agenda.  These House 

amendments will be introduced in Committee of the Whole in 

the usual fashion, and you'll have all the opportunity you want 

to discuss them. 

 

Let me just say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes we might do 

it by leave, later this day, if the opposition members are 

anxious to get to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The official 

opposition has obtained a copy of a briefing note prepared by 

your department which outlines the proposed changes to Bill 

32.  It is different than the one given to the business groups 

because it has your department's analysis and implications of 

the 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

changes. 

 

Now at first glance, it would appear that you have recognized 

the mistakes; you are finally prepared to hold back on a few of 

these items.  But, Mr. Minister, it also appears that while you 

are promising changes, you are also crossing your fingers 

behind your back.  Mr. Minister, what you unable to 

accomplish with Bill 32 under the scrutiny of this legislature 

you intend to accomplish through regulations, regulations 

which are solely determined and implemented by you and your 

cabinet colleagues?  Mr. Minister, why have you put so much 

importance on regulations as opposed to legislation?  Is it 

because you have complete control over regulations and not 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is, I think, a silent majority of 

people on both sides of the issue, of both labour and 

management, who are increasingly comfortable with the 

process by which the regulations in which they will participate 

will contain a good deal of the detail.  If there is a single 

message which we get in this whole process, it is that they want 

to be involved in the solution.  And the regulatory process 

which we have set up enables them to be involved, and they 

want to be involved in things which affect them.  As the 

discussion continues, increasingly there is a group in the centre, 

a silent majority, who are increasingly comfortable with the 

process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your 

own internal department document says that you intend to go 

through the back door.  One amendment you are proposing to 

change relates to the new section requiring an employer to offer 

additional hours to the most senior part-time worker.  Your 

internal document advises that, and I quote: 

 

The distinction between addressing applications by 

regulation rather than providing exemptions by regulations 

is subtle but significant.  Regulations become even more 

critical to the legislative framework governing this 

provision. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, there it is in black and white.  The regulations are 

critical to the legislative framework, by your own admission.  

Mr. Minister, you have promised many business associations 

that you would provide a draft of the regulations before this 

Bill was passed.  Given your new back-door policy, will you 

table those regulations today in this Assembly?  Will you do 

that for us, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, we make no apologies 

whatsoever for the discussion which has gone on on all sides of 

this issue.  The discussion has been useful and we are forging a 

consensus, although 

I admit there are uncompromising voices on all sides of this 

issue.  But increasingly in the centre there is a group who like 

the process. 

 

With respect to the regulations, I say to the hon. member that as 

the discussion has progressed, increasingly both sides are 

uncomfortable with the notion of regulations being tabled in the 

House when the Bill is passed.  They want an unfettered ability 

to talk about these in the sectorial committees which we're 

going to set up to draft regulations, and they don't want their 

hands tied by a set of regulations which are premature. 

 

So as the discussion has progressed, increasingly people are 

comfortable with the way we're going to draft the regulations, 

and they want the process left to that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I'll arrange to give you leave 

this afternoon if you will table those regulations.  Will you do 

that today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think I can authoritatively say, 

if you'll give us leave to go to Committee of the Whole today 

on labour standards, we'll do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't know how clear this can possibly get, 

but we need to have it exactly clear. There are many examples 

in your internal document that show that you are 

double-dealing with business groups.  They want to know the 

answers. 

 

Are you telling them that you are deleting certain clauses in 

Bill 32, knowing full well that you can accomplish the same 

thing through the regulations?  For instance, in the document 

you handed to the business groups, you proposed to delete a 

clause which includes leaves in the definition of benefits which 

would extend to part-time workers, but your internal document 

says that while this may be considered a significant policy 

change, "authority already exists to include leaves in the 

definition through regulation". 

 

Mr. Minister, you appear to be setting yourself up to do 

whatever you please through the regulations.  Do you not think 

that it would be appropriate for all of those who are affected in 

the debate to have a chance to be in that debate before you 

come down with the final legislation?  Is that a reasonable 

request, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- To the extent that I can understand 

that question . . . I want to say to the hon. member opposite 

he'll get plenty of time to see the House amendments in 

Committee of the Whole.  And if I correctly detect a note of 

impatience in the member's voice, I can tell you there's an easy 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

solution: give us leave to proceed to Committee of the Whole 

in The Labour Standards Act and you'll see them this 

afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think we have to finish second reading 

debates first, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister you have botched this whole process from the 

very start, and it's only getting worse.  And because of that, you 

intend to make the changes through the back door and behind 

closed doors.  That's pretty obvious.  You offer a challenge that 

can't be served.  Bill 32 gives you the power of, and I quote: 

 

defining, enlarging or restricting any word or phrase in the 

Act. 

 

That's your comments, Mr. Minister.  After the Premier 

appointed the member from Saskatoon Fairview as the sole 

arbitrator of things that are just, he appoints you, the Minister 

of Labour, as the sole determiner of any word or phrase in The 

Labour Standards Act.  Now, Mr. Minister, if you are unwilling 

to table the regulations now, free of encumbrances, in this 

House as requested by every business group in the province, 

will you do the only other honourable thing?  Will you pull this 

legislation, take it right out, and start again?   Begin from the 

start, and bring it in in the next session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm having a little difficulty, Mr. 

Speaker, in getting a clear focus on the member's agenda.  First 

of all he wants to do it this afternoon; he's impatient to see 

them.  And then he doesn't ever want to do it.  If the member 

could give us a clear comment on when you want to do these, it 

would be a lot easier to accommodate you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Gaming 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, a 

well-thought-out casino policy should be supported by research 

and shown by studies to be viable.  I quote from your own 

news release, quote: 

 

Beginning with only two casinos will allow us time to 

assess the performance and impact of this type of gaming 

on the province.  Saskatchewan has a limited gaming 

market. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, you must have done an economic impact study to 

determine whether Saskatchewan can support the increased 

levels of gaming that you propose, a study that details the 

economic and social cost of what your gaming policy will be.  

Who did it and where can I get a copy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Let me say to the member from Greystone that we have in fact 

spent an awful lot of time studying the issue with respect to the 

introduction of the video lottery terminals and the casino 

project as well.  And I think the member full well knows that 

the information that we have gathered would indicate that.  And 

anyone involved in the gaming industry will tell you that the 

way to locate and the place to locate a casino development 

would be in the areas where you have the greatest market 

potential and that would be in your greatest population areas. 

 

Looking at all of those factors, looking at other jurisdictions 

and how they have established their operations, consulting with 

people who have been involved in the industry over a number 

of years, it became clear to us that the two options we outlined 

in our policy -- that being Regina and Saskatoon -- made most 

economic sense to us. 

 

With respect to the impact as for dollars on the provincial 

economy, I think she will know that we have limited casino 

involvement in this province.  The expansion of casinos will in 

fact generate more dollars.  We have been told by the 

consultants who we deal with the number of slot-machines that 

the market would be able to handle, we've been told the number 

of table games that the market would be able handle, as well as 

the VLTs (video lottery terminals).  The video lottery 

terminals, we have introduced 50 per cent of what the market 

potential is. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite that we have taken a very 

cautious approach to development and we will continue in a 

very cautious vein in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

can take it from what you've said that you can't tell us who did 

your studies nor will you be providing us with a copy.  Dr. 

Shirer is an associate director of the International Gaming 

Institute of the University of Nevada.  He spoke with us about 

the danger in promoting too much gaming in what he calls the 

closed economy.  Shirer says that there are good gaming and 

bad gambling models.  The Las Vegas model and others must 

rely on tourists coming to gamble and golf and see 

entertainment, and these are considered good models because 

the betting revenue comes from outside the local economies.  

However gaming in a closed economy with a limited 

population like Saskatchewan presents a danger of taking too 

much money out of the local economy.  Shirer says that that 

could cost either the casinos or the local economy to collapse 

over time. 

 

What assessment has been done to compare the existing 

economy, including levels of tourist traffic, to other 

jurisdictions that have had a gaming industry for years?  Have 

you done that study, Mr. Minister, to see what level of 

gambling we can actually support? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, it becomes clearer and 

clearer that perhaps the member from Greystone is starting to 

have a look at our gaming 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

policy and is adopting, I guess maybe based on some articles in 

the Star-Phoenix, is adopting our policy, and now is coming 

onside and is in agreement. 

 

But we're still not sure, Mr. Speaker, which in her mind is good 

gaming and which is bad gaming because we've not been able 

to determine that.  We get some sense that in fact horse racing 

is good gaming, but video lottery terminals is not good gaming.  

Now I would like a little clarification from her as to which 

forms of gaming she supports and which she doesn't, as would 

her constituents. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Speaker.  I have told the member from 

Greystone before that we intend to take a very cautious 

approach.  We have consulted with a number of professionals 

and a number of people involved in the industry, and I can 

assure the member today that we will not overdevelop gaming.  

We will do it in a very sensible fashion.  We will develop it in 

terms of what the market will bear, and that is the approach we 

intend to take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you say that your 

government is expanding casinos in order to keep gamblers in 

Saskatchewan from going elsewhere.  Winnipeg just built two 

huge gaming centres, and the bus tours to Minnesota casinos 

from Winnipeg has doubled in volume.  But your policy says, 

and I will quote: 

 

More Saskatchewan gaming dollars are flowing across our 

borders every day to other jurisdictions, and casino 

expansion in Saskatchewan can stem that flow. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, experts in the gaming industry say that 

there is no foundation whatsoever in research to support your 

claim and that in fact trends in the gaming industry indicate that 

the very opposite is true.  Mr. Minister, what study -- and I 

emphasize again -- what specific study did your government do 

to support the claims that people will not travel to the United 

States to gamble if you build mega-casinos in Saskatoon and 

Regina? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member is 

trying to mount the argument that if we have no gaming 

opportunities in this province that people will go out of the 

province just the same as they do if we have a gaming 

experience in this province, Mr. Speaker, no one has ever 

suggested that people will not in fact get on a bus or take an 

airplane to a different climate to have a bit of a holiday over the 

weekend -- nobody has ever said that.  But if the member 

makes the argument that expanded casinos will not stop or at 

least slow down the outflow of Saskatchewan dollars to other 

jurisdictions, then I would suggest to her she should perhaps 

reconsider her thoughts and she should have another look at 

what her analysts are telling her to be the case. 

If you close off a market, it certainly isn't going to stop the 

outflow of dollars from this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, the experts don't think you 

have a clue about what you're doing.  Dr. Shirer states that 

another significant factor in the overall success or failure of 

gaming is the, and I quote: "government take-out percentage", 

end of quote, from casinos and from slot-machines. 

 

According to this renowned expert from the International 

Gaming Institute, there is a 20 per cent tax levied in Colorado 

by the government on the gross intake of the operators, which 

is what you're doing.  Due to that unreasonable withdrawal, 30 

casinos have folded in Colorado in the last nine months. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what research have you done to indicate 

that the Saskatchewan economy and the local economies that 

will provide the hundred million dollars that you intend to rake 

off through VLTs can sustain that level of support?  Just tell us 

and table today all of the studies that you've done that prove 

your point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say this:  

the hon. member has been batting figures around this 

legislature for a number of months.  And so I guess maybe 

what I would ask, if she would table the documentation that 

would suggest that there is a hundred million dollars of 

expanded casino revenue to be gained.  I'd like to see that study 

because I'm clearly not acquainted with her studies. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Speaker: we have studied this issue for a 

number of months and we will continue to study this as we 

develop our casinos.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we've 

taken a very cautious approach. 

 

The member opposite last year was encouraging us to hurry up 

because there was 50, $60 million of gaming revenue last year 

to be gained from the video lottery terminals.  We had 

budgeted in the neighbour of 25, $30 million.  And we did that 

based on other experiences in other provinces.  We did that 

based on other experiences in some states and some of the 

Maritime states, in terms of what we could expect to generate 

for revenue.  It wasn't that we picked the figure out of the sky. 

 

And we think we're going to be very close in terms of our 

revenue projections, just as we will when we finally put some 

casino revenue into the provincial budget.  We'll be very close 

then too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (Board of Internal Economy 

powers) 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act (Board of Internal Economy powers). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Resolution No. 52 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day I would like to draw 

the attention of the Assembly to resolution no. 52 on the order 

paper, which stands on today's order paper under the name of 

the member for Kindersley. 

 

The purpose of a resolution is to allow for a clear and distinct 

expression of opinion by members on a definite subject.  The 

proposed motion of the member in this instance is to have the 

Assembly express an opinion that the government should create 

a utility review committee.  I must point out that the subject of 

resolution no. 52 is substantially the same as the motion moved 

by the same member under rule 17 on March 31, 1994.  

Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, paragraph 558 states as follows, and 

I quote: 

 

"That a question being once made and carried in the 

affirmative or negative, cannot be questioned again but 

must stand as a judgment of the House."  Unless such a 

rule were in existence, the time of the House might be 

used in the discussion of a motion of the same nature and 

contradictory decisions would be sometimes arrived at in 

the course of the same session. 

 

This principle is also addressed in paragraph 480 of 

Beauchesne's, 6th Edition, which members may wish to refer. 

 

Because the Assembly did pass judgement on the member's 

motion of March 31, I find that resolution no. 52 is out of order 

and is hereby withdrawn from today's order paper. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it is private 

members' day today, Tuesday, given the discussion that went 

on during question period, I would ask for leave to move to 

adjourned debates, Bill 32. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 51 -- Federal Government Social Safety Net 

Review 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, at the 

conclusion of my remarks I'll move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly call on the federal 

government to acknowledge that the real goal of social 

safety net review is to provide economic development and 

jobs; and further, that the federal government not use its 

current reform exercise as an excuse to abdicate its 

responsibility by arbitrarily removing dollars from the 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you don't know where you're going, any road 

could just very well get you there.  This is not the case with 

Saskatchewan when we talk economic development and jobs.  

We've had an approach that's involved a broad base of our 

communities.  We've brought together business and labour, 

small groups of people who've been involved in community 

activities and community-based projects and development, to 

speak with us and develop a project, Partnership for Renewal, 

our statement and document on economic development. 

 

And we know that hand in hand with that we must look at 

social development and social activity and reform in the areas 

of social safety nets.  So we know that a review is necessary.  

What we're hoping is that the federal government does have a 

goal or an end result in mind, and that with that approach we're 

going to be getting somewhere in the area of economic 

development and jobs. 

 

(1415) 

 

We're not arguing that there's no program . . . no argument in 

our government that there's a need to look at programs and 

solutions that have been in place for many years, and there's a 

need to update, to address the gaps in some of the programs and 

services, and to reflect changes that have occurred within the 

economy, and in particular, to address the gaps that have been 

raised by 10 years, 10 solid years, of a right-wing agenda. 

 

With the federal government as a key funder of social programs 

-- we're looking at today in the area of 75 to 80 per cent of the 

social programs being funded at the federal government level -- 

we want to see the overarching goals speak to job creation and 

economic development at this level as well.  This is where 

we're going; we want the same strong commitment before we 

design paths with only one direction in mind, whether it be the 

social safety net programs, whether it be job creation and 

training initiatives for jobs; before we design paths that take us 

down the road to social safety nets; before we design the path 

that takes us to job training; before we develop programs to 

support families and children -- before we do that, we want the 

commitment, and the strong commitment, to economic 

developments and jobs, sustainable jobs, for all Canadians. 

 

In other words let's work together on an integrated, on a holistic 

approach to the issue before us, to find solutions for today.  We 

worry in Saskatchewan that this could become an exercise to 

address a single goal.  And that goal of only removing dollars 

from the system, rather than utilizing the few resource dollars 

that we have as an opportunity to meet current needs 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

with improved program services and improved supports for 

families and people who are working toward a job that will 

support themselves and their families in today's society. 

 

And why do we worry?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we worry because 

in the last while Saskatchewan has been impacted by the 

federal offloading, and in a significant way.  In the area of 

unemployment, we've seen cut-backs of $31 million in 1993 

and '94. This has been an increased social assistance cost 

through changes to the unemployment insurance.  We've seen 

$5.5 million in 1994 and '95, and $17 million in '95-96, as a 

further impact on the unemployment insurance cut-backs from 

the '94-95 federal budget, to Saskatchewan. 

 

We've seen in the area of INAC (Indian and Northern Affairs 

Canada) offloading, $41 million dollars. It's a withdrawal from 

the Indian and native affairs off-reserve social assistance 

funding and reimbursement for off-reserve children in care.  

And that's before the cost-sharing formula. 

 

In the CAP (Canada Assistance Plan) freezes we've 

experienced $67 million in lost revenue by the end of 1996 and 

'97.  And this is due to the federal budget freezing Canada 

Assistance Plan payments at the '94 and '95 levels. 

 

We've seen a further $1.5 million cost to the province in the 

federal ceiling on young offenders and legal aid cost-sharing 

agreements -- federal offloading at a time where they say they 

want to seriously consider a social safety net review.  These are 

indeed the reasons why at Saskatchewan's level, we worry. 

 

Well to put this whole issue in a context, and a Saskatchewan 

context, I think we have to look at it in, first, the larger 

framework of what's been going on around us, and in particular 

in the world around us.  And we see that beginning with the 

1979 election of Margaret Thatcher, we see it in the Ronald 

Reaganism, in the election of Mulroney and the Conservative 

governments at the federal level -- a pervasive revolution of 

public thinking that has affected not only those parties, it's 

affected every individual party and individual person in not 

only our country but many countries. 

 

The monetarist revolution we call it.  It's a pervasive revolution 

that tries to allow us to think that the large corporate agenda is 

somehow going to be a good agenda, a good citizens' agenda, 

in that they will somehow in the trickle-down theory, if we give 

them enough tax breaks, we give them enough dollars to work 

with, they're going to provide some jobs; they're going to create 

jobs in the community and that they'll have a responsibility to 

the community, in which they are making their dollars and their 

profits, to address job creation. 

 

Well it hasn't happened.  And no one should be fooled into 

thinking that it ever will happen.  If we haven't seen it now, 

we're not going to see it no matter what we do with the large 

corporate agenda, to see other 

than a commitment to profit and how best they can maximize 

their profits; no addressing of a commitment to the community 

in which those profits are being gleaned and made. 

 

We see the idea that the community should believe that the 

high deficits and the debts that are chalked up before us are 

somehow the result of high social spending.  And we know that 

it's just not true.  And in particular, you don't have to look far 

before you look at our Saskatchewan economy and know the 

reason why we've had the high deficits and the dollars chalked 

up.  It was to: megaprojects will mean megajobs. 

 

Well we've seen megaprojects mean megaheartache and pain 

for the province of Saskatchewan, and we'll be seeing that pain 

for many years to come as we deal with the idea of corporate 

responsibilities that walk away from their commitment to a 

community that provides them dollars to address jobs and job 

creation. 

 

It's not high social spending by any means that has created the 

situation that our communities are in, and it should not be that 

area that bears the brunt of the kinds of deliberate political 

decision-making that has got us to where we are today. 

 

What we have seen as a result of that is a reduction in the 

labour force.  We've seen a change from full-time employment 

becoming the norm to it becoming a variable, and more and 

more part-time employment becoming the norm.  People trying 

to look at one part-time job, perhaps two or three, to either 

bolster their small income in their family to providing full-time 

responsibility for three workplaces to make their family a go, to 

provide the resources that their family needs for their education 

and for their sustenance and shelter -- food and clothing for 

their families. 

 

And we've seen the goals of that agenda.  The first goal is 

always to provide a large surplus labour pool, one that is 

scrambling and saying, well I'd rather have a job than no job 

and so I'll take it at any cost; I need this job.  And they're 

scrambling and looking around at each other and saying, if it's 

not me taking it, there's at least 20 or 30 people in line to get 

the same job.  And it benefits that kind of agenda to have that 

happening. 

 

The next part of that agenda says, well let's wound labour and 

let's discredit some of the kinds of things that the labour 

movement has tried to achieve.  Because if we divide that 

wedge we can see then we also don't have to provide the kinds 

of benefits; we don't have to provide the responsibility at a 

corporate level.  We'll offload that to a community 

responsibility to provide the long-term benefits such as looking 

after people when they're of pensionable age, some of the 

health care benefits and services, and so on.  And so that 

agenda is always to wound the credibility of labour. 

 

And as we've seen it, it's an agenda to hold down the minimum 

wage for as long as possible.  This is more 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

dependent on the short-term resource exploitation.  It's in the 

short term taking all of the resources you can and trying to 

maximize your profit with no return to the community. 

 

And we've heard lately about it saying that in the long term, 

well we're going to connect to the high-tech and high-scale 

jobs.  In Saskatchewan we look at that as a growing technology 

base, but we don't put all our eggs in that basket and say that 

somehow this new information highway or the high 

technology, the electronics, are going to do it for everyone, that 

that's the answer right across the board for everyone.  But we 

hear it more and more at the federal level that somehow this is 

going to create the jobs. 

 

Well this goal and this agenda that's been set by the monetarist 

revolution and the right-wing agenda that I see more and more 

prevalent in not only the Liberals across from us, but the 

Liberals in Ottawa, because we always see a Liberal campaign 

as a socialist and end up as a capitalist; we've seen more and 

more of this same direction that has occurred in the history 

before.  It's occurred in the '20s; it's occurred in the '30s in this 

country. 

 

So it worries us that the social safety net review is happening 

without the strong statement that the overarching goal and the 

way we're going is to job creation and economic development 

in this country. 

 

We acknowledge that the Liberals are talking about, let's train a 

supply of labour; let's get people into the workforce and into a 

pool of employment.  But they're not saying, how are we going 

to create those jobs; how are we going to get jobs that are going 

to be sustainable and keep people in a good employment level, 

and a job that pays to provide the benefits and resources that 

their family needs to sustain themselves. 

 

It worries us because of the tight consultation time frames, and 

that you're pushed into saying, well let's take one of those short 

pathways.  Rather than to keep our eye on the main goal, let's 

take ourselves down one of those short time-frame pathways 

and let's just work on that and that will be the answer. 

 

We should be saying that we're looking at that as a road to 

somewhere and put the flags up if we're not going in that 

direction, if we continue down the road of the last at least 10 

years, of saying let's continue our attack on the welfare state 

and continue our attack on social programs, as if they're the 

reason why we have the problems of unemployment in the 

country today. 

 

You'll see that agenda has new code words to use as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  They're using the code words of, we have to be 

selective in what we're doing, because we're carefully 

managing scarce resources.  So selectivity is very important.  

And it is if you're only looking at that one narrow pathway and 

that one narrow direction. 

 

And we're going to have to target, we're going to have to make 

sure that people are entitled to those benefits. 

And somehow entitlement is going to be very important, 

because we all know of people who have had some abuses and 

we want to make sure the dollars are going where they should 

go. 

 

If you're going down one narrow road with one narrow focus, 

then of course you can use those words.  And for many people, 

they'll pick that up and say, that's right, that's what we need to 

do today.  And it's just only such a small part of the solution 

and the answer that needs to happen for this country and for 

this province. 

 

The first goal of that agenda says, well we're going to talk 

about one pathway that says structurally there are a lot of 

disincentives to employment.  And all of these are correct.  

There are many disincentives built into the system that keep 

people in the welfare circle and the welfare state. 

 

And when we did the mayor's task force on inquiry into 

poverty and hunger, we looked at a lot of those. And some of 

them are that whole cliff that people drop into or drop off of, 

when they're going to someone who's dependent on social 

assistance, dependent on programs and services that are 

provided by society as a whole, and find themselves into a 

working situation, but a very low income job or a job that's in a 

very impermanent state, or a part-time, short-term job. 

 

And once they have achieved that they feel, I'm really doing 

something now; at least I'm starting back on the track.  And 

they find that all of the supports drop out from under them. 

Taxation steps in and says that I'm going to provide a further 

disincentive to you being able to keep that job because I'm 

going to further penalize you.  And there are so many ways that 

once a person tries to make that move from being dependent to 

independent, they have the support networks and systems 

dropped out from under them. 

 

And one of the things that we want to look at and one of the 

areas that we must look at is saying how we can carry people 

from that state of dependency on those programs and services, 

to the independence.  And that includes a number of areas to 

look at, including tax fairness; including looking at the 

statistics of where the age groups are that need help, that need 

the most help; and includes providing the hope for youth that 

there are going to be the jobs to be attained and that they are 

going to move from some of the dependency systems that are in 

place to the independence that they've worked so hard to 

achieve; and they've worked through their training programs or 

through their education to achieve that. 

 

But they know that alone isn't the answer.  Because a number 

of our youth have gone out and they've got the education, 

they've got the training, they've got the work skills. And they're 

saying, where are the jobs, where's the opportunity, where's the 

economic development strategy?  And let's keep our eye on that 

as the main goal and the main direction. 

 

(1430) 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1323 

So we know that the answer isn't that people are locked into 

disincentives, and so we can get busy -- and we will -- at that 

level.  We'll begin the discussions and we will work on that one 

pathway of talking about, well what are the disincentives. And 

we'll spend some time doing that. 

 

But the real goal and the real answer is there are not enough 

jobs and there are not enough jobs that are available in that 

middle income area.  Because what we've seen over the last 

number of years are jobs in the top income brackets have 

increased.  The big corporate dollar jobs have increased at the 

top levels.  We've seen a spreading out and an increasing of the 

jobs in the bottom strata, those jobs that people revolve in and 

out of; we've seen those increase.  Part-time jobs, service jobs 

increase at the bottom. 

 

But we've seen a continuing attack on the middle income jobs 

and a continuing cutting back in the middle jobs that are 

disappearing in our communities and in our economy. 

 

So the removal of the disincentives, although that's an issue and 

must be addressed, to only open up and allow that revolving 

door in and out of that bottom part-time strata, or the bottom 

lower paid jobs, it's not going to address that area of the middle 

income jobs and the sustainable jobs that people vie for when 

they go to get a job training application, when they go to apply 

to a university, or they attend SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology) or our technical colleges. 

 

So we worry that the social security review not be just a 

cosmetic value, not be just geared to those individual narrow 

pathways that will do something that they must draw our 

attention and have some part-time attention paid to them, but 

we want to be able to look toward a direction where we say 

those who are marginalized from our economy now become 

active participants in the economy. 

 

And that calls for an economic development strategy and a 

government who's willing to employ the levers that we need to 

see economic stimulation and jobs. 

 

We have a province that feels that way; we obviously as a 

province in the direction we take and say, yes, we have a 

significant role to play in economic development and job 

creation.  And that role is to bring together people to facilitate 

the discussions that are already out there, the entrepreneurial 

spirit and the energy of communities; to bring them together in 

REDAs (regional economic development authority); to talk 

with them and say, what can be sustained in your communities? 

 

Not that government is going to somehow find the 

megaproject, the big smokestack and stick it out in your 

community and it's boom or bust.  But to talk with those 

communities, those small clusters and say, what can we do in 

your community that is going to provide the longer-term jobs 

that are going to be sustainable in an economy.  And we look at 

that and target the dollars that we have to the resources of the 

value added areas 

in our economy; to look at the areas of manufacturing; to look 

at the Main Street small-business communities, and try and 

address the taxation levels that they have and experience so that 

we can free up some dollars for them to provide jobs in their 

communities. 

 

Obviously, Saskatchewan feels we have a role to play in the 

economic levers of the province and a commitment to jobs 

when we look at the labour legislation that's before us -- The 

Labour Standards Act, the update and review; so it reflects the 

people who are in that economy and the growing numbers of 

women and young people who are becoming part of that 

economy. 

 

And we believe that if we've got the means to deploy the 

economic levers, we know the federal government, with the 

main responsibility for jobs and job training and development, 

have the levers that can be employed as well. 

 

And we want to see that as their main goal and their main thrust 

as we work with all of the other things that they've been talking 

about in the areas of workforce readiness, in job creation or in 

job training, in the initiatives that they pull together in those 

areas. 

 

But we still want to know that with all the work that we're 

going to do as a province in the social security reform project at 

the federal government level, in the work that we're going to do 

with our Department of Social Services, our Department of 

Education, Employment and Training, and the work that we're 

going to do and we're committed to do with the federal 

government and work in partnership, that at the same time 

they're not going to use it as an excuse to pull dollars out from 

under us without recognizing that the loss of dollars is going to 

have a direct impact on what we can accomplish in our 

community in these areas, and do it without the goal in mind 

and without the areas that we want to put up as the road signs 

and the directions we should be taking in job creation and 

training, in programs and services, the principles in the child 

action plans that we developed, in the integrated, holistic 

approach to health care and to social services and community 

supports for our seniors and the people that are out there. 

 

While we work on those, we want to know that the real goals 

are ahead of them, and the real game plan isn't to, on the short 

term, withdraw the dollars. 

 

It would be a mistake for us to argue within narrow boundaries 

that the review shouldn't happen and that we shouldn't go into 

that review.  We want to, and we as Saskatchewan people have 

always been leaders when we talk about reform and review, 

and that's happened right before us in the last few years that 

we've been working together.  But we want to broaden this 

discussion, before we begin it, to real job creation initiatives 

and development of those initiatives. 

 

Not just words, Mr. Speaker.  Let's put our actions together, 

and let's work in a direction that says, yes we know we have 

less dollars to work with.  It's not the 



1324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

fault of the social safety net programs.  It's not the fault of 

social spending.  Let's lay that on the doorstep where it 

belongs.  It's in the areas of taxation policy, on the give-aways 

to the large corporate agenda, on the idea of increased 

globalization at any cost, free trade agreements and NAFTA 

(North American Free Trade Agreement) agreements that don't 

take into account what's happening in the larger picture of 

saying that we're going to have economic development in each 

region of our country and in each region of our province. 

 

So when we're talking about some of these areas of reform, we 

want to look at any discussion also containing something that's 

very important wherever I go and whenever I talk to people. 

 

And in particular, if you look at the growing numbers of people 

involved in the economy, how can you begin to talk about 

reform of these programs if you don't hold out the idea of a 

national day care strategy?  It's not because women want to go 

out there and work for the added little extras for their family.  

We all know that women need to work to support the family.  

Many women are single parents; they have to work to support 

their children and to support the food and clothing and shelter 

that their family unit needs. 

 

We've accepted the idea that those women can be an active part 

of our economy, and yet we talk about the reforming of 

programs, reforming of the social safety net structures, and we 

don't talk about a national day care strategy. 

 

We know then that the review will be driven by an income 

security-side review and we know that hopefully, that with 

some of the discussions, that it'll break down some of the 

rigidities and the vying for the envelopes of dollars.  And that 

somehow in this review the federal government's going to 

recognize that when we provide integrated approaches and 

holistic approaches, that areas of their country recognize what 

those individual needs are and the approaches should be. 

 

We've seen them throughout the province, growing up -- the 

Buffalo Flats area.  We've seen approaches to economic 

development in some of the smaller Main Street businesses 

expanding with some of the bits of dollars that we've given 

them for the expansion that's targeted to the six strategic areas 

of our economic development plan.  We've seen that grow in all 

areas of our economy. 

 

We've seen the approaches and the creativity of people in 

providing jobs in the health care sector, as their health care 

initiatives change from a curative approach to a preventative 

approach.  And people look at that and say, well what jobs are 

needed to sustain a preventative health care system?  And to 

change their roles, and change their ideas on employment to 

meet those needs in our economy. 

 

So we've got a picture in Saskatchewan of what that could be.  

We know the community-based, cooperative, compassionate 

approach works.  But we 

know it's not the approach that says it's the individual to blame 

for being unemployed, or somehow if that individual . . . well 

let's say on the short-term, will work and we'll get them better 

trained, or we'll train them differently. 

 

So, well we'll go ahead and do that, but where are the jobs for 

those people who we're now training, or saying there is hope 

and we want to have the initiatives to more training and 

development?  We have to, when we go into the social safety 

net review process, know that the federal government is very 

quickly going to set out where they're going.  So that it's not 

any path we take will get us there; it's that the varied 

approaches that we use, the creative approaches we use, have 

an approach to that goal; that then when we look at the ideas of, 

let's train, we're going to train for the jobs that are sustainable 

in community economic development initiatives.  And in 

Saskatchewan we know what those are. 

 

When we want to provide that short-term safe place for people 

to be until they are able to access that job, we know that there's 

a role for government to play in doing that.  We want to 

provide that sheltered spot, but we don't want to make it the 

spot that the corporate agenda has created for people and to say 

that you're now not into a safe shelter spot until your job arrives 

and until you utilize your training and your education.  But 

you're going to sit in that spot for a long time because you're 

part of a large pool that the corporations and the large business 

places can use to draw on as a source of cheap labour and a 

way to destabilize and revolve you through the lower paying, 

the lower status jobs in our society. 

 

We want to return to the idea that the individual has the 

initiative, he has the dignity and respect of all governments, 

and that governments now are working together for the 

solutions -- not just the short-term answer here and there, but 

the true solutions to what needs to happen in all of our 

communities. 

 

There are things that we certainly, at the level of Saskatchewan, 

have to offer in ideas and in the approaches that we're using 

and the role model that we can provide.  We have it here; we'd 

be glad to be involved. But when we're involved, we're going to 

aim high in everything we do.  We're aiming for real literacy, 

real numeracy, real employment opportunities that lead to real 

employment for our citizens in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we do a social safety net reform review 

with the federal government, we know that there are some areas 

that the federal government will want to retain responsibility 

for, and they retain the ability to do that and they know how to 

do that well. 

 

If they look at, number one, the area of tax reform and how 

their taxation schedules can address the issue of where the 

dollars are going, to have an agenda that says there's a 

responsibility to the person who's making the large income 

having some agenda and responsibility to the community to 

provide the jobs within that community. 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1325 

We know that the federal government has the responsibility and 

can do a job to look at in some ways addressing support for 

child hunger and poverty through their child tax initiatives, 

through their income security reviews. 

 

We know that they have a role to play in the broad picture and 

maintaining the broad principles and keeping us all on track 

with the broad goals and objectives in mind.  And it's their 

responsibility and their level of dollar involvement that can 

lead this province.  The province has been a leader and can lead 

as an example to other provinces in the whole discussion of 

what truly we mean by economic stimulation and job creation, 

going into the next century. 

 

We know that means talking about, in the short-term, the 

infrastructure -- not only the streets and roads and the 

infrastructure program that in the short term will provide the 

extra few jobs here and there, but the long-term infrastructure 

that we're developing. And we have a role, and a leadership 

role to play in education and health and social development and 

day care and other areas. 

 

We have a role to play in providing more support for families 

that will encourage communities to be involved at all levels, 

and that can be the facilitators, the seed funders, the energizing, 

the mobilizing of communities at all levels to come together to 

develop realistic expectations and realistic middle income jobs 

for the communities that in turn provide the tax levels that 

support small business in their communities, support services 

and programs for their communities, and in the long run will 

serve us all at a much better level and a much better program 

and service delivered to our children, our seniors, our people 

who are greatest in need in our community. 

 

But for the rest of us, will get us involved in meaningful jobs 

that provide sustainable support for our communities and turn 

our approach into a holistic approach that is sound in its 

infrastructure, sound in its architecture, and sound in 

addressing the real issue that's before this country and this 

province, in the hope for our youth and for our middle income 

earners, our people who are now seeing the loss of middle 

income jobs and want to see a return to employment in their 

middle years. 

 

(1445) 

 

We'll all take ownership for that.  We will go into this social 

safety net reform with that in mind.  We're asking of the federal 

government that in the short term they not continue to pull the 

rug out from under us in this review, by pulling out the dollars 

in a holus-bolus approach in a short-term, unilateral cut-back of 

the dollars without knowing how that impacts on the individual 

areas. 

 

Let's stop that review as an approach to, in the short run, using 

it as a guise to arbitrarily remove their levers in the economy 

and use it to go forward and look at 

the opportunities that it presents itself to design and deliver 

programs in social security way that meet needs of people, 

develop program supports for families and children in our 

communities, and that is necessary to see creative new ideas 

coming forward that will provide economic development, job 

creation, and training for everyone in this province.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I urge members to support the motion before us that will give 

the message to the federal government that they acknowledge 

that the real goal of a social safety net review is to provide 

economic development and jobs, and further that the federal 

government not use its current reform exercise as an excuse to 

abdicate its responsibility by arbitrarily removing dollars from 

the system in the short term, in a short time.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Moved by myself, the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains, and seconded by the member from Regina 

Lake Centre. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

second the resolution, the motion put forward by the member 

from Wascana Plains, and to reiterate the need for the focus on 

jobs and economic development, not merely cost cutting in the 

income security review process. 

 

The safety net that Canadians have built has been built up 

slowly over the years, and it's been built in response to real 

needs that developed in our society.  We didn't just arbitrarily 

decide to initiate these programs; they were all built in response 

to some crisis that was taking place in our society. 

 

But we've built these programs well, and I think they've 

contributed to our economic strength in terms of our educated 

population, our trained workers, and a fairly secure social 

environment as demonstrated by many people from across the 

world who would like to come and live in Canada and benefit 

from this very strong social and economic net that we've built. 

 

Now there's been many modifications to these programs over 

the years as circumstances have changed.  And in a way we've 

tinkered away at the system to the point that in many ways it 

really doesn't function any more either for the purposes that we 

originally constructed it or for the needs of the current 

economy.  So it is time for Canadians to rethink these social 

and economic priorities; but it is important that this reform be 

comprehensive and that it involves the active, informed 

participation of all the public, the groups and communities, and 

all levels of government who were involved in initially building 

these systems.  It would be very unwise to get into changing 

these systems quickly when in fact it's taken a great deal of 

time to put them thoughtfully in place over the years. 

 

Now most of our income security programs, Mr. Speaker, were 

designed in an era of strong demand for labour at all skill 

levels.  An individual could leave 



1326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

 at almost any age and find work fairly quickly.  I know when 

we graduated from high school, the longest we might have to 

go without a job would maybe be a couple of weeks if we were 

looking hard for one.  And that really isn't the situation now for 

young people. 

 

Labour markets have changed; and some of the traditional 

sources of high wage, high benefit employment, such as 

resource and manufacturing sectors, have cut their jobs.  And 

small companies are hiring, but they often pay less and have 

fewer benefits and less stability, less hours of work. 

 

Globalization and technology have changed the kind of basic 

skills that people require, and that's meant that even skilled 

workers find that their skills don't match the current economy.  

And so we find people at the age of 50 and over who all of a 

sudden find themselves out of work and their skills outdated, 

and they're trying to go back to university at the very time that 

their children are in university.  And it creates a double-edged 

income problem for the family that's trying to keep up with the 

changes. 

 

For many people UI (unemployment insurance) has become a 

regular source of income, and in effect subsidizes seasonal 

employment in many places in Canada.  So perhaps it's time 

with that area that we have to recognize the real needs in the 

community and quit pretending that an unemployment 

insurance program is going to meet that particular need. 

 

The social assistance programs are a last resort, but 

unfortunately a lot of people are now on the assistance rolls 

who were never intended to be there.  There's many people who 

have assets, who have homes, cars, debts, etc., and never 

expected to find themselves unemployed.  And the particular 

social assistance programs were really never designed as 

anything but a last resort, so they're really not up to coping with 

some of the new kinds of recipients who, due to cuts to 

unemployment insurance programs and what not, are finding 

themselves instead on social assistance when they thought in 

fact they would be re-employed within the time period allotted 

for the receipt of that assistance. 

 

And if we look a little further to the people who spend 

sometime several generations on social assistance, helping 

them achieve self-reliance becomes a very difficult problem 

because there's often no coherent link between the other 

support programs such as counselling and training, 

unemployment insurance. 

 

One good case in point that I wouldn't mind taking a minute to 

explain is, if a person in this country is on disability allowance, 

if they decide to take a chance on unemployment, they 

automatically lose their right to return to disability.  So even 

though they may not really have the skills to participate in the 

economy and they may not really be job-ready in many 

respects, the very fact that they venture out and attempt to take 

a job could forever close the door to the disability pension.  

And the problem with that is a disability pays a lot more than 

social assistance. 

So it becomes a barrier to people to get out of those programs if 

in fact once you're out, you're permanently out and you can 

never go back in again.  And it sort of slams the door behind 

them, when in fact with a little more flexibility they might be 

able to venture out and either successfully stay there or go back 

for a second round when something else comes up. 

 

Adult education and training is on the rise, referring back to the 

comment about a lot of us are in school now and at university 

retraining the same time that our children are in school.  We 

have to figure out how to solve this problem because no family 

really can support the costs of having all family members in 

school at the same time.  And that needs to be considered in the 

income security review. 

 

More job related training is needed.  A lot of the programs I've 

participated in over the years as I've worked with training in 

aboriginal communities and with youth on the streets of 

Regina, the training was never particularly linked to anything.  

And that wasn't through poor intent of the people running the 

programs.  The fact was that there was a very short-term focus 

on the program. 

 

So as long as you were able to keep somebody busy and I guess 

out of everyone's hair for a few months, that was sort of the 

short-term objective of the program.  But it never really linked 

up to strategic community development plans, or strategic 

economic development plans, which would actually tie that 

person in to some kind of sustainable employment within their 

community. 

 

The income security issue links to school policy because high 

drop-out rates feed high youth unemployment.  Whatever you 

can say about high unemployment, the fact is that high 

education correlates almost directly to highest potential for 

employment, and low education correlates almost directly to 

lowest potential for employment. 

 

So the longer people are able to stay in school, even in a 

low-job economy, they're still more likely to be employed than 

young people who don't finish school, who really are at the 

very bottom of the pile as far as their opportunities for any 

permanent employment. 

 

So we need to link school policy to income security policy to 

make sure that young people stay in school and have the 

maximum opportunities to hook up with the job market.  And I 

think we need more programs that help people make a 

successful transition from school to work -- more co-op style 

programs, more apprenticeship-type programs --places where 

people, while they're learning, can also be productive and can 

link directly into the labour market that they eventually hope to 

participate in and have the benefit of working with people who 

have worked in those fields for many years and benefit by 

discussion with someone who has actually done the job as 

opposed to receiving all their training in a more theoretical 

setting.  And I think there's some good models from 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1327 

apprenticeship that we could follow there that would solve that 

problem. 

 

So many of the issues in this are related to the issue of scarce 

resources, shortage of money.  Some are program design 

issues, and some are strategic issues, and I think it would be a 

big mistake if somehow those were all lumped together as if 

one single solution would satisfy all those problems. 

 

But if we are dealing with scarce resources, it's important to get 

the best use out of those scarce resources by tying them into the 

real needs of Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan 

economy.  We have the Partnership for Renewal in 

Saskatchewan.  We're attempting to develop certain sectors of 

the economy.  There's no reason why this income security 

couldn't link people into the training and supports required to 

participate in those targeted areas. 

 

We have areas in our community in terms of health reform 

where we're trying to change what's going on, and there's no 

reason why some of these income supports couldn't tie into 

labour adjustment programs which would help people make the 

transition to a different way of delivering health care in the 

community. 

 

If you start to look at what kind of programs could be included 

in income support, it really does get mind boggling.  I'm not 

going to even mention all of them, but at the provincial level 

we have the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan.  We have child 

care subsidies, the rural and native housing program, tax 

reductions on the tax form, the supplementary health programs, 

student loans, the gross revenue insurance plan out in the farm 

areas, workers' compensation, and that's probably about half the 

provincial package of income support programs. 

 

At the federal level we have unemployment insurance, child tax 

benefit, non-profit housing program, Canada Pension Plan, Old 

Age Security, the net income stabilization plan, again the 

Canada student loans program.  And that again is only about 

half the programs at the federal level. 

 

So when you start to look at why we have so much trouble with 

people getting some continuity in their income support, all you 

have to do is look at that list to understand why there's a 

problem.  People are continually either applying for or getting 

off of one or the other of a huge myriad of programs.  And this 

just doesn't work out very well in terms of any kind of income 

security or stability, predictability of your income. 

 

For Ottawa the fiscal issue is a big one because 75 to 80 per 

cent of our expenditures in this envelope come from Ottawa 

and the provinces make up about 20 to 25 per cent.  And I think 

it's important that we carefully sort out which programs should 

be delivered at the federal level and which ones should be 

delivered at the provincial level.  Because the federal 

government needs to be cognizant of the need to not assist 

provinces in pitting themselves against one another in terms of 

level of benefits or the kinds of opportunities people have, 

because everybody would then move to a high-opportunity 

province which would then increase the cost for that province 

while other provinces would get off scot-free in terms of the 

training and supports to their own members of the population. 

 

So it's important that a great deal of this stuff be thought 

through in terms of some national programs.  But at the local 

level, we do need the flexibility to be responsive to local 

economic development plans, the agricultural sector, to be able 

to train people in the real areas of our economy where real 

activity is taking place. 

 

(1500) 

 

And I think fundamental to all of it has to be designing 

programs in such a way that they lead people to participate in 

this society.  I'm often wistful when I watch programs on TV 

about tribal societies, because in a tribal society if you lose 

your sight, people will give you a job to do sitting down where 

sight isn't required.  Or if you lose the use of your legs you 

might be given a job to do where that wasn't important. 

 

And I think in our society we have not found a way to define 

people unless we define them by virtue of their employment.  

And there is so much other worth that people have that is not 

directly related to employment.  So I think, as well as looking 

at full employment, we also have to look at the principle of full 

participation -- a society that has a place for everyone and is 

able to bring them into that participation. 

 

There was a group of people called the Canadian employment 

research forum who got together to discuss what the predictable 

problems have been with income support programs as they 

have been delivered over the past many years.  And I want to 

share with you some of their observations because as we go 

into a new process, I guess the minimum we can do is at least 

avoid making the obvious mistakes and leave ourself open to at 

least making some new mistakes that nobody has invented 

before. 

 

One of the first issues they talked about is the instability in 

terms of unemployment insurance and social assistance.  In 

British Columbia some of the data they've collected shows that 

half of all the people who leave income assistance, leave within 

three months but many subsequently return.  And that's partly 

because of the prevalence of many short-term jobs that can't 

really sustain them in any kind of permanent way.  A large 

number of the returnees are single males and that maybe 

indicates that our focus on female single-parent families needs 

to be broadened to include single males in our consideration 

because they're not doing too well themselves in terms of 

keeping employed. 

 

The delivery of appropriate services is a key factor because no 

single intervention works for everyone. 



1328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

We have a wide range of problems that people have in staying 

employed.  Some are skill related; some are to do with their 

financial incentives, whether or not they can live on what 

they're making; some of them have to do with long-term 

disabilities that don't lend to regular kinds of employment.  So 

they have found that successful programs put much more stress 

on changing attitudes and improving skills as well as having 

some kind of a reciprocal obligation in terms of the finances 

received in relation to some job search efforts and also with the 

support services coming in to support those efforts. 

 

Secondary to people's success has been financial incentives, 

strangely enough. A financial incentive hasn't been enough to 

bring people permanently into the workforce when in fact their 

problems were maybe not totally related to money.  Program 

impacts have depended on the state of the labour market.  A 

crucial determinant in whether these kinds of programs have 

worked has been whether there's a job at the end of it.  So 

there's just no way you can unhitch this whole thing from what 

our plans are for the economy and for job creation. 

 

In many cases workers are displaced.  It's not that they don't 

want to work and it's not that they don't have skills.  It's that the 

skills they have aren't needed any more, and you find a number 

of highly skilled, highly trained people who just have no place 

to put their skills.  So a policy that relies only on training is 

maybe not totally sufficient for these people because they're 

displaced more than they are unskilled, so again requiring 

maybe a different kind of initiative for that group. 

 

Given the limited resources, when we look at savings, I guess 

we have to look at bang for the buck in terms of the dollars we 

spend.  Short-term low-cost programs are good because they 

are very inexpensive, and they keep everybody going, but they 

don't really provide any long-term results, but they are 

appealing because they are low cost. 

 

The longer-term programs that involve economic development 

and some serious long-term training -- some of it 2, 3, 4 years 

in length --  these are much more expensive programs, but they 

have a stronger long-term impact on the economy.  And no 

doubt these will be difficult issues that we have to deal with, 

particularly when we're all living in four-year electoral time 

frames. It doesn't really contribute to people looking at the long 

term.  But we do need to do that, and I suspect that the money 

we put towards training people in the long term for new areas 

that our economies are growing in would produce a better 

return on the dollar than the short-term programs which really . 

. . at the end of the day, the economy and the people are no 

further ahead. 

 

If each program is additionally separately provided and 

separately income-tested, then all of the program income tax 

become poorly coordinated, and I think that creates even more 

disincentives to people doing anything because the whole thing 

is just so discouraging.  There's no easy way to move from one 

area to the other. 

 

And I can't leave this topic without talking a little bit about 

labour policy because labour policy is absolutely fundamental 

to income security.  The two aspects of labour policy that I 

would want to discuss are the need to regularize people's lives.  

When people are working at unpredictable part-time 

employment where they receive short notice of need to go to 

work, then the difficulty there is that how do you set up any 

kind of routine in your life on that basis?  You can't even have 

two jobs because you don't know what the hours are for your 

first job, and that doesn't leave you available to choose a set of 

hours for your second job that might be complementary to the 

first one.  You're perpetually on call, and that pretty much puts 

you in a box as far as the possibility of having two jobs to 

achieve an adequate income. 

 

Child care arrangements are next to impossible, and even 

sharing arrangements between partners become difficult 

because neither of the parents often -- in some of these 

two-family arrangements where both people are working in 

these part-time jobs -- they can't even make a plan of how 

they're going to share child care and perhaps save some money 

for the family by alternating their work hours.  So there's a 

need to regularize, through labour policy, people's lives. 

 

The other purpose of the labour policy would be to maximize 

income security because if people don't have sufficient hours of 

work and if they don't have any predictability in their hours of 

work, again they can't achieve the levels of income that they 

might be able to if they could plan how to work at a sufficient 

number of jobs a sufficient number of hours to bring in an 

income. 

 

And all of that links, of course, to our ability to get mortgages, 

to get bank loans, to do all that stuff that a consumer society 

likes us to do.  You can't get credit if you don't have a 

predictable income, and you certainly can't get a mortgage. 

 

And so I think one of the issues people will likely be raising 

with the federal government is the need for some national 

labour standards that help to make income earned from 

employment the foundation of income security in Canada. 

 

We've had a lot of difficulty already in Saskatchewan dealing 

with, again, the federal offloading.  And while it's 

understandable, given the high percentage of dollars that the 

federal government contributes to this, there's also a limit, I 

guess, to what's possible before the provincial government 

becomes very undermined in its efforts to meet its mandates as 

laid out in the constitution.  And I can well see where this 

income security review may reopen some constitutional debates 

because the federal government, is it appropriate these days 

that they retain the kind of responsibility they have had for 

training?  Or is some of that responsibility better met at the 

local level where people are making their own community 

economic development plans or what not. 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1329 

Is it possible for us to separate our responsibilities and 

accountabilities in such a way that people don't get perpetually 

bounced back and forth between UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) and social assistance to the point where 

each level of government is designing its program around 

whatever conditions have been set by the other. 

 

And this is certainly the run-around we've been on with these 

two programs.  So maybe it would be better to clearly put 

responsibility in the hands of one level of government so 

accountability can be assured. 

 

In terms of the UI cut-backs, the unemployment insurance 

cut-backs, in 1993-94 the province lost 31 million in increased 

social assistance costs due to the ripple-through effect of the 

changes to UIC.  There was 5.5 million that we're predicting in 

1994-95 and 17 million in '95-96, which again are just the 

roll-through effects of these further UI cut-backs that are just 

being implemented at this current time. 

 

The whole issue with off-reserve social assistance has created a 

$41 million problem for the province. And as well, the freezing 

of the rates in the Canada Assistance Plan.  There's been 67 

million in lost revenue predicted to the end of 1996-97 because 

of the federal budget freezes to the 1994-95 levels of Canada 

Assistance Plan payments.  Another 1.5 million is lost due to 

the ceiling on young offenders and legal aid cost-sharing 

agreements.  So already, in terms of looking at the fiscal side of 

these changes, there has already been significant fiscal impact 

at the provincial level. 

 

And I guess what Saskatchewan will be looking for in this 

whole thing is to make sure, as the dust settles, that of all the 

monies spent in Canada that there's some recognition that 

Saskatchewan has to get its fair share of the resources. 

 

Some of the funding is tied to levels of employment and what 

not and because of the particular situations in Saskatchewan, if 

you look only at that factor it would lead you to believe that the 

situation was better than it is.  But the fact is we can't grow in 

the directions that we need to grow in strategically if we don't 

have some of those resources to put into training and to put into 

other areas.  So you can't look at it just as income support; you 

have to look at it as income support leading to economic 

development and jobs.  Those two things can't be unhitched or 

it will just never work. 

 

So just to finish off and make some concluding remarks on this, 

I go back to four basic points that I've talked around in this 

discussion; one being the issue of training and the need for 

training to fit into an overall plan and strategy for the economy 

and the community so that we are not leaving well-educated 

and job-trained people without jobs to go to.  In terms of 

reciprocal arrangements -- or another word for that is where 

people receive income in return for work -- we need to look at 

the real groups out in society, not some imaginary group of 

people that we believe don't want 

to work but the real people, either those who for some reason 

are permanently out of the workforce, those who aren't 

job-ready, those who are job-ready but have no job, those 

whose jobs change, and those who due to minimum wage or 

part-time work have inadequate income -- those are very 

distinct groups who have different kinds of problems that need 

solving. 

 

In terms of fiscal responsibility, I think it's important that we 

remind Ottawa that in the context of global competitiveness 

and world image that we have a responsibility to maintain the 

quality of Canadian society that we've had so it continues to be 

a beacon for people in the rest of the world. 

 

We will have to deal with some of the fundamental issues like 

wealth distribution as it relates to income tax.  I think it's long 

been assumed that the private sector will automatically create 

jobs from profits, but there's been a great deal of research that 

has clearly indicated that that assumption is false.  So I think in 

the same way that governments get held accountable for the 

monies they spend and allocate, I think so does the private 

sector have to be held accountable in order to justify its tax 

breaks and subsidies in return for job retention and job 

retraining. 

 

We need to get creative about our federalism and sort out these 

problems of authority and accountability between the provinces 

and the federal government, even down to the municipal level, 

because of course in the way that we're putting more emphasis 

on local development these days, the municipal bodies will 

have a lot stronger role in economic development than they've 

ever had in the past, and that's good.  And we need to build and 

strengthen our communities in this process. 

 

So the secret, I think, to the Saskatchewan approach is the use 

of community involvement in these discussions.  What we've 

been doing in health, agriculture, economic development, and 

education all have to be part of this income security discussion.  

And we need to look at how communities can help each other 

in the face of some shrinking needs that means that fewer and 

fewer family needs will be met through traditional income 

support programs. 

 

But I also think it's an opportunity for Saskatchewan to sort of 

paint the picture, as the member from Wascana Plains has said, 

for the rest of Canada, to show how effective, healthy, and 

integrated income supports can help to create a viable economy 

and a viable community. 

 

So with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to second 

the motion of the member from Regina Wascana Plains and 

urge that the federal government make jobs and the economy 

the foundation of its income security review and not merely be 

used as a kind of a shallow, cost-cutting exercise.  Thanks very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure to participate in the debate on the social safety net 

review initiated by the federal government.  Mr. Speaker, first 

of all I would like to indicate that I find this motion both 

premature and hypocritical; therefore I will be proposing an 

amendment at the end of my remarks. 

 

I would like to point out why I think this motion could be made 

better.  The federal Human Resources minister stated his 

intentions of holding a review process in December of 1993.  

The provincial Social Services minister attended the first 

meeting of the joint federal-provincial-territorial ministers 

responsible for the labour market and social services, in 

February. In fact he and the Minister of Education, Mr. 

Speaker, put out a news release at the end of the meeting. 

 

And on February 16, the Minister of Social Services was 

commending the federal government on his approach to this 

matter.  And I'll quote what he said, "We think the time is right 

for such a review and commend the federal government on this 

comprehensive partnership approach." End of quote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Education minister, she proudly said, 

and I'll quote: 

 

At the meeting, Saskatchewan recommended that the 

federal and provincial officials jointly develop principles, 

objectives, scope, key issues, and process for this reform. 

 

I am pleased to report that this recommendation was 

accepted, and we expect a report in May. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's now March, and the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains is already warning the federal government to 

keep jobs and economic development in mind while 

considering changes to the country's social security net 

programs.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains wants to participate in the social safety net 

review process, I am sure her colleagues would welcome any of 

her suggestions to them.  And it seems a bit strange for her to 

be putting this motion forward, particularly when she starts 

talking about job creation.  Actually it is amusing to hear any 

member from that side of the House talk about job creation and 

economic development. 

 

And I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to point out their own 

record in the job-creation arena.  This government likes to talk 

about job creation and economic development.  They do it all 

the time.  And in fact, this year's keeping the promise budget 

indicates that the NDP priority for 1994 is job creation.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that's nothing new really.  The NDP government 

commitment to create jobs can be found in every throne speech, 

every budget speech delivered to this Assembly since forming 

government 

in 1991. 

 

Now I'll give you a few examples.  In 1992 throne speech: 

 

In spite of Saskatchewan's financial problems, there is 

reason for hope and optimism. 

 

In total, there are currently more than 700 companies 

which have expressed an interest in either relocating to 

Saskatchewan or expanding their operations here.  If these 

businesses proceed with their plans, they have the 

potential to create or maintain more than 16,000 jobs. 

 

16,000, on page 3. 

 

In 1992 budget: 

 

 . . . one of the most important priorities for Saskatchewan 

people is stimulating economic opportunities and creating 

jobs. 

 

Again creating jobs -- page 17 of the 1992 budget. 

 

1993 throne speech: 

 

 There is no more important dimension to that future than 

the creation of jobs, and no more important location for 

those jobs than Saskatchewan's smaller communities. 

 

Well, well. 

 

 Of the hundreds of new, expanding and potential (businesses) 

in the province, more than half are outside Regina and 

Saskatoon.  Those outside our two largest cities have the 

potential to create or maintain . . . 8,000 jobs. 

 

Page 2, 1993 throne speech, 1993 budget debate: "Jobs are our 

first priority."  Page 3. 

 

1994, 1994 throne speech: 

 

 The economic development strategy which my government 

introduced in 1992 -- Partnership for Renewal, has three key 

goals: to create a positive climate for economic renewal, to 

build on existing strengths, and to seek full employment. 

 

 The partnership is working.  We continue to have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. 

 

That's on page 2. 

 

1994 budget: 

 

 This Budget shows that jobs are also our number one priority. 

 

Page 3 in 1994. 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1331 

Now let's compare the NDP's commitment to jobs with reality.  

Let's see what's happened after all of those glowing promises 

and . . . Here's a fact.  And this is according to Statistics 

Canada: there are fewer people working in Saskatchewan in 

January than in any month since March of 1984. 

 

Another fact: there are now 12,000 fewer jobs in Saskatchewan 

than in January of 1991.  And we go back to 1991 and we're 

talking 16,000 jobs; we've got 12,000 less jobs. 

 

Another fact: according to Statistics Canada, Saskatchewan's 

population has fallen to a new 10-year low. 

 

Another fact: in December of 1991 there were 57,199 people 

on welfare.  The number of individuals on welfare today totals 

80,593.  Where's all those glowing projections of jobs and 

security? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are 12,000 fewer jobs in 

Saskatchewan today.  And the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains is asking the federal government to keep jobs and 

economic development in mind when reviewing social safety 

net programs.  Well Saskatchewan has 80,593 on welfare.  The 

member from Regina Wascana Plains refers to the new process 

as a reform exercise.  Well the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains should be optimistic, I think, rather than sceptical.  She 

should be desperate for someone to come along and clean up 

the NDP government's mess that they've made in Saskatchewan 

in the economic program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We all know that the NDP government in Saskatchewan has no 

plans at all for assisting people to get off welfare.  As I 

indicated in today's motion, the NDP think that throwing more 

money at a problem will solve Saskatchewan's welfare roll.  

Well it won't.  During the estimates with the Social Services 

minister I asked the minister whether his department was 

looking into any reforms in any other jurisdictions -- other 

jurisdictions that also are suffering from high social assistance 

case-loads.  We're not the only one, and I'll admit that; there are 

other jurisdictions having the same problem. 

 

But the response I got is worthy of note, Mr. Speaker.  The 

minister responded that other models were looked at, but that 

Saskatchewan would not be pursuing any of these models in 

the form of a pilot project.  He wouldn't even try them.  

Saskatchewan's Social Services minister has unequivocally 

refused to even consider welfare reform projects in our 

province.  He simply stated, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, "they are 

punitive approaches".  End of quote.  Mr. Speaker, that was the 

end of our discussion on the welfare reform because, and I 

quote again, "they are punitive approaches". 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can encouraging people to stay in school be 

punitive?  Everyone knows education is the key to most of our 

problems.  If someone is chronically absent from school, the 

matter should be investigated; and if the reasons do not warrant 

the truancy, then 

they should be penalized.  We are not encouraging children 

whose parents are on welfare to stay in school.  We have to do 

that to break the cycle. 

 

Everyone knows that dependence on welfare is generational.  

This being the minister's attitude in regard to social welfare 

reform, one has to wonder how much he will contribute to the 

federal process when reviewing these social safety net 

programs.  He may not be willing to consider any of the 

changes that they may propose. 

 

Well he may go for one change, Mr. Speaker, and that would 

be to keep the $50 million difference between the 

unemployment insurance premiums and the benefits in the 

province.  Our low unemployment rate means that about $50 

million more in unemployment insurance premiums are 

collected than are paid out.  The provincial government wants 

that money paid back.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the concept sounds 

good, and I would welcome another 50 million for the 

province.  However the ramifications of that concept may not 

be that good. 

 

If the federal government goes for his idea . . . and I wonder if 

Alberta and British Columbia will be looking for more 

equalization payments in the future.  Saskatchewan has reaped 

the benefits of equalization for quite some time.  And I wonder 

what the Social Services minister's reaction would be if Alberta 

and British Columbia started to ask for a return on their royalty 

taxes that they pay.  I wonder if that 50 million would look that 

good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of Canada's social safety nets are 

outdated.  We agree with that, and they need to be reformed.  

But they must be reformed in such a way that people needing 

the programs will still have access to them. 

 

The provincial government must take care of its own people 

right here at home.  That's where you have to start.  They have 

forced thousands onto welfare and have no plan, as I know yet, 

of how to get them off. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague 

from Souris-Cannington: 

 

 That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 urge both the federal and provincial government to 

acknowledge that the real goal of the social safety net review 

is to provide economic development and long-term jobs, and 

further urge the provincial government to recognize its 

responsibility in this process and immediately take steps to 

reduce spiralling welfare numbers, and further urge that the 

provincial government not use the reform initiative as an 

excuse to abdicate its responsibility by arbitrarily removing 

dollars from the health care and education programing. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 



1332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I agree with 

my colleague from Wilkie that it is indeed time to review our 

social service, because when 80,000-plus people in 

Saskatchewan are on welfare, and the numbers are growing 

across Canada, there is indeed a great need to review exactly 

what is happening in the social services area. 

 

Part of what is happening, Mr. Speaker, though, relates to the 

economy.  And we saw an example last Thursday of a major 

effect on the economy when the government increased the 

utility rate, Saskatchewan Power's electrical rates.  Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it's important that we discuss other 

issues in this House also. 

 

Therefore I would like to make the following motion, seconded 

by the member from Thunder Creek: 

 

 That the House do now proceed to Bill No. 1, a Bill to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Legislative Utilities Review Committee). 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1530) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I find the motion is not in order.  The 

member is the seconder for a motion that is currently before us 

and therefore he is not eligible to move another motion at this 

time.  So the debate continues then on the amendment by the 

member for Wilkie, seconded by the member for 

Souris-Cannington. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed a privilege to enter into the debate.  And I would 

suggest that the Government House Leader today indicated that 

they were interested in getting on to some substantive business 

in this Assembly.  And my colleague introduced a motion just a 

moment ago, allowing us that opportunity to get on to some of 

that business. 

 

Business which is . . . the public of Saskatchewan are indeed 

asking of this House, asking of members of this Assembly, to 

address some of the major concerns that are on their minds 

rather than, as I would indicate, frivolous motions that we see 

being brought to this Assembly day after day, time and again, 

and asking members just to stand in this House and bide the 

time of this Assembly.  And no wonder the public at large are 

becoming somewhat cynical of politicians and of how this 

House happens to operate. 

 

When we talk about safety nets, I think people are looking for a 

real safety net.  They're looking for an opportunity to have 

members of this Assembly take the time to address the 

concerns that are pertinent to people today -- not tomorrow, but 

today. 

 

The Premier has indicated that when we've brought 

forward motions to move to or to invite the Premier to establish 

or the government to establish a legislative review committee, 

the Premier's indicated and chided at members to attend Crown 

Corporations Committee meetings.  And I would just like to 

remind members of this Assembly and remind the public at 

large that yes, we do attend Crown Corporations Committee 

meetings.  Every time there's a Crown Corporations Committee 

meeting, the opposition caucus are there. 

 

The unfortunate part, the frustrating part that we find, is that the 

only avenue we have to discuss is the business of the Crowns 

that is already a year old.  And the issues that are really 

concerning the taxpayers today, that we would like to raise, 

unfortunately we can't just because of the format of the Crown 

Corporations.  And that's why we've been raising some of these 

questions in the Assembly. 

 

The member for Regina Wascana brought up a motion today 

that this Assembly call on the federal government to 

acknowledge that the real goal of the social safety net review is 

to provide economic development and jobs, and further that the 

federal government not use its current reform exercise as an 

excuse to abdicate its responsibility by arbitrarily removing 

dollars from the system.  I think there are people across this 

province who would suggest that if there is a government that 

should be listening to its own motions, there's the government 

in the province of Saskatchewan, indeed, should follow suit. 

 

I don't know if there's a government that has arbitrarily 

offloaded more on the taxpayers of a province than the present 

government that we have sitting in front of us today.  Talk 

about offloading; talk about offloading on the health system; 

talk about offloading in the educational system; talk about 

offloading on municipal governments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you wonder why people are somewhat annoyed when 

the Minister of Finance stands up in this Assembly and so 

proudly tells us that there's no new taxes and then turns around 

just a few short days later, and the minister responsible for 

SaskPower . . . again we see a rate increase taking place in this 

province.  And so what is that, Mr. Speaker?  What does that 

mean to the people of Saskatchewan?  Where are the safety 

nets for the people of Saskatchewan?  There's no safety nets 

left in this province. 

 

I think the members on the government side of the House, 

rather than looking towards the federal government, should 

start looking at themselves and accepting the responsibility that 

has been placed on their shoulders by the electorate of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  I think it's time they took a serious 

look at ways and means in which they can help and aid the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at social safety nets, what 

do we really mean?  And I believe the federal government has a 

review taking place right now, or commissioned right now, to 

look at some of the terminology that they would use in defining 

what a 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1333 

social safety net is.  And I think if we're going to look at how 

we're going to support the Saskatchewan taxpayer or meet the 

needs of the Saskatchewan taxpayer, we're going to have to 

look at some of the real issues that are facing this province, the 

real concerns, and the real goals and ideals that taxpayers 

would long to see coming out of this Assembly.  The issues 

that they would like to see their members discussing -- real 

issues that affect each and every one of them. 

 

I believe Saskatchewan people indeed want to see reform.  And 

we have offered a number of reforms.  We have offered the 

opportunity for reform in this House.  And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I believe I have spoken on it on many occasions, of 

the fact that I believe there is room for real reform in this 

Assembly. 

 

And I believe it's very important that we not just present . . . 

that the opposition not just present private members' motions -- 

or not just the opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but any 

member can present a private motion, private members' motion 

-- I believe if we're going to see real reform that we should 

allow those private members' motions to come forward.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 

Thunder Creek: 

 

 That we go directly to Bill No. 1, An Act to amend the 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Legislative 

Utilities Review Committee). 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:38 p.m. until 3:48 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Swenson Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Toth McPherson 

Britton Bergman 

D'Autremont  

- 9 

Nays 

Wiens Hamilton 

Shillington Trew 

Anguish Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Johnson Flavel 

Kowalsky Roy 

Carson Cline 

Mitchell Scott 

Cunningham Crofford 

Hagel Wormsbecker 

Bradley Stanger 

Koenker Kluz 

Lorje Knezacek 

Lyons Harper 

Pringle Keeping 

Lautermilch Jess 

Renaud Carlson 

Murray Langford 

- 36 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take but 

a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to respond to some of the 

remarks made by the member from Wilkie and also by his 

colleague in the debate to this particular motion. 

 

And because it has been some time since the motion . . . the 

actual specifics of the motion was read to the House, I think I 

should just take a minute and read into the record again what 

the motion is. 

 

The motion says: 

 

 That this Assembly call on the federal government to 

acknowledge that the real goal of social safety net review is 

to provide economic development and jobs; and further, 

that the federal government not use its current reform 

exercise as an excuse to abdicate its responsibility by 

arbitrarily removing dollars from the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a federal Liberal government.  

Liberals, when they're in government, act very much like 

Conservatives, so it's not much surprise to me to hear that the 

black cats and the white cats are speaking exactly the same tune 

here, and they're against the concept of providing for jobs first 

in order to eliminate people and take people off the social 

service rolls -- not at all surprised. 

 

I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, that it's these same people who 

voted -- the Liberals and the Tories -- who voted against the 

proposed labour legislation, The Labour Standards Act, which 

when implemented will have the effect of helping people who 

are working only on part-time jobs, will have the effect of 

helping them being able to move away from the social safety 

net provided by the taxpayer.  It is these same people who, 

while they voted against this motion and voted against The 

Labour Standards Act, voted for giving the judges a 24 per cent 

increase.  What hypocrisy.  And they think they know about 

how to handle an economy and they think they know about 

how to deal with social welfare. 

 

They seem to have but one idea and no plan, it's clear, and 

Minister Axworthy himself identified that he has no plan.  And 

it's clear that the one idea that they seem to have is that all they 

should do is to be tough, as tough as nails. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan. Our government does 

have a plan.  And we're asking the federal government to take a 

look at the plan that we are presenting, and we're asking that 

they set up a plan which will work on a regional basis like ours 

does and they will support us in our plan. 

 

And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this plan that we have 

is parallel to the plans that we've proposed, as well, in 

economic development, in health and is 



1334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

taking place in education.  And that is, we as government are 

encouraging people in their own communities to develop 

systems, to develop -- in the case of economic development -- 

develop authorities, in the case of health, to develop regional 

administrative districts where those that are closest to the action 

can be in charge of the action.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think it's 

time for us to do something similar in certain portions of social 

services.  There's no reason why we can't look at that and link 

the social service to the job creation at that local level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our plan is working, and I just have at 

random here a collection from recent articles in the newspaper 

about what's happening to jobs in Saskatchewan.  It's working 

because the people of Saskatchewan believe that this is a good 

place in which to do business and as a result, more and more 

jobs are being created and people are willing to put their money 

into Saskatchewan because they know that the whole economy 

is being stabilized. 

 

Let me give you a few examples, and I give this for the 

edification particularly for the member from Wilkie, who 

seemed to have a hard time finding anything good to say about 

our province.  From the Swift Current Sun on March 16 -- the 

headline -- New venture will create 60 jobs here.  Where?  Here 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Up to 60 workers, when 

they've already hired 17, and this is a group called 

Saskatchewan Urban Forest Recyclers Inc. 

 

Another clipping from a newspaper, Mr. Speaker.  The 

headline says, Melfort assists in a unique recycling, creating 

jobs through the Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living.  That was from The Melfort Journal, March 15, 1994. 

 

Here's another one, March 22, 1994 right from Rose Valley, 

The View from Here is the name of the paper.  And the 

headline here is Hog-barn project.  And to take a look at it in a 

little more detail, Mr. Speaker, and there's a group of people 

that have held a meeting with the view of establishing a 5,000 

sow barn in the Kelvington area -- proof positive that the 

people of Saskatchewan have got a lot more faith in 

Saskatchewan than do those Liberals and those Tories, those 

black cats and those white cats. 

 

Here we have, Mr. Speaker, an article from The Grenfell Sun, 

dated Tuesday, March 22: "Jim McKee opening new business 

-- Grenfell General Repair".  From various sectors of the 

province, Mr. Speaker . . . here's one, March 22, 1994, from 

The Outlook paper.  The headline says: "Quadra Group 

Formed".  It's Quadra Management Services who will "provide 

a complete range of services for financing, building and 

managing profitable pig production".  Again, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan.  Here's an article from The Kindersley Clarion  

dated March 23, 1994, and the article, the headline, says it's a 

"Swine centre addition opening this spring".  Mr. Speaker, 

proof positive once again -- Kindersley . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you, and through you to the House, my number 

one son, Nicholas, who's up in the east gallery observing 

procedures today.  And I'd like to ask the members to welcome 

him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 51 -- Federal Government Social Safety Net 

Review 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I continue . . . 

another article from the March 21 edition of The Outlook 

paper.  It says the "Outlook Waste Management Facility Makes 

(its) First Shipment to Calgary".  They're in business.  

Something new in Saskatchewan and it's working.  From 

Strasbourg from the Last Mountain Times, and they talk 

about a company here that's established in Strasbourg, and this 

is dated Tuesday, March 22: 

 

 A La Ronge wild rice company has achieved another 

milestone in offshore marketing. 

 

 Recently, in its La Ronge facility's Canadian Wild Rice 

package the last of 80,000 point-of-sale boxes for export to 

Europe -- about 20 tonnes of wild rice (were packed). 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of good news if you look for it, a lot of 

good news.  Estevan Mercury, March 23, and it says here: 

"Waste disposal company eyes construction date".  And this is 

in Estevan where they hope to start construction of a service 

centre facility by September in anticipation for it to be in 

operation early in '95. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are but clippings from one week in March in 

Saskatchewan -- but one week -- and it's proof positive, Mr. 

Speaker, that the plan that this government has put into place is 

being accepted with confidence by the people of Saskatchewan.  

The corner is being turned, Mr. Speaker.  The corner is being 

turned, and that is because we are linking and we are insisting 

on linking job creation with social assistance.  The only way to 

lower the social assistance network is to do it through jobs. 

 

(1600) 

 

There are basically three kinds of people, Mr. Speaker, on 

social assistance.  First of all, those that are handicapped and 

unable to work.  Secondly, there are those that are temporarily 

between jobs, that sometimes have to find themselves in a 

social safety net.  And unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, right now a 

great 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1335 

deal of people who really had never, ever dreamed they would 

ever be on social assistance and look very much for stability in 

government, a government with a plan that will provide jobs 

such as those that I've given an indication of a few minutes ago. 

 

I do want to mention one other thing before I sit down, and that 

is I want to refer to a remark made by the member from 

Moosomin.  And he talked about how angry people get because 

the government is no longer giving away money and because 

there is offloading going on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how short the memory is of that member.  

While he was in government they borrowed 20 cents in 

addition to every dollar that they took in in taxation so they 

could spend $1.20 for every dollar of taxation.  And you know 

you can only do that for so long, Mr. Speaker.  Eventually if 

you don't straighten out, the people kick you out as happened in 

this particular case.  In the last election the people spoke loudly 

and clearly that that was not to take place any longer and so 

they elected a new government. 

 

And we found, Mr. Speaker, that in order to create the stability 

which will get us the jobs back, we are in a position where we 

cannot spend $1.20 for every dollar taken in in taxation, but we 

have to reverse that.  And we have asked the people of 

Saskatchewan to participate.  We are collecting . . . We are 

paying out 80 cents worth of services for every dollar collected; 

the rest is going to pay off interest -- 80 cents. 

 

But the service that is being provided by the people of 

Saskatchewan that are working to provide those services is 

phenomenal, Mr. Speaker, and we're doing it in a way that is 

going to be successful.  And if you ask any person in the 

medical field, in the health field, in the social service field, and 

you ask them to compare with what's happening in Alberta or 

in Manitoba or in B.C. (British Columbia), they will give you a 

standing ovation at this particular moment for Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I'm very, very proud of the plan that this government has 

put forward.  I ask the Liberals to come to their senses, to get 

after their federal counterparts, to part from the ways of the 

Tories.  Forget about becoming Tories right now, and set up a 

system; try to encourage the federal government to set up a 

system that is not just there to penalize those that are poor, but 

is there is help them through a good job plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 53 -- Repeal of Bill C-91 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I rise to raise a 

matter which I feel, as a private member of this House, to be 

very important to the people of Saskatchewan.  It's a matter that 

is of considerable importance to all other Canadians too, 

especially to those in the seven other provinces where there is 

no 

drug plan at all. 

 

We've had many complaints about the reductions in coverage 

that we have had to make because of the financial restraints 

brought about by the utter incompetence of the previous 

government.  And as a physician I've had this brought up to me 

innumerable times in my medical office.  As patients, my wife 

and myself have had to pay the excessive costs of medicine, but 

despite my anger I can at least know that our maximum costs 

are going to be $850 in any six-month period. 

 

It's not much of a reassurance perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

something, and when we get the budget balanced in 1996-1997, 

I hope that we can put some flesh on the bare bones of the 

present plan. 

 

That problem is compounded by Bill C-91, passed by the 

federal government of Brian Mulroney as another bone thrown 

to the multinationals on whom he fawns and who are now 

repaying him with lucrative directorships. 

 

For your information, sir, the president of the Pharmaceutical 

Manufacturers Association of Canada is a former Liberal 

cabinet member, the Hon. Judith A. Erola, PC.  And the PC 

actually stands for Privy Council.  But it makes you think PC 

(Progressive Conservative); Liberal, Tory, same old story. 

 

Bill C-91 increases the length of time of patent protection for 

new drugs from the current 17 years to 20 years.  And this is 

expected to cost the province of Saskatchewan alone between 6 

and $10 million each year.  I don't deny that the pharmaceutical 

companies do valuable research in drug treatment of disease.  

They do.  And one of my own lecturers at Glasgow University, 

a Dr. Black, won a knighthood and a Nobel Prize for the 

invention of Tagamet which is for stomach disorders and 

Inderal which is an entirely different medicine used for high 

blood pressure.  Both are still in use, and both are being 

manufactured under compulsory licence by generic companies. 

 

All I am saying, sir, is that they do it for the money and will 

stop at nothing to protect their profits.  To rephrase it:  the 

pharmaceutical companies are not Santa Claus.  Much of the 

research that is done is simply me-too drugs: drugs that we 

really don't need, therein designed not to help us but simply to 

grab a share of somebody else's discovery. 

 

The Eastman Committee, which studied this matter in 1983, 

claimed that across Canada at that time, we the public saved 

$211 million per year in drug costs from generics.  In 1986 the 

Canadian Drug Manufacturers Association, which is the 

organization of companies that manufacture generic drugs, 

estimated that compulsory licensing saved us $500 million a 

year.  We don't seem to have a more up-to-date estimate than 

that, Mr. Speaker, sir, but I think that we can probably talk in 

terms of $1 billion a year in today's inflated prices. 

 

And not only do we save on the generic price, sir, but 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

whenever a generic equivalent is introduced to the market, the 

brand name product falls about 20 per cent to compete with it.  

The Eastman Committee at that time recommended a 

maximum monopoly of four years.  The government legislated 

7 years for some drugs and 10 years for others.  And there's 

some wag in the Department of Consumer and Corporate 

Affairs said, we didn't give them a nickel more than they asked 

for. 

 

And now it is not 7 years, not 10, not even 17, but 20 years.  

And how long will it be before they up that again to 25 years, 

sir?  There is a well-known drug, an antibiotic that is marketed 

as Septra by a company called Burroughs Wellcome, and 

there's Bactrim, by another company called Hoffmann-La 

Roche.  This medicine is composed of two constituents that 

work together to produce their effects in the urinary tract and in 

the respiratory system.  One of these components is owned by 

the British drug company, Burroughs Wellcome, and the other 

is owned by the Hoffmann-La Roche company of Switzerland. 

 

And not only do the components work symbiotically, sir, so do 

the companies.  Wellcome makes enough of their product to 

supply their own needs and that of the Roche company, while 

the Roche company makes sufficient of its own product to 

supply them and the Burroughs Wellcome company. 

 

And then each company advertises its own product as superior 

of that of the opposite company, and they will produce research 

material to prove it.  Yet the only difference is that the one 

company markets this tablet green, and the other is coloured 

white.  There is a slight difference in shape, but they both 

contain the identical amounts of the same two drugs that came 

from the same two companies.  They come from the same 

machinery in the same factories.  And not only that, but they 

each thereafter supplied these components to generic drug 

companies who could produce them under compulsory 

licensing and then these companies have the cheek to call 

themselves ethical pharmaceutical manufacturers. 

 

These first line companies complain furiously about generic 

drug houses and lobby constantly against compulsory licensing, 

and at the same time they either set up subsidiary generic drug 

houses of their own or buy an existing one.  And they use that 

subsidiary company to make generic substitutes of rival drug 

companies' products under the compulsory licensing Act, and 

they have the cheek to call themselves ethical companies. 

 

I'd like to make this point quite clear, sir.  I'm not an advocate 

of the generic drug companies as such.  The Pharmaceutical 

Manufacturers Association of Canada may well be predators, 

but most of them are simply branch plants of parent companies 

in the United States and in Europe.  The members of the 

Canadian Drug Manufacturers Association are simply the 

scavengers, picking up whatever is left after the major 

pharmaceutical companies have had their fill. 

 

My point today is that in the battle against the 

voracious members of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers 

Association of Canada, the generics are our natural allies.  And 

as the ethicals gobble up the small fry of the CDMA (Canadian 

Drug Manufacturers Association) whenever they get the 

chance, I'm sure there are many members of the Canadian Drug 

Manufacturers Association who long to graduate and become 

members of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of 

Canada and become first line drug companies themselves. 

 

In the past, generics have not only bought the patent rights 

outright from a line firm, but they have actually bought out 

complete line firms, usually small ones that the big boys didn't 

want or else that they've sucked dry and thrown back in the 

pond when they had everything out of them that they wanted. 

 

I'd like to give you an example, sir, of how ethical these drug 

companies are.  A scandal broke out while I was working in 

west Africa.  At that time the contract came up for the renewal 

to supply tetracycline, which is an antibiotic, to the hospitals of 

the British National Health Service. 

 

A generic company was providing them with this medicine and 

the subsidiary of the Pfizer Drug Company in the United States 

was offering their own product to the government, which was 

currently selling at four times the price that the generic 

manufacturer was offering it at.  This contract was to hospitals 

only and not to neighbourhood drug pharmacies, because 

they're separated under the health service. 

 

Pfizer mounted a smear campaign, charging that the generic 

company was selling the hospitals an inferior product that was 

being manufactured by a Hungarian company that was a 

wicked communist pirate, and this was exported to Britain in 

steel drums marked for veterinary use only.  You can imagine 

the uproar, sir.  Here was a company selling an inferior product 

meant for animals, to be used by hospitals on people, on human 

beings like ourselves.  Oh, the righteousness was incredible to 

see and to hear. 

 

(1615) 

 

But then there was a curious and an enterprising and, strangely 

enough, an honest journalist, sir -- they do exist, despite the 

experience that we've had here in Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

A journalist took a trip out to the Pfizer manufacturing 

company's warehouses just outside London and discovered in a 

warehouse that Pfizer had filled to capacity with bottles of 

tetracycline manufactured in Hungary and labelled for 

veterinary use only.  Oh boy, was somebody's face red then, sir, 

because it turned out that Pfizer was importing the identical 

material from the identical drug company in Hungary in the 

same bottles with the same labels -- for veterinary use only.  

They were putting it into their own capsules and then charging 

four times as much for it as the rival drug company.  And 

Pfizer considers itself to be an ethical drug manufacturing 

company, sir. 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

An article in the Globe and Mail of January 20, 1993 which is 

well-known for its New Democratic leanings just over a year 

ago that is, sir, cites the chairman of the company that 

administers many private drug benefit plans in Ontario.  He 

told the Senate committee investigating this matter that the 

average cost of a prescription in Ontario in 1987 was $12.52, 

and in 1992 it was $21.12 -- an increase of 75 per cent over five 

years.  And he projected that by the year 2000, which is only a 

short six years away, sir, the average would be $34.57.  He's 

pretty accurate with his determinations, but $34.57 is the figure 

he gives us. 

 

Not only that, sir, but the Bill C-91 is retroactive to 1991.  Now 

I'd like to repeat that, sir.  The Bill is retroactive to 1991, just to 

remind the official opposition that even Tories pass retroactive 

legislation, and not just for a few days, a few weeks, or even a 

few months, but for two full years. 

 

And of course the federal government's rationale was that great 

big bogeyman, the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade), and even if that were correct, why should Canada have 

internal matters decided by foreign governments?  International 

trade, yes, but internal matters should be our own decision, 

nobody else's. 

 

And nine provinces at the time opposed Bill C-91, and only of 

these, three have New Democratic Party governments.  I'd be 

interested to know who the 10th government was that sided 

with Brian Mulroney and the multinationals. 

 

Down in the States there was a gentleman named Estes 

Kefauver.  Estes Kefauver was a senator and he chaired a 

committee that is still known by his name.  That committee 

studied the administered prices in the drug industry in the 

United States.  The published study contains 12,885 pages.  It's 

not exactly bedside reading, sir, but the horrors documented in 

it would keep you awake anyway. 

 

This dedicated man spent five years battling the multinationals, 

and deserves the respect of us in Canada as well as his 

compatriots in the United States, although he largely lost the 

fight.  And I intend to quote from some of his findings. 

 

I can hardly claim to be an unbiased observer, sir, as a 

physician, but I do have some knowledge of what I speak.  We 

have no problem with the individual doctor or the individual 

pharmacist.  Doctors and pharmacists are as much victims as 

the rest of the population. 

 

We are taught at university the generic names of medicines.  

These are generally simpler in that they describe what the drug 

is made of or what the drug is for, or a combination of both.  

And of course there are fewer generic names to remember.  

There may be a dozen trade names, and in some cases it 

actually goes up in the United States to 200 trade names for one 

particular drug, which becomes very confusing to the 

doctors. 

 

But many of these drugs are simple molecule manipulations.  

All they do is to substitute a chloride ion for a sulphate radical 

and that sort of thing.  It doesn't alter the effectiveness of the 

drug, but it means that the clever manipulator can often get 

round the patent himself.  And this is usually a rival ethical 

drug manufacturer, and then he can market the clone as a better 

drug than the original -- a development or an improvement or, 

to use the parlance, a second generation drug.  The euphemisms 

for skulduggery, sir, are incredible.  There's no wonder that we 

become cynical.  And the doctors and the pharmacists are just 

as cynical as the rest of us. 

 

But it is only when we are let loose on the public that we 

slowly are persuaded to prescribe by brand name.  And there 

are several reasons for this.  A patient comes in for a refill of a 

medicine that they had been taking for some years and 

produces a bottle which has a trademark name on it.  So you 

tend to prescribe what it says on the bottle.  The bottle maybe 

says Valium, or for example Amoxil, and if you write 

Diazepam or Amoxicillin, which is the generic name, the 

patient often comes back and queries it because it's a different 

name on the bottle and they don't know that it means the same 

thing.  Time was when no name was put on the bottle that a 

patient got, and believe me, those times were a lot simpler for 

both doctors and druggists, sir. 

 

And sometimes the price of a generic is so low that the patient 

refuses to take it -- it must be inferior if the price is low.  And 

this is one of the problems that we have to put up with.  And 

part of this is the skill that a doctor has in explaining these, and 

there's not an awful lot of time to do it, sir. 

 

I remember treating a child in Wadena way back in 1966, and I 

gave the mother a prescription for the little boy.  A week later 

she brought him back and I asked how he was.  And the 

response was, oh he's not much better doctor, but then the 

medicine only cost $1.50.  I guess if the medicine had cost $15 

it would have been 10 times as effective. 

 

And then there's those charming young men -- and now there 

are ladies as well -- who travel the country talking to doctors 

and pharmacists about their company's products.  And 

charming they are, sir, and young and handsome, and the ladies 

are pretty and well-dressed.  They're smooth talkers.  They 

often have more letters after their names than the doctors and 

the pharmacists themselves. 

 

And they bring gifts, sir.  Fly swatters in the summer; 

windshield scrapers in the winter; clocks in the shape of a pill 

or capsule; balancing knick-knacks to put on your desk; wall 

charts with their logo well displayed on them; models of the 

vertebrae or the hip joint as a teaching aid and the name of an 

arthritis cure embossed in gold letters on it. 

 

It doesn't take long to be seduced, sir, and it costs a lot of 

money.  The doctors don't see any of it -- more's the 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

pity -- and nor does the friendly neighbourhood drug pusher, 

but it does cost a lot of money. 

 

The ethical drug manufacturers boast about how much they 

spend on research but they never let on as to how much they 

spend on advertising and promotion, sir, and not surprisingly.  

Because on an average, they spend four times as much on 

promotion as they do on research. 

 

They put it together as a nice little package called research and 

development.  And out of every dollar spent on research and 

development, 20 cents goes on research; 80 cents goes on 

so-called development.  But that development, sir, is not 

development of the drug; that development is development of 

the market.  And there's a big difference in that.  It's possible 

that they're so poor that they can't afford it.  So let's go back to 

the Canadian scene once more. 

 

In 1966 the Canadian government set up the Harley committee 

on drug costs and prices.  But their report only runs to 2,717 

pages, and they're a paperback compared to the American 

version. 

 

One of the witnesses to this committee was a Mr. Jules Gilbert. 

Originally from New York in the United States, he settled in 

Canada largely because he had married a Canadian girl, which 

seemed a very sensible thing to do.  And he had two degrees, 

sir; one was in chemical engineering and the second made him 

a pharmacist. 

 

Not surprisingly, he set up in business in the generic drug 

manufacturing as Jules R. Gilbert & Co.  I've spoken to him on 

the phone and bought many effective medicines from him.  He 

sold out and retired quite a few years ago, but the company still 

exists, although it's been rolled over and sold several times and 

it's now under a different name. 

 

He testified on December 13, 1966 that he was selling a 

tranquilizer called Meprobamate at $5.50 per thousand, while 

the big drug companies were selling it at $10 per hundred. 

 

Gilbert testified that it cost him $2.30 per thousand pills, 

including tableting and including testing.  He was getting about 

140 per cent mark-up at $5.50, and the big drug companies 

were making a profit of 5,000 per cent, sir -- 5,000 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, sir.  And we work for peanuts in this Assembly. 

 

Another company was selling penicillin tablets at $3 for a 

dozen.  Gilbert sold a similar and also government-tested and 

approved product for $17.50 per thousand.  The big boy 

dropped his price to $18 per thousand to compete.  Good for 

Jules Gilbert.  And there are many others on the market that we 

should be grateful to. 

 

And talking about Meprobamate, sir, this drug is sold as 

Miltown by one line company and another one sells it as 

Equanil.  The drugs are identical.  They're not even molecularly 

manipulated.  They're both being advertised in the same issue 

of the American Medical 

Association journal in opposition to each other.  You know the 

sort of advert, sir, big, full-page adverts, glossy, multicoloured, 

and extremely expensive. 

 

The advertisement for Equanil said that the drug was effective, 

but that careful supervision was required because of possible 

side-effects.  The other for Miltown claimed that there were no 

problems whatever with the use of the drug. 

 

Now the American Medical Association should have checked 

these adverts out more carefully and done something about it, 

but they didn't, sir, because they wanted the money.  That smell 

of greenbacks is stronger than the smell of spring is today. 

 

And here we have a major problem, sir.  The adverts in medical 

journals pay for those journals, and the medical and the dental 

and the pharmacists' associations in Canada and around the 

world depend upon the advertisements in their magazines to 

pay the cost of those magazines.  And they are desperate for the 

drug advertising. 

 

And the universities are no different.  Their medical schools 

want the money that drug companies pay them to do research.  

They sell the prestige of their names for drug company money.  

And deans and residents of colleges and universities would 

give an arm and a leg for a chair, any chair, to be endowed by a 

drug company. 

 

Out on the street, sir, when you sell what you've got for money 

it's called one thing.  At the university it's called endowment.  

Again another euphemism. 

 

And this is the sad part, sir.  The organizations that should be 

protecting us from the hegemony of the international drug 

cartel, our professional bodies who claim always to be purer 

than Caesar's wife, hop into bed with the first drug company 

that happens along and tells those knocking at the door to hold 

on because they won't be long.  Talk about a gang-bang, sir. 

 

And I fear our political parties are no better.  They get nice 

donations when election time comes around from the big drug 

companies.  And this is one of the reasons that the New 

Democratic Party refuses donations from corporate entities like 

the drug companies.  It would be nice to have the money, but 

once you've got their money in your pocket, you find yourself 

in their pocket in pretty short order. 

 

(1630) 

 

Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, sir, the furore a month or two 

ago when a school board offered the Pepsi-Cola company a 

monopoly of soft drinks in their school.  Believe me, sir, that is 

chicken-feed compared to pharmaceuticals.  I sometimes 

wonder if illegal narcotics are really any worse than the legal 

drugs we are swamped with -- tobacco, alcohol, 

pharmaceuticals.  And we've all heard of thalidomide, I'm quite 

sure.  The company that manufactures it are the same friendly 

people who give us napalm.  They 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

refuse point-blank to compensate the children whose mothers 

took thalidomide during pregnancy and whose babies ended up 

with horribly deformed limbs.  In fact one of the doctors in 

Gravelbourg that preceded me, he has a child with seal-limbs, 

as it's called, and he's having a terrible time at the moment and 

he's now in his 30's. 

 

It wasn't their fault, they said, sir.  They didn't prescribe it for 

pregnant women, they didn't dispense it to expectant moms.  

They said, sue your doctor, he prescribed it; sue your druggist, 

he dispensed it for you.  They should have known better -- it's 

their fault, not ours. 

 

And eventually they were forced to settle, after being dragged 

through every court -- every appeal court, kicking and 

screaming, appellate courts, supreme courts -- they could think 

of.  Anything to get out of their responsibility, anything to 

haggle down the price of their perfidy, anything to hold on to 

the money whilst the compound interest rolled in on it.  And 

that drug company is an ethical drug company, sir. 

 

Perhaps if trade mark drugs are too expensive it's because of 

high quality.  Perhaps we could examine that a little bit.  

Perhaps thalidomide is an exception.  According to the Food 

and Drugs Administration in the United States, whereas 7.7 per 

cent of generic drugs failed to pass potency tests, 8.8 per cent 

of brand name drugs failed those same tests. 

 

In one six-months period one brand name company had 17 

different drugs recalled from the market.  Another company, in 

another year, had 30 of its products recalled for a variety of 

reasons.  In one case they put penicillin tablets in aspirin 

bottles.  Can you imagine that?  What would happen if you had 

a headache and you took two aspirins?  And what if you took 

two aspirins from a bottle that contained penicillin if you had 

an allergy to penicillin, sir?  The thoughts are possible. 

 

In some cases there was low potency so the medicine didn't 

work, and in other cases there was too high a potency, so the 

patient was given excessive amounts of drugs.  And many 

incidents of contamination occurred. 

 

And in The Globe and Mail of two or three weeks ago, 

Tuesday, March 15, 1994, 

 

  A drug-industry official threatened to end research funding 

after McMaster University tried to limit the firm's access to 

residents in internal medicine, according to the director of 

the residency program. 

 

 . . . the drug industry . . . "tended to be quite a pernicious 

force in the way it influences medical practices." 

 

 . . . the official who threatened an end to research (work) 

worked for the marketing section of the Pharmaceutical 

Manufacturers Association of Canada . . . 

And Dr. Guyatt, the teacher, the professor, said that this is not 

an idiosyncratic situation, it's happening all the time. 

 

But I think I gave you enough examples to prove to you and to 

this House, sir, that these drug companies are anything but 

ethical, that they're already excessively rich, at our expense, 

that their mark-ups are higher than probably any other sector 

than except possibly the cosmetics industry, and that they're 

extremely greedy and deserve no sympathy from us. 

 

I therefore wish to move the following resolution, seconded by 

the member from Melville: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to repeal 

Bill C-91 because it provides excessive profits to foreign 

drug companies, causes severe financial hardship to 

prescription drug users, particularly the elderly, and makes 

provincial drug plans economically impossible. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll give this to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The question before the Assembly is a motion 

moved by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  Who 

seconded the motion?  The member from Melville.  Let me just 

remind the movers of the motions that they are to fill in the 

form, both the seconder and the mover, and the constituency 

that applies to the mover or to the seconder. 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take 

the opportunity to read the motion out again.  I think it's 

probably one of the most important motions and debates we're 

going to have in this Assembly in a long time and into the 

future.  It states: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the federal government to repeal 

Bill C-91 because it provides excessive profits to foreign 

drug companies, causes severe financial hardship to 

prescription drug users, particularly the elderly, and makes 

provincial drug plans economically impossible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier on in this session when I rose to speak on 

the Speech from the Throne, there was two areas that I talked 

about and I just want to revisit them for a few minutes. 

 

I talked about the importance of the new federal government to 

look into Bill C-91 and the economic impact that it has on the 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan, and not only the 

province of Saskatchewan, but all residents of this country.  

And of course we all know that hasn't happened yet. 

 

The federal government, the new federal government, has 

chosen to not look at Bill C-91, not look at changing it to 

restrict the long-term patent protection 



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 5, 1994 

that the multinational drug companies have. 

 

I also mentioned in my Speech from the Throne about the cats.  

And the member that moved the resolution today talked about 

Ms. Erola, Judy Erola.  And I talked in my Speech from the 

Throne last February about when governments lose power, 

governments of cats lose power, within government they 

retrench into the private sector and have their onslaught on us 

as citizens. 

 

And when I got a little letter from the president of the Canadian 

Pharmaceutical Association here in the last few weeks and lo 

and behold a former -- as the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg mentioned -- a former Tory cabinet 

minister, not within the reins of power in the federal 

government now but still with its onslaught on the citizens, 

lobbying and working on behalf of the Canadian 

Pharmaceutical Association to make sure, and I repeat, to make 

sure that Bill C-91 stays in effect. 

 

And I wouldn't be surprised if in the years to come that there's 

more regulations and rules that would give pharmaceutical 

associations, multinational pharmaceutical associations, more 

power in the manufacturing of drugs. 

 

In 1969 federal amendment, patent amendments, eliminated 

exclusive rights for drug inventions.  Other producers, generic 

ones, were given the right to receive a compulsory licence 

which enabled them to copy and distribute generic brands in 

exchange for a paying a royalty to the inventor until the full 

patent term expired -- 17 years in Canada. 

 

In 1987 federal Bill C-22 granted the inventors of a drug a 

period of 10 years, and in some cases 17 years, of exclusive 

rights to market their drugs without concern about a generic 

maker acquiring a compulsory licence to enter into 

competition.  In return the inventors committed to double 

spending on research and development in Canada, to 10 per 

cent of sales by 1995, and to hold increases in prices to the 

equivalent or lower than the CPI (consumer price index) 

inflation rates. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's 20 years; longer patent protection for 

the multinationals means higher drug costs -- higher drug costs 

for our residents, for you and I. 

 

Pharmaceutical manufacturers have defied the recession and 

continue to be one of the highest profit industries in North 

America.  Bill C-91 will assist in increasing profits for the 

industry while costs for consumers keep going up and puts 

more pressure on drug plans. 

 

Ralph Nader, a well-known American consumer advocate, 

recently spoke out against Bill C-91.  He said Canada's current 

system was a beacon -- a beacon, Mr. Speaker -- to other 

industrial nations and that the proposed legislation could spell 

the end, the end of medicare as we know it in Canada. 

Now the drug companies would lead us to believe that the 

importance for them to have longer protection is they will 

invest.  They will invest in new drugs.  Well experience 

suggests that any increases in spending by pharmaceutical 

manufacturers will largely be concentrated in specific areas of 

this country, namely Ontario and Quebec. 

 

Bill C-91 contains no formal obligation for pharmaceutical 

manufacturers to invest in research and development.  So with 

no obligation in the Bill, maybe even Ontario and Quebec 

won't get much of an economic spin-off from it, but certainly 

not Saskatchewan or Alberta or Manitoba. 

 

The definition of research and development must be closely 

scrutinized to ensure it is targeted at the treatment of diseases 

and not at popular drugs with good markets -- drugs we call 

me-too drugs. 

 

Since accessibility to quality health is reduced by the cost 

increases for such items such as drugs, it is important that an 

environment exists to encourage price competition.  Bill C-91 

will destroy any balance that we in this country have had and 

that had currently existed up until a year ago.  Competition has 

been the country's mechanism to attempt to keep prices under 

control, and Bill C-91 has done away with that. 

 

If because of the financial situation in this country, and I think 

we all will agree that the provinces and Canada as a whole is 

under a fair bit of economic hardship, and if they cannot find 

the means to live up to their obligations to fund health care, it 

has an obligation to at least refrain from actions which will 

increase the costs for consumers in provinces.  To do anything 

else would demonstrate a blatant disregard for the mutual 

commitment to the cost containment which I referred to earlier. 

 

This action that we saw a year ago is a severe blow to health 

care in Saskatchewan.  Hospitals and consumers will have to 

buy newly developed brand name drugs from the large 

pharmaceutical companies.  Now their generic equivalents will 

take years longer to get into the market-place.  And on average, 

brand name drugs are twice the price of their generic 

equivalents. 

 

(1645) 

 

I've got a list of three drugs, Mr. Speaker, and the brand name 

costs for one particular prescription is $35.79.  For the generic 

equivalent, it's $4.39.  The second example, Mr. Speaker, is a 

particular drug whose brand name costs $60.44.  The generic 

cost is $19.23.  The third example, Mr. Speaker, is a particular 

drug.  The prescription cost $7.17 for the brand name, and the 

generic cost is $2.53.  So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that some 

drugs are a lot more than 50 per cent difference between the 

brand names and the generic drugs.  When we talk about an 

average -- that's an average -- some particular drugs, there isn't 

as big of a spread, and some drugs there's a tremendous spread. 



April 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

And that's where the economic hit comes against individuals, 

the economic drain out of our communities.  If you look at 

provinces like Saskatchewan that has a drug plan and some of 

the other provinces, whether drug plans -- in my opinion -- 

whether drug plans carry 50 per cent of the cost of the drug or 

10 per cent or 90 per cent, the bottom line is there's an 

economic drain out of our communities for the high cost of 

these prescription drugs.  And these are going directly to the 

head offices of the major pharmaceutical companies which, I 

might add, are not even based in Canada but are based in other 

cities in the world, most notably in Europe. 

 

I think the handling of the patent legislation by the former 

government and by this present government is a revealing 

approach to free trade in the GATT.  I think that it's a . . . the 

GATT and free trade and the federal government -- both the 

previous one and the present one -- are lining up their ducks for 

more changes in trade that will have a heavier economic hit 

year in and year out on us as individuals. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to close by saying that I 

think that this is, as I started by saying, I think it's one of the 

most important topics we're going to be debating in this House.  

I think it's something that every MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) should consider seriously when they 

vote.  I think every person in this province should understand 

what the pharmaceutical companies are doing to us, and I 

would ask that every MLA consider on supporting this motion.  

And I would shut down my comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:48 p.m. 

 


