




















































Hansard: March 07, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 693 

 March 7, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister.  I hope you had a good supper.  What I'd like to 

discuss now is -- before I get into some other items -- perhaps 

the role that you see for the minister.  As the minister, what is 

your role with the Department of Education?  Are you there as 

an administrator or are you there as an advocate for education, 

to deliver the best possible education for Saskatchewan?  What 

do you see your role as, as the minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Before I answer that question I want to 

answer the questions that you raised prior to supper.  And at 

that time the critic talked about the NDP's (New Democratic 

Party) record in taxation, as well as the previous 

administration's record when it came to taxation. 

 

One of the comments that you made that I'd like to correct you 

on is that the NDP promised that we would get rid of the 

provincial sales tax.  We did not promise that.  What we did say 

was that we would not harmonize the provincial sales tax with 

the national goods and services tax because we thought it 

inappropriate to extend the PST (provincial sales tax) to 

restaurant meals, to books, newspapers, and services. 

 

So the promise that my colleagues and the leader of the NDP, 

the member from Riversdale, made prior to the 1991 election 

was that we would not extend the provincial sales tax on all of 

those goods and services that are taxed under the GST (goods 

and services tax). 

 

I guess the other point I'd like to make is that it has long been 

the position of my party that the goods and services tax is not a 

fair tax in that it is not based on one's ability to pay. It's based 

on the goods and services that all of us have to purchase, and 

that really it is an unfair tax on those lower income Canadians. 

 

When you said that . . . in your previous remarks you said that 

the gas tax was a mistake, that you shouldn't have removed the 

tax on gasoline.  I just want to remind you that it cost the 

taxpayers of this province over a billion dollars.  We now have 

an additional billion dollars to our deficit because it was 

revenue that was lost.  And I think the thing that we can say 

about the gas tax is that it's a fair tax because it's based on the 

miles that one travels. And there are many people who don't 

have vehicles and therefore they don't have to have this tax 

because they don't use gasoline. 

 

In terms of your question, what is the role of the minister?  I 

think it's fair to say that the Minister of 

Education serves basically two roles.  The minister, like all 

other ministers of the Crown, is a member of a provincial 

cabinet or Executive Council.  We are involved in the 

decision-making process that occurs in terms of all government 

policy in all areas of the province.  So obviously a minister, 

like all of my cabinet colleagues and government caucus 

members, would participate in the decisions that governments 

must make as they govern a province. 

 

Now the second role that I see is not to involve myself in the 

day-to-day activities of the Department of Education. 

 

But certainly the role of the minister is one of policy, in the 

area of policy, where governments obviously have to design 

and devise policy that is then implemented by those people 

who work in the department.  As well I can say that I do see 

myself as an advocate for education in this province -- as the 

Minister of Education -- but I also am aware that I have a larger 

role in that I'm involved in all areas of government decision 

making and therefore the decisions are in the best interest of 

government-wide initiatives and in the best interest of all of the 

people in the province. 

 

As you know our government has had a great deal of focus on 

trying to eliminate our provincial deficit as a result of the 

strategic work that we've engaged in in the last two and a half 

years.  We can now say to our citizens that we have the lowest 

per capita deficit in the country.  We can now say to our 

citizens that we will be the first province that gets themselves 

out of the whole concept of having continuous deficits.  And 

we can now say to our citizens that times are beginning to 

improve, that we've begun to turn the corner, and that there will 

be economic and social renewal in this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'll come 

back to your role as minister later.  I just want to comment on 

some of the things you mentioned. 

 

I found it interesting that you would describe the GST, or any 

harmonized tax on goods and services, as being an unfair one 

because certain segments of society you view as not having the 

ability to pay that, that they would be trapped into it and forced 

to pay it.  Because, Madam Minister, that is exactly how I view 

utility rate increases.  Everyone in this province has to pay their 

power bill.  Everyone in this province has to pay their heating 

bill.  Those items . . . Their telephone . . . Everyone, I shouldn't 

say everyone, but nearly everyone in this province regardless of 

their financial income, has a telephone and they're all trapped 

into paying any increases that may occur in those. 

 

And when the government increases those, then those people 

on the low income are trapped into paying.  Even if they may 

not use, say their telephone for long distance, that residential 

rate has increased very significantly and I have some figures 

some place that I can look up.  But the actual numbers are not 

important here; what is important is that those things are being 

forced on the low income people who do not have the 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

ability to pay which you say, Madam Minister, is what you 

have a concern about. 

 

When you look at the E&H (education and health) tax that has 

gone up from 7 per cent to 9 per cent, certainly it's not on 

services and it's not on food, but it's on every material thing 

that we buy in this province and those low income people are 

also trapped into paying that, Madam Minister.  So while you 

may claim that the GST in your view is unfair because the low 

income people would have to pay it, I suggest, Madam 

Minister, that the low income people are having to pay much 

more than they did in 1991 because of your government raising 

utility rates and the E&H tax. 

 

Perhaps we should get into some areas, Madam Minister, of 

spending money.  I'd like to know how the capital funding 

criteria works.  What is the criteria for choosing one project 

over another project when it comes to funding capital projects 

in this province for education? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for the 

question.  The process for approving major capital projects has 

the following features. 

 

The capital process is open to the public, so it's not a closed 

process.  Changes to the facility planning guidelines make it 

mandatory to have a high percentage of relocatable 

construction.  Capital projects are estimated by using different 

costs for different types of construction.  And what we mean by 

that is, gym areas cost more to construct than, say, classrooms.  

The cost model also provides for increased construction costs 

when projects are located away from major centres and for 

small-scale projects.  The funding formula is used to calculate a 

fixed maximum provincial contribution, and this allows school 

divisions to save on their contribution by reducing the total cost 

to the project.  And the mill factor takes into consideration a 

school division's ability to pay in determining their share of a 

capital cost of a project.  And the model encourages better 

utilization of existing facilities through consideration of 

availability of facilities within a 30-kilometre radius prior to 

project approval. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if 

the minister could table that document please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We can table that document. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I would 

have to guess that you have a limited amount of funds available 

for capital projects.  When you have a number of projects 

which come forward that would seem to have an equal value, 

how do you determine which ones receive funding and which 

ones may be pushed back? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We have a ranking process.  We don't 

have that with us, but I can certainly give it to you.  I can tell 

you that, in terms of this year's capital projects, there were two 

capital projects that were 

announced last year.  I think there's about $14 million available 

for the Saskatoon Catholic school system for a new high school 

in the Sutherland area or Forest Grove area in Saskatoon.  And 

in Regina the . . . or in . . . yes, in Regina, the Regina Public 

School Board is receiving funding for a high school in the 

north-west.  And I think there's about another $6 million that's 

available, and the projects that are going to be funded are all 

health and safety projects. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So if you have a concern for one of your 

schools and you would like to have some capital funding, it 

should be in the criteria of health-related concerns, health and 

safety, to get your funding in.  I wonder if you could give us a 

list of those items that are currently being funded for capital 

projects. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Okay, I can tell you for 1993-94, 

Wakaw School Division, the Bruno School, there's an addition 

in renovation; Waldheim School at Sask Valley, replacement 

and upgrading; Battleford School Division, the Maymont 

School, addition and renovations; Arcola School Division, the 

Stoughton School; Thunder Creek, the Mortlach School; 

Wilkie, St. George R.C.S.S.D., the St. George School; Wadena 

School Division, Kelvington School; Saskatoon School 

Division, Bedford Road School; Shamrock School Division, 

Foam Lake School; and Canora School Division, the Canora 

Composite High School.  Those are the projects that were 

announced in 1993-94. 

 

And '94-1995, those haven't quite been finalized, but certainly 

when we have them we'll give them to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

reason I brought this up is one of my local schools is interested 

in some capital funding, but their complaint is that they always 

seem to be getting pushed back on the list.  And they were 

wondering exactly what the criteria was to actually, at the end 

of the day, get some funding to do their capital project on an 

elementary school.  And so they were concerned as to what 

exactly the criteria was.  This would be in the Oxbow School 

Division, the Carnduff Elementary School.  And they felt they 

were being pushed back, that they couldn't get up close enough 

to the front line to actually receive their funding.  And so that's 

why they asked me to bring this up, to find out exactly what the 

criteria was and how the formula worked, Madam Minister. 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said earlier, because there are 

limitations to capital funding, the projects that will be occurring 

this year are in terms of health and safety issues, but we 

certainly can provide the Oxbow School Division and yourself 

with the criteria that the department uses to determine whether 

or not we have projects go ahead. 

 

I will say this, that there is no -- and I repeat no -- political 

interference in the projects that are being determined by the 

Department of Education.  It is 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

based on occupational health and safety. 

 

I can assure you also of this, that the Minister of Education will 

not involve herself in determining what projects get approval 

and what projects don't.  The criteria is established, and it's 

based on a set of criteria, and we're going to follow that criteria 

as long as we're the government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm sure 

that all the school boards will be pleased to hear that, providing 

they have the criteria.  Now perhaps they do; I don't know, but 

they were asking me what the criteria was.  So one would have 

to think that they have some concerns about how the process is 

working.  Once we get the list, Madam Minister, I may come 

back to that particular item. 

 

Madam Minister, the school trustees association made a 

submission to the government relating to The Labour Standards 

Act and the review dealing with it.  They had some serious 

concerns, Madam Minister, about the process before they even 

got into labour standards.  Their concern was about 

consultation.  They were very disturbed by the fact that they 

only found out that The Labour Standards Act was going to be 

reviewed and perhaps legislation brought forward on it, and 

they were not consulted. 

 

They felt that with a employment body of approximately 

18,000 people that they would be one of those areas that would 

be consulted.  And it was only by accident, Madam Minister, 

that they found out that this review was taking place.  One of 

their employees was involved through another sector and found 

out this was taking place.  They have approximately 17,000 

people working for them -- 11,000 teachers, 1,000 

administrative staff, and 5,000 support staff. 

 

They found out about two weeks in advance that the 

consultation process was in place on this.  They received the 

discussion guidelines for this particular piece of legislation on 

October 28 to attend a meeting of November 4.  And then they 

were informed that their briefs were to be submitted by 

November 15, 1993.  They were given an extension on that. 

 

I would like to read a paragraph from the brief they submitted: 

 

 As a result, we received the discussion guide on October 8, 

for a meeting on November 4, 1993.  We were informed that 

briefs were to be submitted by November 15, 1993, but that 

we would be granted an extension.  On the basis of this 

limited consultation, it appears that the government will 

develop its policy with respect to labour standards reform and 

the government will defend those policies by saying that it 

consulted. 

 

 Issues for discussion at the community meetings were 

preselected.  There was no indication of what the government 

perceives as problems with the current law or what new 

policy the government is considering.  We can only surmise 

from questions posed in the discussion guide, the direction 

that the government may be moving with regard to labour 

standards. 

 

 We are concerned that this is the beginning and the end of 

consultation, and that the next we hear of labour standards 

reform will be the day that the legislation is introduced in the 

legislature.  We will have no prior opportunity to review 

proposed policy or legislative changes, and analyse their 

impact on the education sector. 

 

But, Madam Minister, when I asked you the question dealing 

with what you saw as the role of minister, you talked of it being 

a policy area and as an advocate.  And I would think, Madam 

Minister, that on both sides of that, that when you have a major 

employer in the province and you're talking of changing The 

Labour Standards Act, if the Minister of Labour didn't consult 

with that group and notify them, that you, as the Minister of 

Education, would have consulted with that group and provided 

them with the information that something was about to happen. 

 

So I think as both in the area of policy and advocacy, Madam 

Minister, it would have been incumbent on you to have 

consulted with this group, one of the major employers, 

probably one of the largest employers outside of government 

itself, Madam Minister. 

 

Have you, as the Minister of Education, consulted with the 

SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) dealing 

with the labour standards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I just want to say this to the member, 

that my colleague, the Minister of Labour, the member from 

Regina Churchill Downs, has met with the SSTA, once I 

believe, on one occasion for four hours and he is meeting again 

with the SSTA this Thursday, March 10, to again consult on 

this legislation. 

 

I want to also say about The Labour Standards Act, and 

amendments to The Trade Union Act, that my colleague has 

gone all over the province, has been to many, many 

communities, including the community that I represent, to 

consult with the business community, the school community, as 

well as others who are interested in any amendments that might 

occur.  So I think the SSTA would concur that they've had an 

opportunity to meet with the minister.  They met with the 

minister for four hours and they will have another opportunity 

to meet with the minister this week. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  They 

have been consulted with perhaps since this brief was 

presented.  But prior to the brief being presented in December 

of '93, they felt they had been missed, that they hadn't been 

consulted with when the first meeting was being held on 

November 4, and they didn't receive the discussion paper until 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

October 28.  I think they have a valid reason to complain here, 

Madam Minister, that they were being, not necessarily 

excluded on purpose, but missed in the process. 

 

And I think it's important that a group that represents 17,000 

employees, when it comes to labour standards, should receive 

some consideration and at least be listened to and have 

discussions with. 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to go back to your comments on the 

PST, that your government -- or your party when in opposition 

-- hadn't promised to eliminate it.  Well, Madam Minister, I 

have a quote from your leader, the current Premier, the member 

from Riversdale, taken from the leaders' debate of October 5, 

1991.  And he says, and I quote: the PST is not going to be 

around after October 21 if we're in power. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's right. We have the E&H now. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's right.  Even the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloyd agrees that that's what he said.  Well, Madam 

Minister, you did eliminate the harmonization but the 

provincial sales tax is still in place, Madam Minister, and that 

has cost this province approximately $250 million a year, the 

elimination of that tax. 

 

Madam Minister, one of the items that the SSTA is also very 

interested in -- and it came up at their convention last fall -- 

was the bargaining system.  They passed a resolution at their 

convention asking that the government implement what they 

call 4-4-1: four representatives from the SSTA, four 

representatives from the government, and one representative 

chosen by that group of eight, the ninth member being 

independent and sitting as the chairman. 

 

Madam Minister, are you giving any considerations to that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said at the time, and the position 

hasn't changed a bit, that it is the position of the province of 

Saskatchewan that we are not prepared to change the 

legislation.  We are prepared, however, to enter into 

discussions with the SSTA to determine who the ninth person 

would be.  We're prepared to discuss with the SSTA a process 

for developing mandate. And I'm pleased to report to the 

member that we have had a number of meetings with the SSTA 

during the . . . over the course of the past two months, and that 

we are very, very close in terms of an agreement that will be 

satisfactory to everyone. 

 

At the time I indicated that it is the view of the government that 

given we have a deficit reduction strategy, that we plan on 

getting to a balanced budget by 1996-97, that it is not our 

intention at this time to leave the collective bargaining process 

to the school trustees because it is our view that teachers are an 

important component in our public sector bargaining process. 

Obviously the government wants to play a key role in that 

process because what happens to the wages and benefits of the 

people who are public employees, civil servants, or employed 

by third parties that receive funding from the province, 

obviously that has an impact upon our strategy when it comes 

to a balanced budget by 1996-97. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, thank you.  I'm sure 

that the SSTA and that the local division boards across the 

province will be very interested in hearing that you are giving 

this serious consideration, and I would encourage you to do so 

and to implement a 4-4-1 program in some form.  I think it's 

very important that the ratepayers in the public, throughout the 

school divisions, feel that they actually have some real control 

on the money that are being spent, that they are collecting 

through their taxes, their 60 per cent. 

 

As it sits today . . . and it's been in place for a number of years, 

and I'm not sure how long that the government has had five 

members on the board, and the SSTA has had four.  But what it 

amounted to at the end of the day was that the government of 

the day could make the decision within that bargaining group 

as to what they were going to accept, the STF's (Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation) proposals, or they were going to reject 

them or a combination in between.  But it ultimately ended up 

with the government group, that five, making the decision. 

 

I think it's very important that that be a cooperative effort, that 

it be meaningful for the members of the school boards that they 

actually have some control.  So I would encourage you to 

follow through with that one and to implement some form of a 

4-4-1. 

 

Now I'm not sure what the STF is going to think about that, but 

I think they have to negotiate with the management board, no 

matter who sits there.  One of the areas that is somewhat 

contentious and, as you noticed earlier, I didn't necessarily 

agree with my colleague from Kindersley and his comments on 

amalgamation.  Exactly how will your pilot projects work, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well I can tell you there are times 

when, in all political parties, when we don't necessarily agree 

with each other.  But obviously we arrive at our policy 

decisions through the democratic progress. 

 

In terms of amalgamations and how they will work, we have 

said that there will be three to five pilot projects.  We have had 

different school boards from across the province approach us 

with amalgamation proposals.  At present the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees, along with LEADS (League of Educational 

Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), the STF, 

SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials), and the department, are devising a set of criteria that 

the pilot projects will have to meet.  The criteria will be such 

that all projects will have to meet this criteria in terms of going 

ahead. 

 

We'll have to take into consideration staffing issues, 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

because there are various collective bargaining agreements with 

various school divisions, which may differ.  As well, there will 

have to be a public consultation process with local property tax 

ratepayers. 

 

The SSTA, STF, LEADS, SASBO, and the department, will 

also develop a process for selecting the pilot projects, and they 

will also develop a process and criteria for evaluating the pilot 

projects. 

 

There are many people who believe that amalgamation is going 

to solve a number of problems. To be frank, I'm not sure. And 

that's why we want to do the evaluation, to see whether in fact 

amalgamation does make educational sense, and whether or not 

there are savings to be made. 

 

We are not yet convinced of those particular positions, and as 

you probably know, there are a number of people in the 

province who had some concerns about the report that was 

passed by the SSTA.  They do not want blanket 

amalgamations.  And it's the position of the government that 

we want to proceed cautiously and deliberately, and that's why 

the three to five pilot projects.  They will only be for those 

school divisions that are willing, voluntarily willing to 

amalgamate.  And this is not going to be forced on anybody. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I agree 

that it has to be voluntary, that it can only work when divisions 

ask to amalgamate with someone else or if even portions of the 

divisions ask.  You know it's possible that if you have a 

division that is centred in a number of different divisions, that 

portions of that division may wish to go with someone else 

because of their trading patterns, etc. 

 

And I think that if it comes to amalgamations, whatever 

happens, it has to be done voluntarily; that it will not work if 

it's done like the health system was done.  You'll have another 

major revolt on your hands, Madam Minister.  And I think you 

can do it much gentler, and it will work if it's done voluntarily.  

And evaluation, I think, Madam Minister, is also going to be a 

critical part of this. 

 

You mentioned savings.  Well if you look at school closures 

that have happened across this province, the divisions have 

said, well we can save money if we close that school.  But in 

some cases a large number of the parents and the public in that 

area question whether or not the school division took into 

account all of the factors involved, such as transportation costs, 

which increased when those schools were closed.  So I think it's 

very important in this issue of amalgamation that it be done 

voluntarily. 

 

A large number of the smaller school divisions are afraid of 

this.  They think they're going to be swallowed up, that their 

schools are going to be closed, that their tax base is simply 

going to be stolen by a larger school division to fund one of 

their large 

schools. 

 

Madam Minister, when you are looking at the capital funding 

projects that you have in place, do you take into consideration 

such things as amalgamations?  I know that there are . . . I have 

received some complaints that some school divisions are trying 

to build schools to gain an upper hand once amalgamations 

take place.  The claim has been made that some divisions are 

looking at building a larger school in hopes that they will be 

able to maintain their school once amalgamation takes place.  

When you're looking at your capital funding, does that play any 

part whatsoever?  Do you look at the possibilities of 

amalgamations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- No, we do not. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, perhaps, maybe 

you should be.  You know if you're looking . . . and I don't 

mean to be critical on this because I've received some concerns 

-- not the same people -- but other concerns that when you're 

looking at the capital funding right now, is it really going to be 

worthwhile to build or improve in school A if amalgamation 

takes place down the road a year or two, whatever.  Is it really 

worthwhile putting the capital funding into that school when 

there may be another school down the road a short distance?  

Have you taken that into consideration at all? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said earlier, our capital funding at 

this point, because of our limited financial resources, is based 

on occupational health and safety.  We are not building, with 

the exception of the two schools, one in Saskatoon and Regina.  

There are no new, brand-new schools that are being built.  We 

are doing repairs.  That is the extent of our capital construction. 

 

I can assure you that we see this pilot project process as a . . . 

it's a response to what the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association wanted in terms of their report.  We were not 

prepared to go to 35 school divisions in the province.  We 

wanted to see whether or not there were educational or are 

educational benefits to our students.  We're not sure of that.  

We're not sure if bigger necessarily means better. 

 

We wanted to be sure that there were financial benefits.  There 

may not be.  We wanted to ensure that there are appropriate 

processes to personnel, elections of trustees, there are contracts 

and financial managers.  This is a fairly complex process and 

we wanted to see if total regrouping or restructuring was 

required in the amalgamation proposal. 

 

So as I said earlier, the criteria has not yet been developed.  

We're just going through the developmental process.  We've 

said there are three to five projects for those school boards who 

voluntarily want to amalgamate.  No one, and I repeat, no one 

-- or school division -- will be forced into this process. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  And, Madam 

Minister, I welcome you and the opportunity 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

this evening to ask you questions, and I welcome your officials 

as well.  I recognize that your department really did try to do 

the right thing by informing the various education agencies 

affected by cuts in funding, that the axe would be falling.  And 

I have spoken with many who are feeling the impacts of these 

cuts, and I think it is important to realize that while people have 

had time to prepare for the pain, it still hurts nevertheless. 

 

And I suppose it is somewhat like telling someone not to get 

hungry next week because you are warning them in advance 

that there won't be any food.  The cuts have been very deep in 

education, and they have been painful, and I am sure that you, 

Madam Minister, can acknowledge this.  I believe that it is 

incumbent upon you and your officials to give us a sense of 

where your department is heading now that you are more than 

halfway through your mandate as government.  And I think that 

people want to know what direction is set for education.  The 

mandate defined in the budget is, and I quote: 

 

 . . . to provide leadership in the development and operation of 

education and training in the Province, as well as labour 

market planning. 

 

And I would assume that, in this model, leadership does come 

from the top.  Will you articulate, Madam Minister, what your 

department sees as the vision for education in Saskatchewan 

and what you intend to deliver as your ultimate goal for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for her 

question.  In terms of the issue of funding reductions, I will say 

this: that minus 2, minus 2, and now minus 4 announced a year 

ago is significant.  There is no question about that and we 

acknowledge that.  The point that is made is this, that when you 

look at education and health spending, they are the two largest 

budget items.  As I said earlier to the opposition critic, 

education spending is some $888 million in the province.  

Interest on the public debt is $842 million.  When you have a 

deficit reduction strategy, in order to get yourself to a point 

where you can have a balanced budget, there's no question that 

you have to look at the two big budget items, and that's health 

and education. 

 

As a result of those reductions, decisions -- and tough decisions 

-- have had to be made at the school division level and the 

community level.  The thing that I appreciate is the fact that all 

of our partners in this process -- and I'm talking about school 

divisions, teachers, students, superintendents, directors of 

education, secretary-treasurers -- have made a tremendous 

contribution to the turnaround that we're presently 

experiencing. 

 

Saskatchewan can now say that we have the lowest per capita 

deficit in the country.  And as I said earlier to the opposition 

critic, I'm advised by the six bankers from New York that were 

here on budget day that Saskatchewan will be the first province 

to make its way out of the various fiscal messes that have been 

created across the country.  And that certainly does give us 

some reason to be optimistic about our future. 

 

In terms of the vision of education and what do we plan to do, 

we have, in the last two years, undergone a major review of the 

entire education system in the province of Saskatchewan.  We 

have reviewed the community college system.  We've had the 

universities review.  We've had the SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) review.  We've 

had the high school review.  We've had the private vocational 

review and I think that's it.  We've had five reviews in the 

province.  We are presently putting together a strategic plan 

with all of our post-secondary educational partners for 

post-secondary education in this province. 

 

We've had, I believe, two or three meetings where we have 

SIAST, the two universities, the private vocational schools, the 

aboriginal institutions as well as the regional colleges sitting 

down and devising a strategic plan for post-secondary 

education in order that our students and young people can have 

access to post-secondary institutions.  We hope to release our 

response to the reviews in June of this year. 

 

Secondly, we have said that with Directions and the core 

curriculum process that was begun in the early 1980s, that it's 

time to complete the process.  And therefore with the high 

school review that has just occurred, there are a number of 

recommendations that are being made by the advisory 

committee.  And the government has said we will respond to 

the advisory committee's recommendations by the end of 

March or early April. 

 

And once we respond this will allow us to get on with the 

process of renewing high school curriculum in this province 

which is over 20 years old.  I sometimes find it shocking that 

we do not -- and I think the member will have some 

appreciation for this -- that we do not have incorporated into 

our high school curriculum, many of the works of 

Saskatchewan writers, poets, novelists, and we don't know our 

own literature and poetry.  And obviously it will be important 

to devise or revise our curriculum not only in education, but the 

sciences, mathematics, as well as other subject areas.  And we 

hope to have all of our curriculum development work done by 

1996-97 in high school in the core areas in order that our 

students really can have one of the best educations in this 

country. 

 

Finally, in terms of the vision for the department, we have an 

expanded mandate in the last year and we are now responsible 

for training and employment. 

 

With the federal government's decision to overhaul the social 

safety net in this country, I think it's appropriate to say the 

department is looking forward to renewing the social security 

system in this country.  We think, and certainly I believe and 

my colleague the Minister of Social Services believes, that this 

is our opportunity to redesign social programs that came about 

as a result of the Depression and the Second World War. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

Having been the previous minister of Social Services and now 

the minister responsible for training, I think it's fair to say that 

when you try to do things there are often impediments that 

come about because of federal rules, and I'm sure the federal 

government feels the same way.  And we are approaching this 

process of social renewal in this country along with our 

provincial and federal counterparts as an opportunity to make 

life better for people, not worse. 

 

We think that we need to ensure that the young people in this 

country have hope, have employment opportunities, but there 

are some challenges, and the challenge will be this: training for 

what?  Because if you look at the history of training programs, 

we train people for jobs that aren't there.  It is often difficult for 

our post-secondary institutions to respond quickly because of 

entrenched processes, I could say. 

 

It often is problematic when you may have a region of the 

province that requires some training in a particular area, but 

because of the courses that are in that area, they can't seem to 

adapt quickly.  So what we're looking forward to, in terms of 

the federal government process, is an opportunity to design a 

social security system that is flexible, that is equitable, that 

provides accessibility to people, and in fact will make people's 

lives better. 

 

This can't simply be an exercise in deficit reduction or offload 

onto the province.  It has to be a genuine exercise where we 

work collaboratively and in consultation with each other.  We 

do so with a set of principles that will lead to better 

educational, employment, and training opportunities for our 

citizens. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, I 

understand then that that is your vision for education for 

Saskatchewan.  What are the specific public policy objectives 

that drive your department? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- If you look in our annual report, you 

will see the vision statement for education.  As well, the 

Education Council is presently renewing a vision statement for 

education and that will soon be released for the public. 

 

But I can say this: that the vision of our department, and 

certainly in terms of our planning that's going on with 

post-secondary institutions, is that we're trying to design a 

system that . . . we call it the seamless web where people will 

have opportunity to lifelong learning; that people will have the 

opportunity to be educated in and trained in the area that they 

choose.  And they will also have, obviously, jobs.  That will be 

important. 

 

But if you care to look at the annual report, that certainly is the 

vision statement for the department and the Education Council 

will soon be releasing a renewed education vision statement for 

the province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Chair, Madam 

Minister, who's established the objectives that you've outlined, 

and what means do you use to communicate them to your 

employees as well as to those in education at large? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The establishment of the vision process 

as defined in the annual report, I understand, has been done in 

consultation with all of our education partners, and the partners 

are many.  We have all of those partners in K to 12 education 

as well as all of the partners in post-secondary education. 

 

In terms of how they are communicated to the public, there are 

annual reports that are communicated to the public, we have 

regional offices in various parts of the province.  They 

obviously are communicating the vision statement or the 

objectives and goals to the public.  As well, in terms of 

internally, how those goals are given to or relayed to our 

employees, I understand that there are staff workshops, and 

staff have the opportunity to have input into the visions 

statements, I'm advised. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister.  

What management structure is in place in your department to 

ensure that your objectives are achieved, and where necessary, 

corrective action is taken? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Obviously you're trying to get at 

something and it might be helpful if you just put it on the table 

so I know what you're getting at. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well, Madam Minister, I do have a specific 

way of addressing this.  I start at the larger part and I keep 

getting narrower.  It's sort of like outlining what one's 

objectives are, outlining who in fact would be responsible for 

meeting those objectives, the time line involved, the 

measurability involved, the ways of ensuring that expected 

versus actual results do match.  So that's really where I'm 

getting at. 

 

What I'm really wanting to know, is is there a structure in place 

in your department, since you have, I believe, stated a vision, 

you have outlined some objectives, that I'm assuming therefore 

that there is a structure in place to ensure that the objectives are 

being achieved.  And so I'm wondering what that structure is so 

that we can determine whether or not what your plans are, are 

actually plans that are being met. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We have a policy and planning 

coordinating unit.  The associate deputy minister, who is with 

me this evening, is responsible for policy and planning.  We 

have regional offices in various parts of the province.  The 

regional offices are just in the process of being expanded in a 

sense that historically they've tended to be K to 12 regional 

offices, and they're going to take on an additional role in that 

they are now also going to be there and available for those 

people involved in post-secondary education.  My 

understanding is that the policy and planning coordinating unit 

is charged with the responsibility of articulating the vision to 

our employees in the field. 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister.  

You've enumerated different kinds of objectives and I'm 

wondering if you can tell us what criteria are actually used to 

ensure that you're meeting the objectives that have been 

outlined by the Department of Education? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised that we have evaluation 

units that are built into each major division.  The department 

has a post-secondary side and a K to 12 side.  I'm advised that 

we have advisory committees advising the department on 

various areas of educational policy so that we have input from 

all of our educational partners. 

 

If you look at the work of Education historically in this 

province, not much is accomplished without the collaboration 

and involvement and input from all of our educational partners.  

We certainly have that history in the K to 12 system where 

LEADS, the SSTA, the STF, and SASBO, along with the 

department . . . Basically it devises much of the policy.  It's a 

collaborative process. 

 

In the post-secondary side we are now in the process of 

bringing together all of our partners in post-secondary to put 

together a post-secondary strategy for the province in order to 

avoid overlap, duplication, and waste.  So I think it's fair to say 

that there's a lot of input goes into educational policy in the 

province based on a collaborative process. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, did any 

organizational changes take place in your department, or are 

they planned for this year, that will make your department more 

responsive to those you would consider your clients?  Do you 

have any plans or have things transpired already? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- There is a new organizational structure 

that was implemented by the department in December, I am 

advised by the department will make the department more 

efficient.  If you look at our funding reductions in our 

department, I think Education has had a 30 per cent reduction 

in its operating expenses in the last four years.  I think if you 

look at the funding that comes from Education, 97 per cent 

goes to third parties, 3 per cent goes into the department.  

Administrative costs have been reduced by some 30 per cent 

and with that had to come a new organization or reorganization 

chart.  But we'll get that chart for you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much. I appreciate that.  

Speaking of cuts, there will be a decrease of $14.3 million in 

operating grants from K to 12 alone in the education system.  In 

addition to this, boards face additional costs of $3 million in 

teachers' salaries, in new benefits for teachers, estimated to cost 

a quarter of a million dollars.  Salary increases for non-teaching 

staff are estimated at $2.5 million.  Natural gas increases for 

those boards are going to be $390,000.  UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) and CPP (Canada Pension Plan) 

increases in excess of $1.5 million, and workers' compensation 

premiums increases of $125,000. 

Madam Minister, what study have you made of the local tax 

base to determine whether it is feasible for local authorities to 

pass on these increased costs that have been passed on because 

of education costs . . . decreases, cuts.  Have you investigated 

whether communities can support these cuts and if so, would 

you please forward your impact studies that you've done? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well as I said earlier, education and 

health are the two largest expenditure items of government.  

Over two-thirds of the government's budget goes to third 

parties.  When you are in a position where you must reach a 

zero or balanced budget, obviously cuts have to be made.  And 

so we've seen reductions in Education, Health and all 

government departments.  No government department has been 

spared, and consequently no citizen in this province has been 

spared. 

 

All of us have been asked to join in our endeavour to reduce the 

deficit and to get to a balanced budget.  We have the largest per 

capita debt in this country. I don't think anyone will dispute 

that.  When you're in the process of trying to renegotiate some 

of the long-term debt that's come due as a result of nine years 

of waste and mismanagement, you have to have bankers and 

bond dealers that are prepared to lend you the money to pay off 

the debt that's coming due. 

 

We weren't a very . . . Saskatchewan wasn't a very good risk.  

And in order to allow ourselves to renew some . . . renegotiate 

some of this debt that was coming due, we had to do some 

things.  And one of the things we had to do is we had to show 

the bankers and the bond dealers that we could get ourselves to 

a balanced budget in a short period of time. 

 

No one has been spared in this process.  We've all been asked 

to contribute to this process.  And that means everybody -- 

rural, urban, northern, young, older, in between -- everybody.  

And it's my sense that all people have been asked to participate 

and all people will enjoy the benefits once we turn the corner. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Do I take it 

then that there have not been studies made to determine 

whether or not communities can support these kinds of cuts and 

the increased responsibility on their part to make up for it at the 

local level? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- What I can say to you is that all 

communities have been asked to participate.  All citizens in this 

province have been asked to participate in our deficit reduction 

strategy. 

 

We understand that it has meant some tough decisions on the 

part of local school divisions, municipal governments, 

hospitals, I mean everybody.  Everybody has been asked to 

participate in this process and obviously there have been 

concerns expressed about that process.  But we can now say we 

have the lowest per capita deficit in the country; that we will 

reach our balanced budget barring some 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

unforeseen circumstance like federal Liberal offload. 

 

But we are making our way to the point where we can stand up 

in this House and announce that we've reached our balanced 

budget.  It allows us to renegotiate some of the debt that the 

members opposite racked up over the last nine years.  And it 

allows us to say, because we're meeting our targets, that there 

will be no further funding reductions to school boards in this 

province for the fiscal year 1995-1996. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister.  

I'm sure we should thank our lucky stars as far as equalization 

payments from the federal government which assured that you 

made your deficit reduction target which you would not have 

done otherwise. 

 

The current level of provincial funding is viewed by many as 

simply inadequate to maintain a quality education program in 

Saskatchewan.  This is what many people have come forward 

and been very concerned about, people, many of whom to 

whom you've referred this evening, directors of education and 

others.  And you did make reference earlier that in 1992 there 

was a 2 per cent increase in the provincial grant, 1993 another 

further 2 per cent cut, and this year the funding decreases by 4 

per cent. 

 

The loss of the foundation grant program has already resulted 

in rural and urban school closures and program cuts especially 

in areas like library, music, and in guidance.  And last year the 

number of teachers employed by school divisions was reduced 

by more than 250 people. 

 

Madam Minister, can you give us a summary analysis of how 

many teaching and teaching assistant positions will be lost at 

the field level this year as a result of the 4 per cent additional 

cuts taking effect with this budget? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- It's interesting, I've had the opportunity 

to be around the province since the Alberta government 

brought down their budget, and since a number of people have 

gone to various federal conferences and seen what other 

provinces and jurisdictions are doing, and what I can report to 

the House is this, that Saskatchewan has taken a gradual 

approach to deficit reduction of minus 2, minus 2, minus 4. 

 

Our neighbours in Alberta will cut out of their education 

system over 10 per cent this year, post-secondary some 18 per 

cent in a two-year period. 

 

In Nova Scotia last year they cut minus 4.  This year I'm told 

that they're probably going to cut minus 8.  That's the Liberal 

government in Nova Scotia.  Every government across the 

country has similar problems to Saskatchewan -- they were 

spending more than they were taking in. 

The only difference is this: Saskatchewan has the worst debt in 

the country, we have the lowest credit rating in the country, and 

we had a difficult time borrowing money to pay back some of 

the debt that those people over there racked up.  So we had to 

put together a plan. 

 

And as I said on budget day, there were six bankers from New 

York or bond dealers, or from investment houses, and they said 

this . . . I asked them: what do they think of the speech?  They 

said it was too long.  One of the shortest budget speeches, I'm 

told, 17 minutes. 

 

But they did say this: 

 

 Saskatchewan has the lowest debt per capita deficit in the 

country. 

 

 Saskatchewan will make its way out of the fiscal mess that 

this country is enduring before anybody else. 

 

 Saskatchewan has a prudent financial approach through 

program reductions and small tax increases. 

 

 Saskatchewan is making its way out. 

 

Obviously there have been program reductions in our 

communities when over 60 per cent, 66 per cent, of your 

budget goes to third parties; cuts have to come there.  I've said 

that our department has taken a 30 per cent hit in the last four 

years.  We've shrunk our administration.  We're encouraging 

other institutions to do the same, to try not to affect programs in 

the field, front-line services. But we can say to our partners that 

there'll be no funding reductions next year.  Alberta can't say 

that; Manitoba can't say that; Nova Scotia can't say that; 

Quebec can't say that. We can; we're through it.  We've made 

our way through it and things are starting to turn around.  And I 

think that if you talk to people who've been outside of the 

province, particularly in Alberta, they appreciate the fact that 

this government has taken a gradual approach, that we have 

notified our partners a year in advance of what to expect the 

following year. That's allowed school divisions an opportunity 

to do as much planning as possible. 

 

Obviously there are impacts; we don't deny that.  But we think 

that we have been able to assist school divisions in minimizing 

the impacts by giving them advance warning. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, Madam Minister, 

I'll repeat my question.  Can you give us a summary analysis of 

how many teaching and teaching assistant positions will be lost 

at the field level this year as a result of the 4 per cent additional 

costs taking effect in this budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I am advised that there will probably be 

250 teachers retire this year and 100 teachers will get out of the 

field of teaching, and that 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

we expect a 1.5 mill rate increase. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Decreased 

funding has created a situation in many school divisions -- and 

most of these rural, of course -- that they do not have the 

capacity to accommodate the kinds of decreases we're talking 

about.  And I understand very much where it's inviting to turn 

and look to other provinces.  But we do talk about the 

uniqueness of Saskatchewan, and this is really our 

circumstance here.  You do know that we are a very different 

kind of province, in particular the way in which we're spread 

around a province slightly smaller than the state of Texas.  So 

to try to make and draw comparisons simply from one province 

to the next, I don't think is really worthy of what it is we're 

trying to address with our own unique circumstances here. 

 

In many places, Madam Minister, there is simply no fat left to 

cut.  And this is a reorganization of education virtually being 

driven by what it is you've been referring to this evening, and 

that is purely by dollars.  It's the fiscal bottom line. 

 

Well my understanding is that you've cited now on different 

occasions -- both late this afternoon with the member from 

Souris-Cannington, and this evening you repeated -- about the 

people who were present during budget day.  That in fact, many 

of the circumstances we're facing were abominable things to 

face regardless of who would have taken over administering 

this province. 

 

And no one tries to undermine the seriousness of the financial 

situation of Saskatchewan, but in many instances what this is is 

a question of some choices and particularly of being able to 

hear what people are saying.  I know that you tell me that 

you're hearing what people are saying around the province, but 

this is also what they're talking about. 

 

They are feeling that there needs to be some way of 

determining long-term solutions from the department to offer to 

the boards of education for the crisis that has been created 

through the cutting of all of these funds.  There are many places 

that don't feel that there's anything else for them to give.  And 

they really wonder, even at their own community level, how 

they can manage any more. 

 

And one of the things that is very striking is that in each and 

every statement that's made in this House, people like to make 

reference to the federal government, and that one change from 

the federal government will throw your entire plan off.  Well, 

Madam Minister, there have been fundamental changes that 

have been put upon people.  And for people to simply indicate 

-- as members opposite often do -- that you are operating in the 

dark from the federal government . . . I happen to have met for 

an hour and a half with the Prime Minister of Canada last 

Thursday night and we travelled on the same plane together, 

going to the same destination, and one of the things that 

became very clear is that all of you knew exactly what was 

coming. 

He acknowledged that the Minister of Finance in Saskatchewan 

had received a call from the Minister of Finance federally; that 

there was no big surprise at all; that people knew what was 

going to be happening with equalization payments; and they 

knew what was going to be happening overall on that budget 

day. 

 

And one of the things you're saying is that somehow everyone 

should be rest-assured and feel much better because everything 

is simply going to come to an end now, except if the federal 

government does something to knock things off whack.  Well 

people at local levels are saying that what you've done has 

actually knocked them off whack.  They really are feeling very 

insecure about their financial situation, and that the taxpayers' 

pocket is only one pocket. 

 

Now as much as we can't do anything to change the federal 

government's policy, the one thing over which you have control 

is the provincial government's policy.  And one of the things 

that people want to know is what are the long-term solutions 

that your department is proposing in order to deal with the 

difficulties that these local school boards have been facing, 

especially those who are feeling that they may not be able to 

recover from the cuts that they've been facing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well, Member, I hear what you're 

saying.  The only difference is this, that if you look at 

municipal governments in the province, I think in 1992-93, 

they had over $43 million sitting in reserves, RMs (rural 

municipalities).  If you look at school divisions in this 

province, they had money sitting in reserves.  We had no 

money sitting in reserves anywhere.  We were flat broke.  I 

won't say flat, busted broke; that's not proper English. But we 

were flat broke, and that was the reality.  We didn't have any 

reserves anywhere to sort of try something here and try 

something there.  There was nothing.  So we were in a position 

where we had to make some difficult decisions. 

 

And I guess we made the decisions that we made -- minus two, 

minus two, minus four -- hard decisions but gentle decisions in 

comparison to what other provinces are doing. 

 

Now I know you will say that Saskatchewan is unique, and I 

agree with you.  I agree that we are unique.  We have less than . 

. . maybe a million people now, less than a million people in a 

very large area.  We are different than Nova Scotia.  We are 

somewhat different than Manitoba, a little bit different.  

They're more diversified.  We're different than Alberta. 

 

But our approach has been different as well.  What we have 

done is reduce funding; there's no question about that.  We've 

given our partners one-year-in-advance notice. No other 

province is doing that.  We've got the information out to our 

partners in education before Christmas in order that they could 

make some plans. 

 

We are in the process of devising a distance education strategy 

because we have some very real issues, 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

agreed, that we have to face in terms of how do we deliver an 

education system to citizens living in remote parts of 

Saskatchewan, rural and northern.  We can't put kids on the bus 

for three hours one way and three hours going the other way.  

When I was a child getting on a school bus, 7:30 in the 

morning was pretty early for a little kid, and we still have kids 

getting on the bus at 7:30 in the morning. 

 

We have fewer people living in rural Saskatchewan.  We have 

fewer young people who are having families living in rural 

Saskatchewan. And so it sort of begs the question, how do we 

have an education system that people can have access to not 

only K to 12 but post-secondary as well. 

 

And we think that by putting some additional resources into 

SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) 

because the federal funding runs out at the end of March, that 

we will be able to have a distance education agency that will 

assist us in making sure that our citizens, regardless of where 

they live in this province, have access to an education system. 

 

Now we're just in the process of putting that together.  We have 

various people who are involved in distance ed in the province, 

assisting us in doing that.  There are some school divisions that 

have looked at various ways of having interactive television, 

interactive media to assist them. 

 

We have an interesting situation at the Eston-Elrose School 

Division where a teacher in one school is teaching the kids in 

the other school, calculus.  And the teacher in the other school 

teaches kids in the other school, I believe it's physics.  And 

that's the way that they're preventing high school closures, by 

having a teacher in each school teaching to the other school. 

And therefore both communities can save their local school, 

which I think is a creative way. 

 

I mean Saskatchewan people are very creative and innovative. 

And we think that with the help of people across the province 

that have some expertise in the area of distance education, we 

can provide educational services to people. 

 

I think that's all I can say in terms of your question.  I know 

what you're saying, but given the financial circumstances . . . 

and I don't want to harp on it, but if you were sitting over here 

you'd be harping on it too.  Because I come from an education 

background.  There are many, many, many things that need to 

be done in education, there's no doubt about that.  I'd love to 

see an increase in funding for special education students, and 

you have some knowledge in that area. 

 

There's much more to be done in ensuring that individual 

students have access to individual programs.  And it's difficult 

to do that when you don't have a lot of money.  But I think that 

the good news is that there won't be any funding reductions 

next year. 

 

In terms of equalization payments, you mentioned that earlier.  

Thank goodness for the federal 

government.  There was a time in this province when we did 

not receive equalization payments.  And those times were in the 

1970s. We were not a welfare province. We were a have 

province.  We sent money to Ottawa. 

 

Well we are a have-not province now.  And the way this 

country was formed and the way Confederation was formed in 

this country, those people who didn't have it assisted those 

people . . . or those people who had it assisted those people 

who didn't have it.  In the good old days, we used to assist other 

parts of Canada.  Well it's not the good old days for 

Saskatchewan any more.  We have the highest debt in the 

country.  We have the worst credit rating in the country.  We 

get, quote, welfare payments from Ottawa. 

 

But we think we can turn that around.  We will be the first 

province out of the fiscal mess that other provinces are in.  We 

will have a balanced budget by 1996-97.  We have the lowest 

per capita deficit.  This province has a history of sacrifice and 

we will sacrifice in order that we can be a sovereign province 

and control our own destiny and control our own government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 

Minister, it is interesting, I think that there have been many 

concerns raised about the fact that there were equalization 

payments, transfer payments, whatever, that did not come from 

Ottawa, that had created problems prior to October of 1993.  So 

I think perhaps it wouldn't do us any harm periodically to 

acknowledge that things have changed, and that they did 

change under the circumstances, for your budget, in enough 

time to actually assist the people of Saskatchewan, the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I do think it's very telling indeed as well, that when the federal 

budget came down there was never any mention of the previous 

administration.  There was never any mention of Brian 

Mulroney.  And in fact it was very telling last week that there 

was a very interesting conversation last week, when a speech 

was given to people in Saskatoon where the comment made 

was, that sitting in the House of Commons Mr. Chrtien 

actually did know -- as a member of that House and paying 

attention -- what the financial circumstances were, facing the 

country.  And that was one of the reasons why he wanted to be 

Prime Minister of the country, in order to address that issue.  I 

think that it's in significant contrast to what we have had in the 

province of Saskatchewan where we've had endless comment 

made about who in fact has made the problem -- created the 

problem -- and now you're trying to solve the problem.  I don't 

think that that has really gotten us anywhere except for a lot of 

people feeling hopeless. 

 

Madam Minister, boards of education are now picking up 55 

per cent of the operating costs of K to 12 education.  And what 

do you believe is a fair 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

percentage share to be borne by the local boards, given their 

limited access to funding relative to the tax base that you have 

as a provincial government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I can say to the member this: that my 

position has not changed since my days in opposition.  And I 

support us eventually getting to 60/40, where 60 per cent of the 

cost of education is borne by all taxpayers in this province, and 

40 per cent is borne by local property taxpayers.  I continue to 

hold that view and so do my colleagues. 

 

I guess my question is . . . it would be useful, I think, since 

we're trying to engage . . . I think you want to keep this a 

non-partisan debate because you don't want us to talk about the 

Liberals in Ottawa and you're saying that we shouldn't blame 

the previous government, even though Paul Martin, the day 

after his budget, blamed the previous Mulroney government.  

But I guess what I'm interested in knowing is . . . you know, 

help us; tell us what you would do.  What would you cut?  

What would you cut?  Given that we have to get to zero; given 

that we have to renegotiate some of the debt that these people 

racked up; given that we have to get the fiscal madness that has 

gone on in this country for the last decade under control: what 

would you do?  I'd really appreciate hearing from the Liberal 

Party and the Liberal leader because obviously you have some 

good ideas.  I don't think it's good enough to stand there and 

criticize.  What is your position? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Deputy Chair, Madam Minister, you 

were doing far better when you were attempting to answer 

questions rather than asking the questions put to you by the 

member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Northcote. 

 

I will ask again: you indicated that what you thought would be 

a fair percentage share borne by local boards would be 40 per 

cent.  Do you believe, Madam Minister, the impact of your 

funding cuts is balanced between rural and urban areas, or do 

you agree that rural areas are now less able to offer complete 

programs than their urban counterparts? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- If you look at the foundation grant 

formula, it has not changed in this province over many years.  

Our government has not changed it.  It's the same formula that 

was there prior to our election.  The foundation grant formula is 

based on enrolments.  It's weighted by enrolments.  The pattern 

of rural migration to urban areas obviously has an impact upon 

the foundation grant and the monies available to various school 

divisions. 

 

Let me say this, that for the 1994 school year, rural school 

boards are estimated to receive an additional $78 million over 

and above the basic per pupil funding in recognition of the 

differing and more costly realities of rural Saskatchewan.  And 

I will say this: that in rural transportation they will receive 

$55.6 million; the small schools factor $9.4 million; sparsity 

factor $5.4 million; and an enrolment decline factor -- because 

when a school has its enrolment decreased there is a transition 

phase -- of 4.4 million, for a cost 

of $74.8 million for rural boards.  I should also tell you that 

rural boards receive a higher per pupil basic rate, and it's 5 per 

cent higher than urban boards, which provides them with an 

additional $12.5 million. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would you 

be willing to table that document?  Thank you. 

 

You're saying then that there are mechanisms in place to ensure 

that rural secondary students will not be at a disadvantage to 

get a program that they will need to qualify for post-secondary 

entrance requirements?  Perhaps you can describe the 

mechanisms that are in place that are going to ensure that rural 

secondary students will not be at a disadvantage to get the 

programs that they need to qualify for post-secondary entrance. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said earlier, we presently have just 

received a report of the High School Advisory Committee that 

has made a number of recommendations in terms of kind of 

curriculum we need to develop in the province for students in 

grade 10, 11, and 12. 

 

You are correct in saying that there is some worry, particularly 

in rural Saskatchewan -- and this is not new, this is not a new 

worry -- that school divisions need to provide those students, 

for instance who are interested in going into medicine, with the 

three sciences and the two mathematics, the geo-trig and 

algebra.  That is why we are involved in our distance education 

strategy, to try and get our distance education training agency 

up and running in order to cope with the kinds of issues that 

you raise. 

 

As well there are school boards that are looking at, I suppose, 

consolidation of their high schools in order that they can have 

enough students to provide a physics, a chemistry, a biology, 

the geo-trig and the mathematics, but we think that we should 

be able to assist those school boards that have remote areas and 

transportation distances are far too large in terms of our 

distance education agency. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  There's been 

considerable tinkering with the funding for curriculum and 

instruction.  What assurance can you give us that the core 

curriculum initiative is securely on track and that there are 

sufficient monies and support for new curriculum 

developments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well I can say this, that we have just 

appointed Dr. Margaret Lipp as the person in charge of 

curriculum in the province.  That was a welcome appointment 

by all of our partners in education. 

 

I can say this, that we are committed to developing and 

implementing and supporting core curriculum in this province.  

That once we can respond to the high school review which I 

want to do by the end of March or early April, we can get on 

with the task of revising our curriculum for students in grade 

10, 11, and 12, particularly in the core subject areas.  We hope 

to have 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

all of that work done by the 1996-97 school year. 

 

Now that certainly won't mean that the curriculum will be 

implemented or piloted but it will be designed or revised.  The 

curriculum work will be done.  So we are committed to 

continuing the process begun in the early 1980s with 

Directions in core curriculum and I think you will see that very 

shortly when we respond to the high school review. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister. I 

want to be on record as well saying that the appointment of Dr. 

Lipp was a very welcome one.  Can you quantify the impact 

that cuts to social services and health will have on the resources 

available to teachers who must deal with a wide range of 

overlapping issues in schools and comment on the plan that you 

have in place to ensure that there will not be a shortfall in the 

resources available to teachers for support? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- There has not been to my knowledge, 

any funding reductions in social services.  That is one area 

where we have not reduced spending.  It is our view that those 

most in need and those most vulnerable should not have to 

suffer as a result of some fiscal imprudence in the last nine 

years. 

 

I can say this, that we have developed an integrated services 

approach where Health, Education, Social Services, Justice, 

Municipal Government are coming together to have an 

integrated approach to children and youth in this province.  

And we believe that instead of departments being in their own 

little separate boxes, and cooperating and collaborating, that we 

can ensure that teachers can do what they're trained to do, and 

that's teach students; and that those people, such as mental 

health workers, social workers, and others, can support the 

teacher by taking a more integrated and collaborative approach 

to service delivery. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Your 

department is mandated to provide leadership training . . . 

pardon me, leadership in training and labour market planning.  

Will you table the list of studies that have been done on the 

current status of our workforce in Saskatchewan and the future 

requirements of our workforce in terms of training and 

education as they relate to the economic development vision for 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That's a very good question.  One of the 

things that I found useful in the 1980s was a report done by 

Flora MacDonald, the federal minister, when it came to labour 

market studies and availability.  We're just in the process of 

doing that because in order to devise a post-secondary system 

that is integrated and . . . not integrated but coordinated, and 

prevents duplication overlap, we need to know the -- I'll use the 

word -- manpower needs of our province in order to adequately 

address training issues.  So we're just in the process of doing 

that.  I can't provide you with current information, but once we 

have it, we'll give it to you. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, 

can you explain how the long-term goals of the ministry of 

Education directly affect the identified market niches of the 

Department of Economic Development?  And will your 

department's mandate adequately address the needs of our 

future economy, and where is that articulated in your vision for 

the Department of Education?  Is that all part and parcel of 

what you just made comment on? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The Partnership for Renewal 

document identified six niche areas where there are 

opportunities for Saskatchewan business.  Obviously there are 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people to be employed in those 

areas, and the Department of Economic Development, and 

Education, Training and Employment are working in a 

collaborative way in order that we can assist people in being 

trained in the areas where we think there will be opportunities, 

but we need to have the labour market study first.  We need to 

finalize how the regional economic development authorities are 

going to look, whether we want to create regional training 

authorities that could then work with those economic 

development authorities and the regional tourist authorities, if 

we go that route. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move we report progress. 

 

(2030) 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Agriculture and Food 

to introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With 

me I have Hartley Furtan -- Dr. Hartley Furtan -- the deputy 

minister.  Behind me is Terry Scott and Dale Sigurdson, who 

are the assistant deputy ministers.  And way at the back is 

Harvey Murchison, Doug Matthies, Terry Tangjerd, Lorne 

Warnes, Bob Donald, Merv Ross, Norm Ballagh, and Dick 

Leigh.  Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 

officials, thank you for your attention this evening.  Mr. 

Minister, we'd like to start off with information on crop 

insurance to begin with.  I wondered if you could just give me 

-- just for quick reference here -- what the breakdown of the 

cost of administration is between government, both federal and 

provincial, and the farmers' portion of it.  Can you give me, in 

percentage terms, what that is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I certainly can.  The 

administration of crop insurance is broken down 50 per cent by 

the federal government and 50 per cent by the provincial 

government.  The farmers do not participate in the 

administration cost of crop insurance.  Their premiums go into 

a pool which is matched by the two governments and paid out 

from 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

that pool.  The administration is separate from that and funded 

equally by the two governments. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if we can 

move our attention then towards the little shebang we had this 

weekend, or whatever you want to call it, Mr. Minister.  I 

wonder if you could provide us with an agenda of the weekend, 

this past weekend. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we have here an 

agenda.  If I could get a copy made of this and we'll send a 

copy across. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wonder who was it that determined what the agenda for the 

weekend would be.  Do you have some indication of who set 

the agenda -- both the work schedule and the social activities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there was a 

strategic planning group within the corporation which would 

have been in charge of setting the agenda for it and organizing 

this conference. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And, Mr. Minister, what was the cost to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Canada for the 

weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know that all 

the bills are in that we can give it to the penny, but it's in the 

neighbourhood of $70,000. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many people 

attended the weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were 476 

employees and agents who registered for the convention. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many people were invited for the weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, all the agents and 

employees of the corporation, which totals about 800, were 

invited. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, noticing on the agenda there's a 

couple of things that I would like to ask about.  There was a 

keynote speaker from 1:15 to 2:45 by the name of Gary Gregor.  

I wonder what his . . . what did his address involve? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, Gary is a 

well-known motivational speaker who addressed the 

conference on motivation and teamwork and that sort of thing. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, in the evening there 

was a banquet and there was also another guest speaker by the 

name of Rick Worman, I think it is.  I wonder if you could tell 

us what the topic of his address was, and the relevance to crop 

insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Rick Worman is a certified 

management consultant and speaker. 

Donated his time, by the way, to come to this convention; 

spoke after the minister at about 9:30 when I left, and he was 

beginning to speak. So I think for the price of admission, it was 

very well worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I'll agree with you 

there.  For the price of admission it would certainly be well 

worth it all right.  It was just prior to the casino night that he 

started his address? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, as I say, it was something 

after 9 p.m. when he addressed and spoke to the group.  I don't 

know how long he went because I left before he finished. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Also in the work 

sessions, I would draw your attention to that, there was one 

topic by Kathy Fenwick -- I'm having difficulty making out the 

name. What was her topic of that day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Her topic was humour in the 

workplace.  This was one of the concurrent sessions that went 

on concurrently with agricultural trends and communications. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In your mind, in your 

department's mind, did you determine . . . how do you 

determine whether the conference was successful or not?  Or 

have you determined in your mind whether there was good 

value for the dollars spent by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan?  

And how do you judge that?  Is it by the attendance?  Or is it 

by the reaction to the workplace humour, motivational-type 

speakers?  What is the criteria that you use to determine 

whether the $70,000 was well spent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, some of the 

topics covered were sales and project management and time 

management, so I suppose the ultimate test is whether or not 

we do a good job of sales this spring and whether or not 

farmers know what they're buying. 

 

One of the things that I use to judge is talking to employees.  

And the short time that I was there, I sat at a couple of tables 

and talked to employees who said that it was very well 

worthwhile, and they had received some information that 

would be useful at home in their work.  So I think the 

management will obviously be evaluating this and we will see 

how the corporation functions.  That's the ultimate test. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As well as the 

corporation evaluating it, the farmers in Saskatchewan are 

currently evaluating it, I would suggest, being at home on the 

weekend and talking to farmers in the curling rink and the 

hockey rink and that sort of stuff. They were coming up to me, 

Mr. Minister, and I would say a typical response was 

something like, you mean to tell me the Minister of Agriculture 

has okayed an expenditure of some $70,000 for a weekend of 

essentially, of fun for the Crop Insurance employees? 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

Well break out the time, Mr. Minister, break out the time that 

was spent actually doing something that I would guess farmers 

would consider somewhat productive, compared to the time 

that wasn't spent on somewhat productive ventures, Mr. 

Speaker, and there's very, very little in this information that 

would suggest that there was hardly anything beyond a party 

for the weekend for the Crop Insurance employees.  And I 

wonder if you'd care to comment on that and what reaction 

your office, what reaction your office has been getting since the 

information leaked out about the party. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, the 

information that leaked out was obviously wrong.  The member 

obviously has very much false impressions of what went on 

there. This was not a time of fun and frolic.  There was eight 

hours of sessions here. 

 

As I said, I left at 9 o'clock and they were beginning to listen to 

a motivational speaker.  These employees have, some of them, 

six to seven hours of travelling time to get here. Nobody got 

paid for being there on Saturday. 

 

I think that this is probably very well worthwhile, and I would 

remind the members opposite that the progress that has been 

made in Crop Insurance since we've been in government, going 

back to 13,000 uncorrected errors in a corporation that was in a 

rather bad tangle at the time.  And I think the progress we've 

made to date has been good. 

 

We've got some ways to go, and I think this is one more step 

along the road to delivering a decent service to farmers.  And 

certainly when I talk to farmers, one of the things that farmers 

tell me is that this corporation needs to be more coordinated, 

that you need to have the people in the CSO (customer service 

office) offices and the agents and the people in head office and 

the adjusters all knowing the total picture and all being able to 

answer questions.  And that's what this is all about, to bring 

them all together and try to build a team. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You mentioned that 

one of the ways that you are going to evaluate whether the 

weekend was a success or not is by how many farmers you're 

able to sell crop insurance policies to this spring.  And I'm 

wondering if you could provide for us this evening, how many 

people were in crop insurance in 1991, as compared to how 

many people are in crop insurance today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In 1991 we had 51,466; in '93-94 

it's 45,796 customers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Looks like your party 

was a year late.  You should have had it a year ago if you were 

trying to make some kind of a value judgement on how 

successful you were going to be. 

 

What is your forecast for the upcoming year, for 

1994's crop, of how many people will be in crop insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think we've had this session 

probably three years too late and the reason that we lost 

customers back from that time period was the mess the 

corporation was left in when we took it over. 

 

I think we are anticipating an increase in customers this year, or 

certainly an increase in the acreage that will be covered under 

crop insurance this year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if you could 

provide us with some detail of that rather than just your 

assumptions. 

 

Have you done any kind of studies, any kind of indication that 

you would have that would support your claim here this 

evening that there will indeed be an increase in . . . What we 

are hearing in the rural areas of Saskatchewan is that there will 

be a cut-back rather than an increase in crop insurance acreage 

and the number of people taking up crop insurance, as well as a 

lot of people are looking at substantially reducing the coverage 

they have under the program rather than increasing it, Mr. 

Minister.  And I wonder if you'd care to comment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we've 

certainly been concerned about the enrolment in crop 

insurance.  I don't think farmers in this province can afford to 

be without it, and as a province we cannot afford to have 

farmers risking their livelihood because they're not in the 

program. 

 

As you will know, and these estimates show, there are three 

enhancements that we have done to crop insurance.  The 

premium rates will be frozen, or the rate will be slightly lower 

than last year.  We've added three enhancements to the 

program.  And as to how many farmers will sign up, or won't, 

will be a decision of the farmers and it's not very easy to 

predict. 

 

We've certainly done everything we can with programing, and 

that's part of the reason for the conference, is to provide better 

service, that we'd keep as many farmers as possible into the 

program, and we have some hope that we will attract some who 

left the program in recent years. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would care to 

answer the farmers' concerns that we heard over the weekend. 

 

What possible reason could you use to justify holding 

something like this in Regina under these difficult economic 

times on the farm, Mr. Minister?  One fellow come up to me, 

and he was fairly quick-witted, and he said to me that times are 

so tough out on the farms in a lot of areas of Saskatchewan that 

having a burglar alarm on the waste-paper basket just isn't a 

Newfoundland joke any more, Mr. Minister. That's how 

difficult he has it on his farm. 

 

(2045) 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

He said to me he doesn't see how anyone under these 

conditions that agriculture is going through can possibly, 

possibly in good conscience suggest that something like this is 

a valued use of taxpayers' dollars, Mr. Minister.  I think he 

would rather have seen some reductions in premiums or some 

increases in coverage or something like that, rather than using 

the money in the frivolous way that you used it over this 

weekend, Mr. Minister. 

 

In the past, as I understand it, there were regional-type 

meetings held around the province where people, Crop 

Insurance employees, travelled down for the day and then went 

back home -- none of this other kind of frills besides the 

banquet and the casino night and auction.  I wonder . . . I just 

noticed that now, Mr. Minister; what did the auction entail?  

What was the . . . did you auction off some items or what was 

the . . . how did that work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were some 

prizes that were donated for casino night.  Again as I say, this 

was certainly in the evening.  I know the members opposite 

don't believe in training of staff.  We could have lowered the 

premiums or the coverage or whatever by two cents an acre 

instead of doing this.  But I think, Mr. Chairman, that although 

things are tough in government . . . And this government has 

cut back in administration, have eliminated a whole lot of 

positions since we've been in power and created a leaner and 

meaner government.  But in order to do that, you have to have 

employees who are trained, who are dedicated, and who are 

professional.  And that's the reason for bringing these people all 

together. 

 

Again the response was from many farmers that this is not a 

coordinated operation, and that's one of the very few 

complaints that we got left.  We got our rate down 

substantially, and one of the things that we are hearing from 

farmers is that the different arms of the corporation are not as 

coordinated as they should be, and that's one of the reasons for 

bringing all the people in and doing it. 

 

I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that not only government 

departments, but private industry as well does that.  I think 

there's a convention starting tomorrow SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) is having.  Those people 

are all paid for by their ratepayers at home, certainly a lot more 

money coming out of farmers' pockets to pay for the SARM 

meeting which they do twice a year than there ever was Crop 

Insurance.  And are you saying that that's not worthwhile, that 

it's not worth bringing all the people into Regina, that we could 

have regional SARM meetings? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I realize 

that this is an area of a great deal of sensitivity to you and your 

government and your back-bench members, as you can see 

them chirping from the floor about it.  They're concerned 

because it points out that the kind of expenditures that you, as 

the minister of Crop Insurance, are willing to make on behalf of 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  And the farmers of 

Saskatchewan don't agree with it, Mr. Minister, and you're 

frivolously . . . frivolously suggest that it's only 2 cents an acre, 

and big deal; 2 cents an acre, no big deal.  Why would anybody 

be concerned about that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Well $70,000 to the average farm family in Saskatchewan 

probably represents about 4 years' net income of the last 

number of years, if not more than that, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. 

Minister, I would suggest to you that you should re-evaluate 

those kinds of things in the future. And I think that if given the 

opportunity, you would have cancelled that thing because you 

knew very well that that's a frivolous use of taxpayers' money, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

I think you have better good sense than that. But because the 

thing was scheduled and you had no opportunity to cancel it at 

the last minute . . . I think you'd have done that, Mr. Minister, if 

you'd have had the opportunity.  But unfortunately, we caught 

on to it a little bit too late, Mr. Minister. And the farmers of 

Saskatchewan are left, along with the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, picking up the tab for a very, very excessive 

weekend of entertainment for the Crop Insurance employees. 

 

And you say, again frivolously cast off, and say private 

industry does it all the time.  The difference is, Mr. Minister, 

private industry picks up the tab themselves, and you aren't 

doing that on behalf of taxpayers.  Mr. Minister, the taxpayers 

are paying this kind of shot and I don't think they think it's a 

very good expenditure of their tax dollars whatsoever. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, how can you in your mind justify, how can 

you justify this kind of expenditure when farmers out in rural 

Saskatchewan are struggling under the cost of the crop 

insurance program these days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite can insult the Crop Insurance employees all he likes.  

They did not view this as a frivolous weekend.  They came and 

worked very hard.  I think the member opposite would agree 

with me that many errors that Crop Insurance makes are 

dealing with farmers' money.  Crop Insurance Corporation 

handles billions of dollars of taxpayers' money and farmers' 

money, and often errors can amount to $70,000.  So if you have 

a corporation that makes 10 fewer errors, it's probably well 

worthwhile, certainly to some farmers. 

 

I might also mention that the Conservative governments in 

Alberta and Manitoba on both sides are both having a very 

similar conference to this.  I wonder how the member would 

explain that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What was the cost to 

the participants, of the weekend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think they got a 

nominal expense of . . . travel expense of 10 cents a kilometre 

so they were out whatever else that cost.  There was a $20 

registration fee that they paid 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

for.  They got no wages for being there on Saturday.  The 

agents who came in spent both Friday and Saturday on their 

own time to attend this conference.  So I think it took some 

dedication on people who drove from places like Shaunavon 

and Meadow Lake and so on to come to a conference.  It 

certainly took a lot of their time and effort and they put a lot of 

effort into this weekend. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If I understood you 

correctly, the Crop Insurance employees that attended on the 

Friday received payment?  They received their regular wages in 

addition to the rest of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, of course the 

employees who are on salary were not docked a day's pay. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So, Mr. Minister, what is the real cost of this 

then?  If there was 476 people that were there in addition to . . . 

so they weren't working in the office back home, obviously.  

They were at your conference.  So there were 476 people there.  

Does your tab of $70,000 include that, Mr. Minister?  What are 

the wages of those . . . what I'm asking, I guess, is what are the 

wages of those 476 people for that one day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, to begin with, as I 

said, the agents received no remuneration.  Certainly there will 

be no extra cost to make up the work for . . . the employees will 

probably work longer hours to catch up what work may have 

been done.  But there was no additional cost to having these 

people there. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So what happened to the offices of Crop 

Insurance on Friday, March 4 at Meadow Lake or at Kindersley 

or anywhere else?  Were they closed, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No. We left staff at all the offices 

so that they were manned.  I think there would have been a 

minimum staff who were not at the conference who maintained 

the offices during the Friday. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So, Mr. Minister, how did you determine who got 

to go to the conference and who didn't get to go?  Did you have 

some kind of a casino night to determine that, Mr. Minister?  

Or was there a short-straw type contest?  Or how did you 

determine the folks that actually got to go relative to the ones 

that had to stay home? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, that was worked out 

with the employees themselves.  They volunteered to stay and 

man the offices for Friday. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So you had people that actually volunteered to 

stay back home and miss the little shebang in Regina here. Stay 

at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel in Regina here, miss all of 

the fun and activities and frolicking, the keynote speaker and 

the casino night, the auction -- all of those things, Mr. Minister.  

That's really interesting to note that. 

I think, Mr. Minister, you should be able to provide us with the 

cost of those 476 people just on any one given day.  Let's not 

even call it March 4.  Just give me the cost for one given day, 

of those 476 employees. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite continues to insist on slamming Crop Insurance 

employees who work very hard on behalf of farmers in this 

province, and I think that that is unacceptable to accuse 

employees. 

 

I think if the employees thought it wasn't worthwhile, they 

certainly would not have come in.  I certainly don't think that 

anybody would drive all the way from Meadow Lake to be here 

because there's a casino night at 10 o'clock at night to have a 

little bit of fun.  I know the members opposite are into gloom 

and doom, but we certainly don't discourage our employees 

from having a bit of fun after the workday is done. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What kind of service 

would have a farmer been able to get on Friday, March 4 when 

he arrived at his Crop Insurance office to discuss, for example, 

the upcoming programs that you're talking about.  He walks 

into the office, this given farmer, I don't care whether it's in 

Meadow Lake or Kindersley or Rosetown or wherever.  What 

kind of service could they expect?  Or would they walk up and 

the receptionist would say, I'm sorry, there's nobody here 

today; I don't know nothing.  Or what's the deal?  What would 

they have received that day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were qualified 

staff in every CSO office. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, on that day then, 

you said that there was service available.  So would you 

consider it to be a full range of service, or a skeleton type 

service, or how would we categorize that? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were adequate 

staff to cover the situation.  My deputy points out to me that I 

made a miscalculation.  It should be .2 cents per acre, not 2 

cents an acre. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So there was good 

service available that day.  There was adequate service 

available that day.  So what do we need the 476 people for, Mr. 

Minister, if there was adequate service available that day, Mr. 

Minister?  I mean that begs the question, I think, Mr. Minister. 

 

And we get into the area of almost the ridiculous when we start 

talking about this, Mr. Minister, because I think that's what the 

farmers were saying to me on the weekend.  They went into 

their Crop Insurance office and there was nobody there, 

basically.  They looked around and they said, can you give me 

some details on the program? And they said no, the agents are 

away and the adjusters, they're away, and I got the short straw 

so I had to stay here.  Mr. Minister, that's what 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

happens when you have these kinds of things.  And people are 

paying the shot for them and they don't like it, Mr. Minister. 

 

The farmers I think would have rather had the $70,000 taken 

out of your salary rather than spent on that sort of stuff, Mr. 

Minister.  I don't think it's a very good expenditure of 

taxpayers' dollars in these economic times, Mr. Minister.  So 

you know I can't help but wonder why you would want to have 

gone ahead with such a thing.  What was wrong with the 

regional type meetings that you had in the past that made you 

determine that this was necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I think 

there's a difference of opinion.  We think the money spent on 

training and personnel development is well worthwhile, and we 

do that throughout government.  And I think any government or 

any company that neglects to do staff development is going to 

find itself in a great deal of trouble. 

 

Regional conferences -- we would have had to have the 

resource people to all the regions.  We could not have gotten all 

the people together, which was one of the things that our staff 

were asking for, and one of the things that, as I repeat again, 

that farmers have been telling me -- that this corporation, 

because they never see each other, they're not as coordinated as 

they should be.  And this is one effort to try to pull the whole 

corporation together and come out with a strong, efficient team 

to do the sales program for this spring. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you provided us with an agenda for 

the weekend.  And when a person has an opportunity to view 

this . . . And I'm going to publish this, I think, in my report 

from the legislature because I think the farmers of 

Saskatchewan would be very, very interested in knowing what 

went on at that conference that cost the taxpayers that kind of 

money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would guess if you total up the hours here it doesn't 

come anywhere near eight hours of actual work time that was 

taking place there, Mr. Minister.  So I think you have an 

explanation . . . you owe an explanation to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan as to why you'd be doing this kind of thing under 

the most difficult of circumstances. 

 

You suggested that the Crop Insurance agents, the Crop 

Insurance people themselves have been asking for this kind of 

thing, Mr. Minister.  I don't think that they had a whole lot of 

choice, quite frankly.  When your employer sends you an 

invitation and says that here's a . . . we're having this policy 

workshop over the weekend, I don't think there's very many 

people that would suggest or think to themselves that it's not a 

requirement of their job, Mr. Minister. 

 

So to suggest to the farmers of Saskatchewan that this is okay 

somehow or another, and it's only a minor little cost, Mr. 

Minister, I don't think is acceptable at all.  And I don't think the 

farmers believe that either.  So maybe you'd like to . . . maybe 

it would be a good opportunity to send some kind of 

explanation to the 

farmers of Saskatchewan as to what went on.  To get your side 

of the story out, shall we say?  If you have a credible story, I'm 

sure farmers will give you . . . the taxpayers will give you the 

benefit of the doubt on this, Mr. Minister. 

 

But over the weekend in discussions that I had with farmers, 

there was no benefit of the doubt, Mr. Minister; they were 

saying it wasn't a good use of money.  It wasn't a good taxpayer 

expenditure, and they seriously doubt your competence now, 

Mr. Minister.  And I wonder if you'd care to comment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know that 

the member opposite should be lecturing us on what's a good 

expenditure.  We don't think that $870 million a year in interest 

is a good expenditure, but we make it anyway. 

 

Mr. Chairman, farmers may well have agreed, if the member 

opposite is giving them false information and telling them that 

the Crop Insurance employees were in there just to have a party 

and frolic.  They would obviously not agree with that.  I don't 

think that farmers in this province are averse to civil servants 

who serve them being trained and upgraded and knowing the 

programs that they're dealing with and delivering a good 

service to farmers. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I would be just interested in 

getting a little bit of information about the coverage in '94-95 

compared to what it used to be, and I will break it into three 

categories.  If you look at 1991, and you might have it . . . or 

try '91, the year you got elected, if you look at the number of 

farmers -- I think you've given us that, 50-some thousand; 

maybe you could give it to me again -- the number of acres that 

were insured and the dollar value of the coverage.  In other 

words, what could you get protected for and what was the 

coverage bought and the amount of premium paid? 

 

So if you've got the number of farmers, the total acreage, and 

the protection which . . . and you might have a symbol for that 

or some measure of it, that is the premium paid or the coverage 

. . . In other words on the typical farm, what could you get for 

what you paid? 

 

Because I want to compare it today because obviously -- I 

mean we'll agree to disagree -- I don't think you've got nearly 

the coverage, and that's why your numbers are down.  And I 

don't think you've got, number one . . . I'm sure you'll find that 

the number of farmers is down. Number two, I think you'll find 

the acres are down. Number three, I think in many cases they 

just took the minimum coverage just to stay with it and they're 

not really serious about the coverage. 

 

So can you give me any comparisons, and you must have some 

ballpark there, of not only the number of farmers, but the 

number of acres and the extent of the coverage and the 

premium it costs to cover that, '91 versus the last year, which 

would be '93-94. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I gave 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

the numbers on the number of participants: 51,466 in '91-92 

versus 45,796 in '93-94.  The acres covered in '91-92 is 

28,209,622.  In '93-94 it's 19,536,072.  Premium totals -- 

161,124,037 in '91-92 and 191,533,268 in '93-94. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So you're saying that the numbers dropped from 

51,000 to 45,000; the acreage dropped from 28 million to 19 

million; but the premium to cover went from 161 to 191 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's true.  And the premiums 

are a reflection of the risk, as you well know, partly because of 

bad crops in the '80s and a deficit that would run up the crop 

insurance during the reign that you were in charge of it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you are telling me you 

expect the number of farmers and the number of acres in crop 

insurance to increase with your recent announcements.  And 

what you've given me here is that you have raised the 

premiums significantly, even to handle about a fraction of the 

acres in the last couple of years.  Is that what you want to tell 

the farmers?  That your premium is going to go up and the 

acreage has gone a way down but it's a much better deal.  And 

you think and you honestly expect the number of farmers and 

the number of acreage and the coverage to increase in '94-95. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, for next year the premium 

rate at least will go down very slightly.  And of course as the 

member opposite knows, each risk area is actuarially sound on 

its own basis on each crop so that there is shifting around, but 

the actual premium rate will drop a bit.  I think it's 

oversimplified to say that the gross premiums are up.  You 

have to realize that last year we had record acreages of lentils, 

peas, canola and a lot of higher value crops which have higher 

coverage.  So that also reflects in premiums. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, maybe your officials -- I'm 

sure they could; I've had the opportunity to work with them -- 

maybe they could calculate, just so that we can get it here, the 

decline in the acreage for me and the increase in the premium 

on a percentage basis. 

 

And then if you say that the premiums are going to fall a little 

bit, what impact do you think that might have on the acreage 

coverage?  In other words, you've dropped from 28 million 

acres to 19 million acres.  Could you then work that out into 

percentage terms, and then compare that to increasing the 

premium from 161 million up to almost $200 million for that 

smaller coverage in a percentage term.  And then tell me what 

percentage you think farmers are going to buy, given that ratio. 

 

If this goes out in anybody's newsletter, I mean if it goes out in 

the Wheat Pool's handbook and they said, for heaven sakes 

that's going to be the plan, I, you know . . . You expect the 

farmers to actually increase coverage with this.  I just want to 

know if you could give me a little bit of sort of what you base 

that on because I'd like to go . . . We could look at some 

forecasts or even some probability of whether in fact they 

would follow perhaps your logic there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as compared 

to last year, the premium rate will be slightly down.  And again 

I say that only over averages, and as the member well knows 

that shifts between risk areas, between farmers.  The coverage 

will be up slightly this year because grain prices moved up, so 

there will be some increase in the coverage and also 

incidentally in the nominal amount of the premiums. 

 

I guess what we're saying is that we've got basically the same 

program that we had last year with enhancements of spot loss 

hail and multiple crop options which allows farmers to use the 

whole-farm approach and have a lower premium if they choose 

that option.  And we've got an option for diversification for 

new crops. 

 

So we have basically the same program that we had last year 

with a very slightly lower rate and these new options.  And I 

hope even better service from our staff. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All right well, I guess you don't have a 

calculator, but we did a little calculating here.  But what it 

looks like is that there's about a 30 per cent drop in acreage and 

about a 20 per cent increase in premium which is a massive 

change in a relationship; that you're charging them 20 per cent 

more from 161 to $191 million on 30 per cent fewer acres 

because you went from 28 million down to 19 million acres. 

 

And then you come along now -- just so that I understand -- 

and you say, but there are going to be more farmers buy into 

this because we got spot loss hail and we've got some specialty 

crop options in a basket that are really going to make it 

attractive.  Now you're going to have to explain those options 

to farmers like myself and others to even, I would think, get 

people reasonably interested in going back into crop insurance. 

 

Could you tell me . . . I mean are you saying that there's going 

to be a modest decrease in premium?  What are you talking 

about and what kind of coverage can you get in terms of spot 

loss hail and specialty crop options that would make you so 

optimistic that farmers are going to get a good deal and they're 

going to get back in with more acreage and better coverage and 

so forth? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we do not, as 

you know, set the crop insurance rates or the coverage.  Those 

are set by an actuary.  Crop insurance is governed by a 

federal-provincial agreement and the numbers are calculated by 

an actuary.  And when there are losses, insurance premiums go 

up. 

 

Crop insurance is still a good deal for farmers.  For every dollar 

that a farmer puts in, $2 are paid back to farmers.  That's the 

basic way the system works and over the past number of years, 

not only have they got back $2 for every dollar they put in, but 

they've gotten $600 million extra.  I have the officials crunch 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

numbers over the last ten or twelve years and we found that 

over that time period, 84 per cent of farmers have gotten back 

more money than they've put into crop insurance. 

 

Certainly we don't like to charge higher premiums and we 

would like to avoid it but that is the program that we are stuck 

with -- cost-sharing premiums, I might add, that were taken on 

by your government when you were in power. But that is the 

premium regime that we have and until crop insurance 

experiences better premiums or we're able to convince the 

federal government to write off some of the debts or something 

can happen with it, those are the premiums that are available. 

 

We've done what we could to increase the viability of the 

program.  We've added the options at some extra cost to us that 

we think will help farmers.  The spot loss hail was one option 

that comes up over and over again when I talk to farmers and 

farmers tell me if we had spot loss hail I'd be back in it.  I don't 

know whether they will or not.  That's a business decision that 

farmers will make.  If they feel they can afford to be without 

insurance, then obviously they won't join the program. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that you 

expect the numbers of farmers and the acres -- I don't want to 

put words in your mouth -- to increase as a result of the 

changes that you've made.  Now obviously the numbers and the 

acres have decreased substantially.  You acknowledge that. 

 

Now you're saying that you think that you're going to turn this 

around.  Everything's based on actual numbers, and I think 

we're under the same federal agreements and laws.  We've been 

here for 10 or 15 years; it's a federal-provincial crop insurance 

mechanism.  Can you give me an example . . . Can you 

illustrate why you think the speciality crop basket option and 

the spot loss hail is going to increase the protection that much 

that you're going to get farmers to turn around and say, oh I 

think this is really going to be a good deal, particularly given 

the fact that you said that you're going to drop the premium. 

 

Could you tell me, on the average farm -- or I'll give you one or 

I'll give you mine -- what the premium decline will be and what 

kind of coverage do you think you're going to be able to 

provide to get some renewed interest?  Because you've got 

substantial drop in numbers any way you look at it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well on average, again using 

averages, premium rates . . . and remember I'm saying the 

premium rates are going down.  The coverage is going up; rates 

are going down.  Rates on hard red spring wheat will be down 

4.8 per cent; durum will be down about 5 per cent; barley down 

about 3.6; oats will be even; flax down 1 per cent; canola down 

1.5 per cent. 

 

Some of the coverages:  hard red spring wheat, the 

coverage was going from 2.99 a bushel, high price option, to 

3.13 a bushel, I believe the number is.  So it's a slightly 

increase in some of the prices which will give a higher 

coverage.  These numbers I quoted you are not an actual 

premium; that's in the rate as a percentage of coverage. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I wonder if you could give me an example of 

the coverage and the protection difference.  Just pick an 

average farm and we'll put on say a thousand acres.  And 

you've got 500 acres of wheat, and a couple hundred acres of a 

specialty crop, and a hundred acres of flax or canola, and give 

us a breakdown of what the coverage or protection and the 

premium is.  And you can give me, well recently your changes 

from '93-94 compared to '94-95 and then compared to . . . I 

think it would be fair to the farmer because the farmer probably 

will know why he changed, but do it for '91-92. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as you well know 

and the members opposite well know, crop insurance, again, is 

different for risk areas.  It's on individual coverage for 

individual farms.  Obviously, would have to have a lot of data 

to do information on . . . (inaudible) . . . farm.  This is one of 

the reasons why we spend so much time training our staff is 

because this has to be worked out on individual farm basis.  I 

might add that the premium increase that we got last year under 

the crop insurance agreement was as a result of an agreement 

that was signed in 1990 by the previous provincial government 

and the federal government which required the actuary to do . . 

. to do a study in 1992 and be implemented in 1993, so those 

premiums were the result of the agreement that was signed by 

yourself in 1990. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Now I just want to ask again: you can't take a 

typical farm and give me the comparisons of the coverage and 

the premiums either from '93-94, even during your 

administration, '93-94, '94-95, to give me an example of what 

the coverage might be for an oilseed and wheat and a speciality 

crop from year to year. 

 

I mean it seemed to me, even in terms of marketing you must 

have taken to your crop insurance people and your agents and 

others and said, well, this is about what it would work out to 

be.  Here's a typical farm.  Or here's in crop zone or area X, 

one, two or three and let's compare year over year so that at 

least they could explain. 

 

Because without doing that, I don't know how you can forecast 

that farmers are going to like your coverage, your package, any 

better.  Because it doesn't wash.  I mean you and I both know 

that if you put more speciality crops in it, you're going to dilute 

the coverage you have in that basket, either for the majority 

crop or something else.  It will weigh . . . it will balance out.  

Now you're going to have to make some changes in the 

premium or changes in the coverage to help him have better 

protection and explain that to him or he's . . . I don't understand 

what you're talking about.  I know the premiums up and I don't 

think my coverage is there.  So I . . . wouldn't it be reasonable 

to 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

get a ballpark farm comparison? 

 

You telling me you can't . . . you can't make those kind of 

comparisons on a typical farm over from one year to the next? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I could do on an individual 

farm, but you might well find that one farm in one risk area 

who had one experience with drought in '92 or '91 would have 

a totally different picture than somebody else in another area.  

I've given you the averages for the rates across the province 

and the total numbers. 

 

One of the things that we do and one of the reasons again that 

we train our staff, is that each individual farmer will get a 

breakdown on his farm and we can even do what-if calculations 

and so on.  And each farmer will sit down with his agent and 

have a breakdown of exactly what his coverage will be and 

what his rates will be on his individual farm.  That's part of the 

individual coverage and that's part of why we have to maintain 

good service. 

 

We have to explain to the farmers exactly what his coverage is, 

exactly what his premiums are, and what he can expect from 

us.  And then he or she has to make the decision based on his or 

her own good business judgement. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All the information that you have, could you 

send over or . . . I mean on all the rate changes, the premium 

changes, the coverage, the percentages you gave me for spring 

wheat and durum and flax and some other things -- you gave 

me prices that you might have -- and the whole combination.  

And I suspect you have it by risk area. You must have, by risk 

area.  Is there . . . I mean maybe I'll have to work out an 

example. I'll sit here and we'll work out an example by risk area 

and say, well here's what it used to be and here's what it is now, 

to give the farmer a bit of protection. 

 

Mr. Minister, the problem that you face is one of credibility and 

confidence.  The farmer is worried that he has to have a total 

wreck on all his commodities in order to get a payment under 

your system.  That's why they're signing off and the acreage is 

down and down and down -- acreage is down 30 per cent.  

They don't trust you, frankly, because you've made dramatic 

changes and you've raised premiums and you've got less 

coverage. 

 

And now you're kind of, it looks like, you're kind of just 

fooling around the outside, say we can throw in a few of these 

speciality crops into a basket. What does that do to the total 

basket, what does it do to the probability of getting paid, and 

what does it do to the premium?  See and you haven't given me 

any answers there.  They don't know what you've done to the 

formula. 

 

And the same with including spot loss hail. What does that cost 

him and what's the coverage?  Can you give me an example?  

You'd have a section farmer, you brought in spot loss.  How 

does it compare to 

Municipal Hail, that is the coverage and the premium?  Why 

wouldn't he just go with Municipal Hail as opposed to buying 

your basket here?  Can't you give me any illustrations, 

examples of how you have improved the system this year when 

he knows that it's just been going downhill for the last three 

years. 

 

And the farmers speak for themselves.  I mean their acreage is 

down 30 per cent -- from 28 to 19 million.  And you've raised 

the premium on that smaller acreage up to $191 million. 

 

So he's from Missouri . . . I mean, he really would like some 

examples and some illustration on how your new basket or 

previous baskets would work by risk area.  Take the average of 

a risk area.  Try it out, as an illustration.  You must have give 

something to the agents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly the agents would work 

out for each and every farm in the province all those numbers 

for the farmers so that they can do that. 

 

The spot loss hail, the premium will be between 1.5 and 3.5 -- 

an average of 2 per cent.  The farmer will pay half of that.  So 

on average, 1 per cent buys them spot loss hail.  It is not 

comparable to buying hail insurance from a hail company 

because it is spot loss hail.  But that's the cost, and I can break 

it down on individual farms.  That will vary from township to 

township depending on the hail risk. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'll ask once more and then I'll 

just assume that you can't give me or the farmers typical 

examples of farms in risk area year over year over year. 

 

Now I think you can.  I think you've got computer capacity to 

do that.  I think you can punch out a dark brown soil zone.  I 

think you can take Regina heavy clay.  I think you can take 

parkland.  And you can put together a risk area and say here's 

what the typical coverage would be.  Just do one for canola and 

spring wheat.  Give me some comparisons.  Just take a typical 

farm in the risk area.  I'm sure you could crunch out those 

numbers.  Then we can really talk and see what you're doing. 

 

In fact what we think is the case, if you won't do that, is that the 

farmer's continually going to reduce his coverage under 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, when that is not the case, and 

certainly not the extent that we find in neighbouring provinces.  

And you know that's the case.  And if I'm mistaken, I want to 

know. 

 

So can you make comparisons year over year in the province of 

Saskatchewan that would give us some confidence that you've 

turned the corner?  And do you have any idea if other people 

can?  And if in fact it's possible, I'd certainly like to know.  

Because if you can't, then we must assume that it's not any 

better.  It's going to get worse.  The premiums are high.  The 

coverage is poor.  And farmers are going to continue to 

abandon millions and millions of acres to crop insurance when 

this is the home of crop insurance. 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

We've got half the farmland in Canada and it's abandoning you 

and your policies.  I mean you have a credibility problem there 

and I'm just trying to find out if you've been successful at all in 

kind of bringing it back, because obviously they're not buying 

it the last couple of years at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we have not 

made dramatic changes to crop insurance.  I might point out 

that Alberta and Manitoba have only 70 per cent coverage 

option, where in Saskatchewan we have an 80 per cent 

coverage option.  Their prices for grain are similar to ours, and 

their average yields are whatever their average yields are. 

 

So I think . . . we'll send over the data on the different rates on 

the different risk areas.  I don't have data on every farm in 

Saskatchewan here.  And again, we can do typical farms, but 

the danger of that is that there is no typical farm in 

Saskatchewan.  Every one will be different. Everybody is on an 

individual yield, and so it is their own individual yield over the 

past 10 years that determines what their coverage is, and risk 

areas, of course the rates vary up and down. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, what I also want to know is . . . 

and you might not be able to dig this up and you probably 

won't, but you see my concern is that the farmers and the public 

in rural Saskatchewan and obviously in the cities -- because 

there's no stores on the farm, they've got to come to town to 

spend their money -- have lost a great deal of coverage and a 

great deal of money in the last two or three years because of 

your administration. 

 

And we've had serious weather problems which we all 

acknowledge, and you've acknowledged, and it's cost them 

dearly.  And they took out insurance to cover that.  That's what 

crop insurance is for.  I can't prevent a drought, I can't prevent a 

frost.  And they've been hit hard.  You know that.  In your area, 

my area, all over the province. 

 

And they have . . . I mean we don't need to go through the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) arguments, but they 

made major decisions on crop insurance protection, 

renegotiated bank loans, bought machinery, leased, sold to their 

kids, all kinds of things, and then had the rug pulled out from 

under them.  They lost a lot of money because the coverage 

wasn't there. 

 

Now that's why you have a serious credibility problem here and 

across the country when it comes to, well now you have the 

solution on crop insurance.  And it's not confidential. This is 

something that we've been through. We were looking at it 

before.  Your own officials in advising our caucus said, under 

the new plan that was initiated here in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- your plan -- if there's a wholesale drought or a 

wholesale frost, they admitted it'll be unmitigated disaster.  

And that's what happened.  Unmitigated disaster.  There will 

not be the protection. 

 

Now they have seen that happen to them.  And you're saying 

now that you think they're going to come back 

into crop insurance because your credibility is up, your 

examples are up, your premium is going to be lower, and your 

coverage is going to be better.  And you have no example and 

no illustrations, just sort of trust me, it's going to get better and 

they've lost, I don't know, you pick a number, 25, 35, 45, 

$50,000 a farm that was hit with frost that cut them off, or 

drought or combinations thereof.  A lot of money, compared to 

Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Now with that kind of loss, and the members opposite, the 

members opposite can laugh at those farm families that have 

put up with this, but it isn't funny.  It's not funny, it's serious 

stuff.  It's just like the symbolism of having a $70,000 party at 

their expense.  Some of them lost $70,000 of farm by you 

changing crop insurance.  You know it; we can find them in 

every zone and you had a $70,000 party. 

 

(2130) 

 

Now if you're going to change this for the better, don't you 

think you could have better examples and take the time to put 

together illustrations so that the average farmer in each risk 

area could say, now he's talking, that makes sense.  They're 

kind of getting their senses, they're coming back together.  

Because you're talking real families -- and they're NDPS, 

Liberals, Tories, Reformers and everything else.  These are 

good Saskatchewan people that want to know they've got 

adequate coverage in crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, under your new crop insurance, can you give me 

comparisons, '91-92 versus '93-94 if we have a frost that goes 

across the province or a drought or a weather disaster -- and 

that's what crop insurance is about, it's a production insurance 

-- can you give me interyear comparisons on what happens to a 

farm if it gets wiped out this year versus three years ago? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the crop 

insurance in this year is at 80 per cent coverage, at least that's 

an option that farmers have available.  Again farmers can 

choose 80 per cent, 70 per cent, 60 per cent, 50 per cent, 

whatever they decide is necessary. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Crop Insurance is now out in the country 

holding public meetings explaining the changes to crop 

insurance and explaining the program as it exists, and we're 

having 35 public meetings to explain those programs.  Farmers 

will be able to sit down with their agents when they come to 

buy insurance and they will know exactly what their premiums 

are on their farm and what their coverage will be and what their 

options are when they buy the high price, low price, market 

price option; or take 80 per cent coverage, take 70 per cent 

coverage plus spot loss, or whatever options they choose.  The 

numbers will be available for them and they will be able to 

make those decisions in the best businesslike manner. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well let me try this.  Could you give me the 

best option you could buy here, pick a couple of risk areas if 

you like.  Let's take spring wheat, 80 per cent -- the highest 

coverage, the best you can get - 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

what can you get covered for and compare it to '92-93, '91-92, 

and then tell us the cost of that.  And then do one for -- say -- 

an oilseed like canola so that we get an idea of how you've 

changed it.  Premium and the coverage -- you should be able to 

do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the premiums 

I've given, I passed across the floor.  The coverage levels are 80 

per cent of the individual average yield.  I think any farmer can 

do those calculations.  If you insist that we do a calculation on 

a typical farmer, we can certainly do one on a risk area.  I do 

say though that there are no typical farmers.  Each farm is on 

individual crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well again, Mr. Minister, we'll just have to 

advise the public that you can't give us an example of taking 

the best coverage you can buy right now in Saskatchewan -- 

'94-95 -- on this year's crop, spring wheat, the highest 80 per 

cent high-priced option, and what's the premium?  Can you 

give me that?  Give me a couple . . . Give me one risk area.  

Then go back and compare it to '91-92.  And give me the 

premium.  Give me the coverage. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We have, to oblige the member, 

worked out a typical farm, as he says.  We took somebody who 

would be in risk area 4 who had 500 acres of wheat and 200 

acres of canola.  Assuming a 30-bushel long-term average yield 

for wheat and 20 for canola, the total premium for '94 would be 

$8,921.  The same premium for '93 would have been $9,515.  

So we got a slight decrease in premium for that risk area. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Could you give me the coverage and then do 

that for '91-92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- We don't have our '91-92 prices 

with us.  We came here to answer estimates on this year's 

budget, not back to '91-92.  But if the member wants it, we can 

certainly look up price options and punch in the numbers if 

that's of any relevance. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I wonder if you could give me the coverage 

difference in '93 versus '94.  You've given me what the 

premium is, and I'll just note that in looking at the risk area no. 

4, that you had the largest percentage decrease in the premium 

in that risk area. 

 

I wonder if you might give me one where it's sort of average or 

maybe one on the other side where it's the highest increase, and 

then we can look at that. But can you give me the coverage 

comparisons in those three years, or those two years, '94 versus 

'93, in that same area and the same risk area, and then we'll take 

it from there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the coverage in '94 

would amount to $72,832.  The coverage in '93 would amount 

to $70,330.  So we've got a slight increase in coverage.  We've 

got a slight increase in coverage and a slight decrease in 

premiums. 

Mr. Devine: -- Could you do that same calculation for an area 

that didn't have this big, dramatic drop in premiums for spring 

wheat?  You've got the highest drop.  Could you get one that 

perhaps had . . . go to the other end, or give me an average and 

go to the other end, so we can see if it was just the luck of the 

draw that you picked risk area 4. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we should . . 

. We've sent the coverages over.  We can send the numbers, the 

coverage, and the averages over, and the individual can work 

all the examples that he cares to work out. 

 

He's asked for one for a risk area.  We could go on all night.  

As I said, we've got 45,000 customers, and every one of these 

calculations will be different.  And I don't know what we prove 

by going through all these calculations because what we're 

saying is on average the premium rate is going down a bit in 

this province, just very slightly overall, and the coverage is 

going up slightly because of increasing prices. 

 

So now we can do those calculations all over.  They vary, 

obviously, from risk area to risk area as the member points out.  

Some risk areas the premiums are not dropping as much as they 

are in others.  Some crops are actually going up in premium.  

So we could do 10 million examples of farmers.  I think it's 

more productive to have the individual farmer go in to the 

agent, work out the numbers for his individual farm, and he can 

see exactly what it is that he's buying. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you see the thing we're 

getting at is that you just told us that you're going to have, I 

think it's 35 meetings, regional meetings, out talking to farmers.  

Right?  Now I used to participate in those, help design the 

tables and examples and so forth, and I'm sure you will.  Why 

can't you give me an illustration of what you're going to be 

giving the farmers in those 35 meetings?  Now if you say each 

farmer has to go to the agent and go figure it out, then why the 

35 meetings?  What are you going to tell them at the meeting? 

 

Let's assume that is one of the 35 meetings.  You have 11 

officials behind you.  You've got calculators and computers and 

lots of smart people there, more than you'll have at the regional 

meetings.  I'm a bona fide farmer.  This is a bona fide farmer, 

and there are lots of them in the room.  Why can't you tell us 

what the road show is?  Give us some examples.  Give us some 

illustrations.  Show us what it's going to be like.  And I'm 

prepared to see this because this is serious business, a 

billion-dollar business for a lot of people here, a lot of lives. 

 

So it's not good enough to say, well you've managed one 

back-of-the-cigarette-package calculation and that should be 

enough for me and the estimates.  And you've got a room full 

of people who've got all kinds of expertise.  And your 

colleagues can joke about the impact on farmers but it's serious 

impact.  You have lost thousands of farmers in crop insurance 

and they have lost millions of dollars as a result of your 

changes, so it's no joke.  And I'm sure you're not 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

laughing but your colleagues can maybe try to lighten it up a 

little bit; but this is serious business for your political hide but 

more so for their lives.  Serious. 

 

So do you think you could give us an example or give us a 15- 

or 20-minute summary of what you do at the road shows?  Why 

do you do them?  What do you give?  Or do you just say, Mr. 

Farmer, here's the numbers; we can't do your farm but trust me, 

if you run it into the agent -- assuming that they're not in 

Regina -- they'll work it all out for you.  Why have the 

meetings?  Now you must have something you're going to say 

to them.  I'd be very interested in knowing what illustrations 

and what kind of information you're going to be giving to them, 

and why you couldn't share that with us here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we would be glad to 

share the whole road show with the members opposite; in fact 

we could do it here.  We could do it somewhere else if you 

want to be informed.  When we go out to the country meetings 

we're explaining the three options: how they work, and what 

the options are, and how they may be beneficial or not 

beneficial to farmers so that they understand clearly how the 

three new options work. 

 

We will also show them the rate decrease in the different risk 

areas which we have showed you, which says that:  if you're in 

risk area 4 and your rate went down 5 per cent or whatever it 

did on hard spring, and down 1 per cent on oats and coverage, a 

new price for wheat is 3.13, and you can then punch in your 

average yields and see what your coverage is.  In fact we would 

be delighted to put on that show for the members opposite, as 

we've done for our ag caucus, to inform them of what's 

happening. 

 

But again you asked for an example -- we calculated out an 

example and it comes out as one might expect.  What I'm 

saying is we've got very slight decrease in rates overall and 

we've got a very slight increase in coverage because of prices 

moving up.  And we can obviously work out examples that will 

be an exception to that.  We can work out examples as we have 

that will obviously show that.  We can calculate those options 

all night, but I don't think that it adds anything to enlighten the 

members opposite. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you must be . . . if you've done 

this for your caucus . . . You have? Is that true? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's true. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay.  Could you give some illustrations you'd 

use for your caucus?  If the NDP MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) had said, well give me an example. Tell 

me how the risk thing works with respect to . . . or pardon me, 

the spot loss hail coverage works.  Give me an illustration of 

how I will be better protected.  Tell me about the indemnity, 

whether I can get covered by somebody else as well.  Just go 

through an example of that so we know what we're . . . an idea 

of what you're doing at these 35 meetings, so that we get a 

sense and a flavour for what 

your plan is and how you're going to explain it to farmers, and 

why you're so confident that the coverage and the acreage and 

the number of farmers participating is going to go up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we're confident because crop 

insurance is still a good deal and we think the enhancements 

have added to it.  How much it will go up again will be up to 

the farmers to decide.  And we don't get to pick a number for 

premiums. They're actuarially calculated and that's what we're 

stuck with to sell the farmers. 

 

As to what we say about spot loss hail, we explained how spot 

loss hail works.  That the premium coverage will be available 

on coverages up to 70 per cent only.  That the premium will be 

between 1.5 and 3.5 -- average of 2, which means an average of 

1 per cent for a farmer to buy spot loss hail.  That it will be true 

spot loss hail coverage; that there will not be double-dipping on 

it.  And we go through the whole option of how spot loss hail 

works.  And if you don't understand how that works, ask some 

questions and I will try to explain to you how spot loss hail 

works. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's what we're trying to do.  I'm asking 

you questions and I'm having difficulty in getting you to give 

us illustration.  You carved out one and then that's been about 

as far as you've been prepared to go.  Don't you have a . . . you 

must have some some charts.  And you could give me some 

illustrations or some examples of what you're taking out there 

to the farmers. 

 

Because I'll tell you where we're heading, is that we've seen the 

charts and the numbers from years ago.  And the coverage that 

you would have here don't compare.  They don't compare to 

neighbouring provinces and they don't compare to the past. 

 

So that's why I'm not so sure that people are going to have as 

much confidence in your new deal as that you might think.  I 

mean you could perhaps get a hundred-and-some thousand 

dollar coverage -- maybe a $120,000 coverage for a less 

premium under previous packages before you changed it.  And 

you say you have no choice; the premiums are there; they're set 

by the governments, federal etc.; it's actuaries. 

 

No, you made big changes.  You're making changes now.  So 

either you're responsible or you're not responsible.  You are 

responsible for the changes in crop insurance and coverage and 

premiums in the last two or three years, since the fall of '91.  

You are.  Okay?  Now you're going to make some more 

changes. 

 

The last ones that we had out there, I didn't recall 35 meetings 

of song and dance because people were rallying saying, don't 

do this, you're going to hurt us.  So now you can afford a 

$70,000 party and you can afford 35 road shows.  So where 

they're saying, what are you up to?  What's really going on?  

Because the premium changes and the coverage changes are 

not nearly what they used to be and certainly not close to what 

they are in neighbouring provinces. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

I wonder if, Mr. Minister, could you . . . I mean you said to me 

you can't do this.  I'm going to ask your officials, somebody 

there, to go dig up this farm for the next time around, this farm, 

risk area 4, 500 acres of wheat, 200 acres of canola, 30 bushel, 

20 bushel, the premium and the coverage in '91-92. 

 

Second thing I'd like to know because farmers want to know, 

that farm along the Manitoba border and the Alberta border, 

how is the coverage in my land over there compared to here in 

Saskatchewan?  They'd be really interested in that because they 

-- as you know because we hear about it here in the House -- it 

seems to me they have a deficit in Alberta and they have a 

deficit in Manitoba.  It seems to me there's deficits everywhere 

across Canada.  Okay? 

 

So you're fighting a deficit and fair ball.  They're doing it.  

Premier Klein as you know is in the news a lot, he's taking it 

on, other premiums are as well . . . premiers are.  I would like 

to know if you . . . well I'm asking, I want to . . . comparison of 

similar risk areas along neighbouring borders because we have 

farm land, farmers have farm land, neighbours, relatives and so 

forth on either side, because I don't think the numbers have 

fallen in Alberta and Manitoba like they've fallen here.  Is that 

correct?  You can get me that.  Or we can get it from our third 

party counterparts.  I'm sure they can dig it up and be happy to 

provide it to us or neighbouring provinces, we can still talk to 

some of those. 

 

We'd like to know what the coverage is.  We'd like to know the 

comparisons.  Because I think, Mr. Minister, what your song 

and dance should show in the 35 meetings is that the coverage 

here has collapsed and your officials and good people 

forecasted that.  They said, if there is a widespread drought or a 

widespread frost or a widespread production weather-related 

problem, it's an unmitigated disaster in Saskatchewan, you will 

not get covered.  And that's exactly what happened. 

 

So I want you to, if you can't do it tonight, I want you to dig up 

that same farm in '91-92 and I want the comparisons in Alberta 

and Manitoba because I'm sure that you can get them.  And 

we'll have to go . . . if you won't get them, we'll get them and 

then and we can bring them up and we can ask and then we can 

just compare the viability of farming and the premiums and the 

coverage in the prairie provinces under your administration 

versus either the past or neighbouring jurisdictions.  And we've 

gone through some of that before in this House and you have 

not fared well, didn't fare well at all. 

 

And that isn't even touching the revenue side.  This is just crop 

insurance that you're looking at.  If you look at the revenue side 

and all your complaints . . . well that's another issue that we're 

going to get into but would you agree, Mr. Minister, to bring 

those figures back to the House or get your officials to do it.  

I'm sure you can get '91-92 on the same farm; I'm sure the same 

risk area.  And at the same time would you pick another risk 

area and do the same thing so that we can make these 

comparisons? 

And that's just fair ball, because I know if you go from town to 

town in 35 meetings, you've got to have every risk area covered 

and every typical farm.  I did.  I was all over the province, had 

lots of meetings.  The agricultural caucus did; we did it all the 

time.  So you've got to have it available.  We would ask for that 

so that we can be prepared here in the House if we have to ask 

you questions.  I mean it's our responsibility to scrutinize the 

king's money.  We're going to see if you are really doing what 

you say you're going to do here and provide fair coverage for 

the premiums you're charging. 

 

Fair coverage.  Not that you've been really miserable and now 

you're a little bit nicer. But what really is the coverage and is it 

worth it?  So, Mr. Minister, do you think that you could agree 

with my request to bring those comparisons back to this 

Assembly so that we can pursue this in some detail and 

particularly in light of what you're going to say at those 35 

meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member 

opposite is referring to the dog and pony show when they 

implemented GRIP, I was at some of those meetings and the 

thing that every farmer told us there was that it was a waste of 

time going because they didn't have any answers.  I can assure 

you that my officials that are on the road now do have answers 

to the questions. 

 

I've explained to you how spot loss hail works.  The crop 

insurance is the same in Alberta and Manitoba. They use the 

same grain prices that we do. They have different average 

yields and if they have higher average yields obviously they 

have higher coverage. 

 

The only changes that we made to crop insurance was we 

moved the option from 70 per cent coverage up to 80 per cent 

coverage which was again an option.  Farmers could have 

stayed at the same old program.  If farmers chose, they could 

be still on the same program, crop insurance program, that they 

were coming into this.  We offered them 80 per cent coverage 

last year or the year before.  Many, many farmers took that 80 

per cent coverage which gives higher coverage, which you 

have been saying that it isn't high enough.  We actually 

increased coverage from 70 per cent to 80 per cent, and again 

this year we've offered options.  Nobody has to take spot loss 

hail if they don't choose, or any of the other options that we've 

put forward. 

 

The officials have done another calculation on another risk 

area. This is risk area 7, which is the one I think that you 

mentioned, where the premium is not . . . the increase is the 

same; there's no decrease.  On this farm with the 500 acres of 

wheat and 200 of canola, the premium in '93 would have been 

4,888.  The premium in '94 would be 5,041.  So indeed the 

premium did go up a bit.  On the other hand, the coverage 

would be $70,339 in '93, and the premium in '94 would be 

$72,824.  So a slight increase in premium and an increase in 

coverage. 

 

We can go on through . . . and that may again apply to 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

one farm in that particular area.  But a farmer who grows 

different crops, who has different average yields, will again 

have different coverages. And we can go through all the risk 

areas and all the farms until we get them all worked out. 

 

But those rate increases are there for the farmers to see, and we 

will show them to them in the country meetings, and the agents 

will have their individual yields and the exact calculations that 

they can make to calculate for their farm, what it's going to cost 

them for coverage and what coverage they will have. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate the 

second example.  I will ask you to confirm that you can get 

your officials to get '91-92 in the same risk areas for the same 

acreage, premium and coverage, so that we can discuss it.  And 

will you give any commitment at all to comparing a typical size 

farm like this in neighbouring provinces, that you could 

provide for at least discussion purposes here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again my officials assure me 

that they will do what they can to get numbers.  I think there 

may be some difficulty as some of the crop insurance 

premiums are buried in GRIP in both those provinces. But we 

can certainly get the '91-92 numbers, and probably work 

something up from the neighbouring provinces. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that.  I 

want to just turn to part of the GRIP program, the revenue 

insurance.  Could you describe for us where revenue insurance 

is in the province of Saskatchewan?  And just in a sentence or 

two, briefly compare sort of the direction of where it is here 

versus the neighbouring provinces. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well in Saskatchewan, we have 

lower premiums and we have less, smaller deficits.  And all 

provinces, as the prices have moved up, anybody getting 

average crops will probably not get pay-outs this year in any of 

the provinces.  The potential for pay-outs next year is difficult 

to assess at this particular time. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, isn't it fair to say . . . I think that 

you and your colleagues may have criticized GRIP, and 

particularly the revenue insurance because you said . . . I think 

the Premier is quoted as saying, well prices go down, and as 

they go down you get less coverage and eventually won't get 

any.  And Crop Insurance officials said, well it's cyclical; prices 

go up and down.  You want to get good payments when they go 

down and then obviously you recoup when it go back up. 

 

And I heard a lot of criticism from people like you about, well 

sure it's okay, but what if prices keep going down and keep 

going down and they never go up.  And you had a lot of people 

really frightened. 

 

Now under those circumstances, and I'm sure that you will 

recall that -- under those circumstances 

where they were going down, you kind of pulled back and said, 

well we're not going to participate.  And so the payments in 

Saskatchewan were not nearly as high as they were in other 

places. 

 

Now prices are going back up.  And guess what?  You say, oh 

gosh, we've got a little bit of a surplus here in Saskatchewan.  

We don't have as big a deficit as the neighbouring provinces.  

Isn't that nice?  And the neighbouring provinces says, well no, 

the farmers got the payments in those difficult times, not the 

government.  Now on the way back up you say, well Jeez, it 

might not pay out because the prices are going up. 

 

Could you tell me if that's an accurate assessment of what 

happened in the province of Saskatchewan?  Prices went down 

and you criticized it.  You formed government in '91-92 and 

said, oh well, we'll end this program.  And certainly when you 

look to . . . say well it's going to cost the farmers . . . it cost the 

government and we won't give it to the farmers, and then it 

turns around and comes back up. 

 

And now I think I've heard you say and there's been some 

publications that you're quite happy that you have less of a 

deficit in that revenue account than neighbouring provinces.  

Could you comment on how the farmers have received money 

in neighbouring provinces, if you're prepared to make the 

comparison, how the farmers fared on revenue in Alberta and 

Manitoba compared to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again, that depends on the 

individual farmers.  Just let me remind the member opposite 

that that deficit will be paid off in part by farmers as well, so 

they're now in a position where they're not likely to get a 

payment and they're going to have to continue to pay large 

premiums until they get the deficit paid down. 

 

I think if the member opposite is defending GRIP program he's 

the last farmer in this province who still wants GRIP. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just asking you to comment 

on your statement I believe you made, is that you were happy 

that you had a surplus or more money in your revenue 

insurance than other jurisdictions.  Now we got most of the 

farmers in the Prairies right here.  We had just as difficult a 

time with those low prices as anybody else.  Now if I'm not 

mistaken, it almost sounded like you were very proud of the 

fact, and happy, that you were building up a surplus in that 

revenue account compared to other jurisdictions here on the 

Prairies.  Isn't that what you said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, if you're asking if 

this government is proud of not spending money they don't 

have and running up huge deficits that taxpayers and farmers 

have to pay off in future years without any responsibility, yes, 

we are proud of that.  We stand by our farmers as best we can 

in this province. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

I think the member from Arm River has quoted in this House as 

saying: if we'd have had a crop disaster it would have been a $3 

billion deficit in there.  That would be a fair burden on not only 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, but also the farmers who would 

be responsible for their share of that deficit.  And it was very 

much, I think as Alberta and Manitoba will find out, short-term 

gain for long-term pain. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you haven't answered my 

question.  You are saying that you are happy that the farmers in 

Saskatchewan didn't get their insurance coverage and that the 

money is in your coffers and not in the farmers' hands. 

 

They bought the insurance.  They had a difficult time, but they 

couldn't collect the revenue.  And you are saying: here we are; 

we're really happy that we in the NDP administration are happy 

that the government has got a surplus in those revenue coffers.  

Mind you, in Manitoba and Alberta the farmers got the money, 

but not in Saskatchewan.  And you're saying that you are in fact 

proud of that.  That's good.  It's a good comparison.  And the 

farmers should feel good about that.  And now that prices are 

going up, of course that they're not going to get any money.  

And when they were going down, you're the guy that took it 

away.  And you're happy about that. 

 

I just want to understand that so we know a little bit about 

whether we should believe that you really have the farmers at 

heart when you're talking about your crop insurance changes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not happy 

about anything about GRIP.  It was a terrible program from the 

start.  It's not a great program as we've corrected it.  We have 

give notice to get out of it.  Farmers that I talk to are saying, 

what the hell can you do to get me out one year sooner.  I don't 

think that . . . This program was a disaster from start to finish, 

and I don't think we're happy about any part of it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, all I'm asking you is to 

defend your statement.  Is it true that you are happy with the 

surplus in the revenue insurance that's here?  And it's much 

higher here than it is in neighbouring provinces under the same 

international price schedule.  In other words, and I won't put 

words in your mouth, in other words farmers got less money 

here under the program than they did in neighbouring 

provinces, and you're happy with that.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the farmers have 

gotten back something like $2.77 for every dollar they paid into 

it.  We are certainly happy that we don't have either our farmers 

or our government wrestling with a huge deficit to deal with.  

The surplus in this fund is not yet established; there may indeed 

not be a surplus in this program when it winds down. And we 

certainly would like farmers to have as much money and as 

many pay-outs as they can get, but if it comes out of them 

being stuck with paying off those premiums over a period of 

time, that is not great for farmers either. 

Mr. Devine: -- But we've got to ask, Mr. Minister, do you 

understand what insurance is based on?  You just finished 

saying it's based on actual numbers, 20-year cycles, 

federal-provincial law, and all of that.  So if you have 

back-to-back disasters, you pay out.  And then when the prices 

go up and production is good, you get it back.  That's what it's 

for.  That's insurance.  Not the whim of a minister comes in and 

says, oops, I don't like the direction of the cycle, I think I'll cut 

it off here. 

 

And then as it seems, two years later, you are proud of -- I 

think you said -- 300-and-some million dollar surplus in that 

revenue account that didn't go to the farmers.  And the farmers 

are asking, well isn't that what we bought it for?  It was, as your 

officials said, if we have a frost it's unmitigated disaster; they're 

going to need the money.  I won't put words in his mouth but 

there's no coverage here.  Well that's what happened.  And I 

think you said, and I think you -- if we can find -- you were 

proud of the fact that you had 300-and-some million in your 

piggy bank when the farmers didn't get that. 

 

And now you're saying, well insurance is something . . . we 

wouldn't want them to pay out because later they'd have to get 

it back.  Is that what you're saying?  I mean don't you realize 

that insurance means that if it's a disaster you pay, and in the 

good times you get it back, and it's based on cycles.  That's a 

fundamental premiss of crop insurance or any insurance.  And 

you've just finished sort of buttressing your whole argument on 

these . . . are national and federal-provincial agreements based 

on actual numbers.  And yet you don't seem to ride with it. 

 

So again I want to ask: is it true you have over $300 million 

today?  Or you just put out a release . . . it's something like 

$300 million in the revenue insurance side.  And could you 

give me any comparison in terms of how much surplus they 

would have in neighbouring provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well we do not have a $300 

million surplus in our account.  That's some projection that 

might happen if grain prices stay up.  And in a sense, if grain 

prices are up, that's good news because farmers and producers 

will get something from the market-place.  The neighbouring 

provinces are going to have . . . do have significant deficits in 

their programs.  And the member says that this was an 

insurance that was actuarially sound, which is certainly not at 

all true. 

 

Crop insurance is a program that was designed to be actuarially 

sound over a 25-year period.  The adjustments that were made 

last year was because that the number crunchers are saying that 

it was no longer actuarially sound.  Nobody, but nobody, ever 

predicted that the GRIP program would be actuarially sound 

over any time period.  And the people who had designed the 

program talked about a new program as soon as GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) came along. And 

this was a short-term political program to get certain 

governments out of some political trouble and was never 

designed to be actuarially sound and was going to leave the 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

provincial government and the farmers holding the bag on it 

and was a program that was a disaster from start to finish.  And 

that's why we've given notice to be out of the program.  In one 

more year, we're out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well it's interesting to see that your NDP 

colleagues are clapping when you're saying that you're . . . and 

I think it's correct.  We'll confirm that you said you reported to 

the ministers' conference, Ag ministers' conference, you had 

$320 million either in or forecasted in your revenue insurance 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  Now if you've done that, you 

shouldn't be ashamed of saying so.  Did you say that?  Did you 

forecast it, say it, use that number at all in front of other Ag 

ministers, that you had that kind of money potentially here in 

the revenue insurance?  Because we're going to confirm 

whether you did or didn't. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There is a potential for being 320 

million in there.  I suppose there's a potential for there being 

even more than that.  If the national grains bureau prices are 

right for this year and for into the future and the crystal ball is 

right on, that's a potential that there will be that much surplus in 

there.  If that surplus is there, then what happens to it is not 

spelled out in the agreement.  One would assume that at least 

the farmers' portion of it would go back to farmers.  But that is 

not there yet.  I think if the wheat price were to drop 50 cents a 

bushel or if the French were to dump their wheat on the world 

market before GATT, we well could have a deficit in the 

program at the end of that time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well there's two points here then, Mr. Minister.  

So you're acknowledging that you said it, and we want to just 

get that on the record.  Now imagine a minister who has cut 

farmers off 50,000, 40,000, up to $70,000 a piece because he 

changed the program, going to a convention of fellow Ag 

ministers. And it must have sounded a little odd but maybe 

almost like you're bragging, that you had $320 million 

potentially in your revenue portion of your crop insurance. 

 

And they must have looked kind of odd at each other and said 

well, you know, I wonder if he runs around at his 35 meetings . 

. . At your 35 meetings coming up will you, on my behalf or 

members of the legislature, make sure you announce to all the 

farmers that go to the 35 meetings: by the way, Mr. Farmer, 

you didn't get your revenue insurance and that part of GRIP 

when it was a disaster.  But I'll tell you the good news is we 

have $320 million potentially in a surplus because we didn't 

pay you.  Will you advise the House whether you and your 

officials will do that at the 35 meetings across the province in 

the spring? 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, you've taken the money right out of 

farmers' pockets and then run off to a meeting some place else 

and you have just been very flippant about it, how well you 

have managed.  And you've lost not just crop insurance 

customers, you've lost farmers and generations of farmers. 

And you know it because you say . . . I've been to enough 

campaign meetings to know.  Oh maybe when it goes down it'll 

just . . . it'll never end, it'll just work out to nothing; you've got 

to get out from under this.  And even at that time canola prices 

and flax prices were starting back up, and everybody . . . and 

you can't tell me that there wasn't actual numbers went into the 

GRIP program and revenue insurance.  I sat with the officials; 

we crunched numbers and we looked for 25-year intervals and 

20-year intervals.  And it wasn't just this province.  It was every 

province in the country, everyone in Canada. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, just so we know sort of whether we can 

have confidence, and farmers can have confidence, in your crop 

insurance numbers, will you advise us, or will you confirm to 

the House, that when you're out talking with farmers, in the 35 

meetings, that you will mention out there -- and very clearly -- 

that you have accumulated potentially $320 million because 

you took it out of their pockets and put it into yours; and then 

have the courtesy to compare the figures to neighbouring 

jurisdictions because I'm not so sure that other provinces are 

even going to get out of revenue insurance. 

 

And you might be able to confirm that for me because farmers . 

. . as they're looking at these prices going up and saying, well 

that's not a bad thing, I can chase that up as we do in our 

productivity on our own farms. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you'd make that commitment in 

the House here tonight that you will make sure you describe 

what you've done with all the revenue money you took out of 

their pockets and were so willing to share with other ministers 

across Canada when you got to the national meetings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, I will 

certainly provide any estimates of what we expect to happen in 

programs to anybody that wants to hear them.  In fact a press 

release went out predicting what we think will happen for the 

balance of this year. 

 

But I might add that each $10 a tonne increase in the price of 

hard red spring wheat results in a $75 million reduction in the 

pay-out.  Pay-outs changed $244 million -- the estimates from 

October to January -- so this is a very fluid number.  The 

member opposite brags about the number of people in crop 

insurance in '91-92, and indeed there were 51,466 in crop 

insurance and the reason was that they were coerced into it with 

the GRIP program that had come along. 

 

All through the reign of the members opposite from '82 on to 

'91, the numbers were 43,000, 43,000, 46, 48, 46, 45, 49.  And 

our numbers this year are 49,466. So the only anomaly was the 

one year when they were coerced into having crop insurance 

because of the GRIP program that was set up as a re-election 

plan in 1991. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you're saying that there must have 

been an election in every province across Canada, when for 

years we worked on crop insurance 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

and made changes.  We made many changes in Saskatchewan.  

I mean in terms of the salvage program -- there was no election 

-- lots of changes.  Saskatchewan has been responsible for 

making changes in crop insurance for years and years and 

years, and hopefully for the improvement of farmers. 

 

The problem we have with your changes, is that it's not for the 

farmers.  We just can't see the benefits.  So again I want you to 

confirm that you will tell the farmers on those 35 meetings, 

where you've put the money, and why you've got extra money, 

and I would like you to compare it to other provinces. 

 

(2215) 

 

The same cycles you talk about apply to Manitoba and Alberta.  

What we find out is that there's a lot more money in the hands 

of farmers over there, in either jurisdiction.  Still is.  And yet 

you were running to national meetings, say, well gee, we could 

have over 300 million in the bank here that the farmers didn't 

get.  Aren't we doing good.  That's appalling. 

 

I don't think you . . . Would you do that at your own 

constituency level? Is that what you do?  You run around and 

tell them in your riding that you have salvaged $300 million by 

taking it out of the farmers' pocket, not paying them. And in 

neighbouring jurisdictions in Manitoba, just a baseball throw 

away from your place, or over here in Alberta, that they got the 

money.  And then this is your claim to fame. 

 

I mean you have cut the number of farmers and raised the 

premium. Premiums have gone up to $191 million, and farmers 

and acres go down.  You're just hosing them, charging them a 

lot of money and then on the revenue side you're even bragging 

because you didn't pay it out.  Gosh.  And you think it's a . . . 

well I'll tell you, your officials aren't laughing much.  Even 

your colleagues aren't laughing.  I'll tell you the farmers aren't 

laughing.  No wonder the member from Shaunavon decided to 

pull the pin.  I'm sure it was an unmitigated disaster when you 

tried to convince your colleagues that this was the case.  It 

didn't help farmers. 

 

Crop insurance.  If you look at the raison d'tre of crop 

insurance, is to protect farmers against production losses due to 

things beyond their control, and you've just changed that 

historically. 

 

So here you are today . . . then they talk about political gauche.  

You were here today talking about you expect farmers to 

believe you that things will be better, that you're going to give 

them.  I think commodities will be better, no question.  I think 

there's tremendous renewed optimism in agriculture in North 

America because of very low interest rates, good moisture 

conditions, and commodity prices. 

 

What I'm trying to find out is if you can have crop insurance 

keep up to that.  You can collect premiums and have your little 

piggy bank but what bothers them is they say, you know what, 

when it comes time to pay out, boy do things ever change, 

because in their 

experience you didn't pay them.  You took $300 million at 

least, and many, many thousands and tens of thousands per 

farmer and you put it in your little piggy bank and then you're 

-- looks like you're bragging about it, which is not . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, will you explain the revenue insurance at your 35 

meetings, what you've done with the money and make the 

comparisons to other provinces and take an average farmer, and 

if you're really proud of it you'll have no problem.  You'll have 

no problem at all.  They'll say, well, I'm really glad the 

government's got the money and the farmer didn't get it.  You'll 

have no problems if you're really right.  And if you're not right, 

then maybe you'll gear a different story. 

 

Would you be prepared to make that commitment that you'll do 

that at your 35 meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's interesting 

to note that the member opposite is opposed to changes that we 

made to crop insurance, moving coverage from 70 per cent to 

80 per cent, is opposed to spot loss hail and is opposed to 

insuring new crops and the other options that we have put 

forward. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he thinks that the old GRIP program was the 

best program in the world.  Why are all the other provinces 

moving towards it?  All the provinces are saying, what we need 

is a new safety net, a whole-farm safety net that's not 

commodity specific and that's a better cap to small and 

medium-sized farmers and that does a better job.  Certainly we 

don't hear anybody in the world except the member opposite 

saying that this program was a good program, and I have no 

trouble explaining to farmers why we're getting out of a bad 

program. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Will you make the commitment to explain this 

accumulation in money in Crop Insurance on the revenue side 

at the 35 meetings?  Yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well there certainly is no 

accumulation of money in Crop Insurance as the member 

opposite well knows, and certainly the press release went out to 

everybody in Saskatchewan, at our best guess as the national 

grains bureau is saying that what might happen to the GRIP 

program, and that's certainly no secret. 

 

We'll make the estimates that come out, and we certainly hope 

that we have good grain prices and that there is no need for 

pay-outs and that there is a surplus in GRIP program.  I know 

the members opposite would sooner have poor prices and 

pay-outs.  But I think most farmers would sooner get their 

money out of the market-place if that's possible, and we're 

certainly happy if prices go up, and they do get the money out 

of the market-place. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, will you explain your $320 

million surplus in revenue insurance to farmers at your 35 

meetings? 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to be 

at all 35 meetings.  We certainly will explain to anybody that 

wants to hear what's happening in revenue insurance, and I 

don't think that's a big secret.  If the grain prices move up, there 

will be a surplus.  If the grain prices go down, there will be a 

deficit, and that's the nature of the program. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- One last time . . . I mean of course they do, 

even in neighbouring provinces in the rest of the country.  But 

will you be prepared and have your officials there.  This is a 

public meeting.  These are not partisan meetings.  Have your 

officials be prepared to explain the accumulation of revenue 

money, revenue insurance, in the province of Saskatchewan, 

under these conditions that apply across the West and then be 

prepared to explain why the situation is significantly different 

in neighbouring provinces.  That's all we're asking. 

 

I mean you've made the statement, so you must be proud of it.  

You'd better arm your minister, at least your professionals, 

when they go out there because it's a hefty amount of money.  

And isn't it nice that prices are going up.  And isn't it very good 

that we've got low interest rates and that we've got very good 

moisture. 

 

Believe me, you must have lived in the province when those 

conditions didn't exist.  I know I was here: 18 per cent interest 

rates and drought and very low prices.  And people needed 

help, and they certainly were looking for Crop Insurance to 

make its commitments.  So we would appreciate if you would 

at least, Mr. Minister, have your officials prepared to describe 

that situation at the 35 meetings. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly my officials are very 

familiar with the program and how it works.  I might point out 

that in 1991, under the old program, paid out in the fall and 

when the estimates come in in March, there was change in 

grain prices, and producers had to pay back what they'd already 

paid out.  That's how the estimates varied under the old 

program.  It hasn't changed.  That's one of the unfortunate 

things; we are not able to put any predictability into this 

program.  It's still a very unpredictable program and we could 

be anywhere from huge surpluses and pay-backs of initial 

payments, or we could be in large surplus positions.  That's one 

of the faults of this program and one of the reasons why we're 

getting out of it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I wonder if the minister would explain why in 

the '91-92 Public Accounts that the Crop Insurance had $150 

million loss, and explain to us whether in fact that was official, 

the loss; and why the minister didn't put that into his '92-93 

Public Accounts book so that the public could know that you 

overstated your $85 million of loss and have yet to have 

brought it forward in any of the financial statements that the 

public have been able to see.  And I'd like to have that 

answered, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, this is the 

same question that the member opposite asked in Public 

Accounts.  Again what we had was an estimate from national 

grains bureau in 1991, and based on those prices the loss would 

have been approximately 235 million.  When the final prices 

came in it was only 150 million which meant it was 85 million 

less than originally estimated.  The 1992 to '93 financial 

statements do not include the adjustment for the $85 million. 

 

At March 31, 1993, the effective $85 million overestimate of 

the 1991 revenue insurance final payment was corrected in the 

corporation's financial statement.  The accounting for this is all 

in accordance with the accounting standards, has been 

examined by the corporation's independent auditors, and I will 

send a copy of this answer over to the member if he wants to 

study it in detail. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 


