




















































Hansard: February 24, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  421
 February 24, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before 
dinner I was making some remarks to the budget speech, and 
what I had talked about before was the direction that the 
province is being led by this government and the fact that we 
are on target in terms of our budget projections.  And in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, this budget I think clearly indicates that we are 
restoring fiscal integrity to the economy of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had done in a small way a comparison of the 
federal budget to the Saskatchewan provincial budget, and 
what the federal Liberals were doing, and what this budget 
showed in terms of direction for the province under New 
Democrat government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated as well that it was my opinion that 
the Liberal opposition members and the Conservative 
opposition members would be standing shoulder to shoulder 
voting against this budget which, in my opinion and in the 
opinion of people in my community, is a very welcome 
budget and does show in fact a very positive direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I quote comments from my community, 
from Prince Albert, I would like to go through some of the 
differences between the federal budget and the provincial 
budget.  And I'd like to have a look at what they are 
proposing and what the people of Saskatchewan are facing in 
their budget that we have delivered just short days ago. 
 
In our budget, Mr. Speaker, we have continued on the cost . . 
. On the cost of operating small business, we've continued on 
a reduction in the small-business tax.  And, Mr. Speaker, in 
the Liberal federal budget there is no tax relief for small 
business.  Mr. Speaker, in the federal budget what there is is 
the capital gains exemption being eliminated and a higher tax 
rate for medium-sized businesses. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have recognized job 
creation in this province will be and has been done in no 
small way by the small-business community, is a proper 
approach.  We have, when we formed government, 
eliminated the PST (provincial sales tax) on meals and food, 
putting in the neighbourhood of $65 million back into the 
economy.  We have been partnering with the hospitality 
industry in our gaming ventures as I've indicated earlier.  
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I believe and I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan believe we're on 

the right course. 
 
And what help has come other than opposition from the 
Conservative and Liberal members in this legislature?  Mr. 
Speaker, the answer is none.  The member from Greystone 
promised us months ago, a hundred and some months ago 
now, that she had an idea every week that she would share 
with the province of Saskatchewan in terms of economic 
development.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, we haven't seen one 
single positive thought from the member from Greystone, 
any more than we've seen from the Conservative members of 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been nothing shared with us in terms 
of small businesses and benefits and proposals that would 
benefit small business.  Nothing, Mr. Speaker.  So, Mr. 
Speaker, this government has acted on its own because 
there's no assistance, there's no ideas from members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of unemployment, I indicated that I 
wanted to make some comparisons between the province of 
Saskatchewan and the federal government.  What the federal 
government offered my community, the community of 
Prince Albert, is cut-backs to unemployment benefits, Mr. 
Speaker.  We know full well that the impact of these will be 
generating, not more jobs, but more welfare.  And I say, 
shame on the Liberal members from this province who voted 
in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal budget offered nothing in terms of 
assistance for agriculture.  What it did offer was cut-backs.  
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this federal budget was a budget 
of tax, tax, tax, and not of jobs, jobs, jobs.  Mr. Speaker, 
sadly lacking in agriculture.  And I say that the people of 
Saskatchewan will see that a Liberal in the 1990s is no 
different than a Liberal of the 1970s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated that I want to support this budget 
because of what people in my community are saying.  And I 
just want to read some of the headlines that have been in the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald in the last few days.  "P.A. 
residents happy with no tax hikes".  "Accountant sees 
benefits for P.A. in budget", Mr. Speaker.  "School boards 
grade high province's new budget".  "Children's advocates 
enthused about gov't spending . . ." 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, instead of supporting positive initiatives, 
I'm convinced and I think will be evidenced later this 
evening, that members of the opposition will be able . . . or 
will be standing in their places and voting against this 
budget. 
 
I just want to put a few short quotes before the people of this 
province, Mr. Speaker.  The quote from one of the articles 
says: 
 

 Business owners may look forward to better times thanks 
to the budget decisions, he says.  A $600 million promise 
to the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation -- which 
replaced 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation -- 
could create more markets for provincial products. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the person goes on to say: 
 

 The same theory applies to the $4 million allotted to 
developing jobs and businesses in the north, which could 
have a local spin-off effect, he says. 

 
 "The Prince Albert area will certainly benefit from that," . . 

. "We in Prince Albert have to focus on getting involved in 
that." 

 
 Small businesses can be encouraged by the continued 

reduction in the corporation income tax rate.  With Prince 
Albert's high concentration of small businesses, it could 
mean more investment in jobs or expanded markets . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of comments that are 
out and about this province and these are what people are 
saying about this budget.  But I say that you will see this 
evening that members of the opposition -- both of the Liberal 
and Conservative Party -- will not vote for the people of 
Prince Albert.  They'll vote in their partisan, political way 
against the initiatives in this budget. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what could you expect from members of 
the opposition?  The member from Shaunavon I see is 
getting ready to address this legislature.  And I'll be 
interested to know if he'll stand up and explain where he 
would expect the people of Saskatchewan to find $167 
million, as he has requested we write down the entire debt of 
the crop insurance program. 
 
And I want to say to the member from Shaunavon that he 
may be able to explain this evening where we would find $3 
million, as he suggests we restore all of the service to the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company.  Where would this 
corporation find the money, I ask, Mr. Speaker?  And if the 
member from Shaunavon has a new idea, then I would be 
interested in finding out where that might be.  But I know 
what he supports, Mr. Speaker, as a Liberal member of this 
legislature, and I'm quoting from the Prince Albert Daily 
Herald one more time: "Red Book, red ink clash.  Budget 
fails to deliver election promises." 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the actions of Liberals; those are not 
the actions of a New Democrat government.  And I say to the 
members of this House that the people who sit on this side 
and who worked to put this budget together have faith in the 
people of Saskatchewan, have faith in their ability to restore 
fiscal sense, fiscal common sense, to their government in 
Saskatchewan.  And I say that people on this side of the 
House also recognize the fact that they would support similar 
initiatives from his federal cousins in Ottawa but sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, they play politics rather than doing what's right. 

Mr. Speaker, this process that we go through annually is a 
difficult process.  The Department of Finance struggles with 
a lack of revenue.  They struggle with high debt loads.  They 
struggle with the bond dealers.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, they're 
committed to restoring a good quality of health care and of 
education, and a good highway system, and a fair 
government. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, there are some differences in the way 
governments put budgets together.  I want to say that I'm 
glad to see the day is gone when year after year, 
Conservative government increased debt upon debt in this 
province.  I say, Mr. Speaker, those days are finished, and I 
believe the people in Prince Albert and in other communities 
in this province are happy that that in fact is the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not an easy course.  It's been referred to, 
deficit reduction, as a narrow road that few might be willing 
to walk.  But I say it's a road that we need to walk, Mr. 
Speaker.  There are some who have the courage to face the 
challenges of getting the fiscal house in order but then again 
there are others who can't.  There are others who will stand 
and oppose a responsible government, and there are those 
that haven't got the courage. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, and I think I speak for 
every member of the government side, that we're proud to go 
back home to our constituents and tell them that we are 
putting together a budget of fairness.  And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, we're all proud to go back to our communities and 
tell them that we in fact are building for our children's future. 
 
Now there are those who can go home and oppose these 
initiatives that we've taken.  There are those who would, as 
the member from Shaunavon does, call us to increase 
expenditures and increase services, but I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, we on this side of the House know that it can't work 
that way.  It never has and it never will. 
 
The leader of his party is on two sides of most every issue, 
and I want to say that in terms of some of the revenue 
initiatives that we've taken, she's being very inconsistent.  On 
one hand she opposes the introduction of the video lottery 
terminal program.  That's, of course, this week.  Now a few 
short months ago it was hurry up, hurry up, hurry up, get 
these video lottery terminals in, you're losing 50 to $60 
million in revenue.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that it's a 
position of inconsistency that all of those members take. 
 
There's a split in terms of which form of gambling in this 
province is good gambling.  She's got a list.  She has good 
gambling.  The bingos, as I understand it, are good gambling.  
But video lottery terminals, now that's bad gambling.  And 
horse racing appears to be acceptable; now that's good 
gambling.  But golly, don't do casinos because that's bad 
gambling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, what we support, what this 
government supports, is maintaining the dollars in this 
province as opposed to seeing them spent in 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

Manitoba and Alberta and the United States.  And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that people see through the opposition 
members who just play politics. 
 
This is a serious matter that we have in this province.  It's a 
serious fiscal problem that the Conservative government has 
created for us.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, we're going to be 
cleaning it up.  We're well on the road to having that happen 
and I feel comfortable in supporting this budget knowing that 
I've got the support of my community.  I've got the support 
of the people who sent me here to put this fiscal house in 
order.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that, unlike members 
opposite, I will be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, in closing I just 
want to ask members of the opposition to think about what 
they're voting against when they stand in this legislature 
tonight, and understand that you're voting against 
balanced-budget targets, that you're voting against stopping 
the outflow of dollars in interest to bond dealers in Zu pürich 
and in New York.  And I'm asking you to take a little bit of 
courage and support this budget. 
 
As I said, the member from Shaunavon was part and parcel 
of the first two budgets that we put together, stood in this 
House and voted for them because he knew that's what we 
needed to do.  But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the 
pressure came a little too heavy, he had to move to the other 
side and sit with the Liberals in opposing a balanced-budget 
course that we're on. 
 
(1915) 
 
But I say that there are members in this legislature who have 
courage.  My colleague, the member from Shellbrook-Torch 
River, is proud of what we're doing.  And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, he knows that we're on the right course and I'm sure 
that he'll be supporting this budget this evening.  Mr. 
Speaker, this is more than a political exercise we're doing; 
this is putting together a base for the future of our province.  
This is putting together a base for our children's future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to indicate to you that I will be 
supporting the Minister of Finance; I'll be supporting her in 
her balanced-budget initiatives; I'll be supporting this 
government in terms of putting our financial house in order; 
and I want to say that I quite proudly, on behalf of the people 
of Prince Albert, will be voting in favour of the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
I'm pleased to respond to the budget speech today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to be in the rare position of 
comparing the approach used in the federal/provincial 
budgets delivered within a week of each other.  I believe the 
budget speeches delivered by 

the two Finance ministers underline the basic differences 
between the Liberal approach to governing from the 
approach of the provincial administration.  When the New 
Democrats were elected after nine years in opposition, they 
stepped gingerly into the harness of government.  We've all 
listened to hours and hours of criticism of the former 
administration.  For two and a half years this government has 
blamed everyone but themselves for their own lack of vision 
and initiative.  Two and a half years, Mr. Speaker, the New 
Democrats have wasted time trying to come up with a plan 
they promised people in the 1991 election, the plan many of 
us thought did exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has not been without input 
from people.  The question is what they have chosen to do 
with it.  I think the government members opposite should 
take note of the approach used by the Hon. Paul Martin in his 
federal budget address.  After 110 days in office his 
government acted swiftly, but not without consultation, to 
bring down a budget that would chart the course for 
campaign promises to be implemented.  The decisions 
announced in the budget were reflective of a great deal of 
dialogue having taken place with the people of Canada.  
There was obvious input from the province about the need to 
stabilize revenue-sharing formulas. 
 
And did the Premier acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker?  No, he 
did not.  This Premier who has been so anxious to promote a 
good working relationship with the federal government said, 
and I quote: there was nothing but uncertainty in this budget. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that the federal initiative to meet 
with Finance ministers just weeks into its mandate -- not 
months or years but weeks within its new mandate -- why is 
it, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier is unable to acknowledge 
the value of those consultative processes, unable to give 
credit when it is due?  The people of Saskatchewan have a 
right to know that the provincial government would not have 
met its budget, would not have met its deficit reduction 
target had it not been for the additional $60 million in 
transfer payments and the monies advanced under the federal 
infrastructure program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial budget is very indicative of a 
government that has grown weary of the burden of 
leadership, a leadership it has proven incapable of providing.  
Mr. Speaker, the provincial budget shows a government 
whose only vision is the bottom line of deficit reduction -- 
nothing else.  That, Mr. Speaker, is not a vision; it's not 
leadership; it is simply bean counting.  And Saskatchewan 
needs and deserves more. 
 
In this provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan had an opportunity to put some ideas on the 
table that Saskatchewan people could grab hold of, some 
tangible programs that would put the skills and talents of 
Saskatchewan people to work.  But what did they deliver in 
their speech about delivering the promise?  This tired 
administration resorted to platitudes and rhetoric 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

when it should have been delivering programs and results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are not the only ones 
who are growing weary.  The people of Saskatchewan are 
getting tired of waiting for the results from their plans, their 
promises, and their platitudes.  Since 1991, Mr Speaker, the 
number of jobs in Saskatchewan has fallen until we now 
have 6,000 less jobs this January than we had last year; 9,000 
less than we had when the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
took charge.  And keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government has had a mere 100 days to bring forward a 
budget.  They travelled from one end of Canada to the other 
for initial consultations. 
 
And what of the Saskatchewan NDP government?  It took 
them more than 200 days to deliver their first budget to deal 
with a province, not a country. 
 
The throne speech two weeks ago was not the first or the 
second or the third, but the fourth throne speech.  This is the 
third budget speech this government has delivered -- all 
those wasted opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and still no specific 
action plans for the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the federal Liberals have taken bold steps 
very quickly to implement their election promises, the people 
of Saskatchewan are still waiting for the provincial 
government to deliver. 
 
Delivering the promise.  I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that 
delivering the promise is a quantum leap from what has 
actually happened here in Saskatchewan.  Since the members 
of the NDP or the so-called not-Douglas party seem to enjoy 
history lessons, let's take a little walk down memory lane 
with the 1991 election platform to see what the promises 
were that they had supposedly delivered on in this budget. 
 
First off, there was a commitment to save 7,500 jobs 
threatened by the increased sales tax.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
how have they done on that one?  Let's see.  Since 1991 the 
three budgets have resulted in sales tax from 7 to 8 per cent, 
then to 9 per cent.  And the net job loss has been 9,000 jobs, 
Mr. Speaker.  That doesn't look like delivering the promise to 
me or to the people whose jobs are going to be protected.  
Promises. 
 
Then there were jobs and savings through a comprehensive 
energy conservation strategy.  I don't recall seeing that 
strategy or the jobs it produced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Moving along, we have a commitment to develop a new 
community-based health care system, the wellness model.  I 
wonder if the Minister of Health or the Minister of Finance 
can explain how the 2.8 per cent funding cut for acute care 
services is offset by the smaller funding increases to 
long-term care or home care. 
 
I wonder if the Minister of Health can expand on how much 
expense they were spared when the rural 

communities decided to give them a second chance and not 
proceed with lawsuits that they were being threatened with as 
a result of the cooperative, community-based approach from 
the Health department.  People threatening to sue their 
government over health care.  Farmers suing the government 
over agriculture.  Companies threatening to sue over 
cancelled contracts.  This kind of action is not characteristic 
of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker.  At least it should not 
be their reaction if the government was indeed delivering on 
its promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were more promises that should have 
been delivered on in this budget.  How about the promise to 
renegotiate improvements to GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) and NISA (net income stabilization account)?  Has 
this government, has this NDP government, negotiated with 
other provinces?  With farmers? 
 
Would the provincial ag minister care to share with us the 
specific proposals that the Saskatchewan government has 
developed and ratified with Saskatchewan producers so that 
the federal government has a clear understanding of what 
people wanted to see implemented?  And what about the 
promise to work with farmers and their organizations to 
design a debt restructuring program to keep farm families on 
their land? 
 
Is that part of the same promise the Premier made when he 
said, not one more farmer, Mr. Speaker?  In fact, I recall the 
Premier in the election, standing on most of the stages in this 
province and saying, not one more farmer.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I know at that time the people thought what he 
meant was not one more farmer would be affected or go 
bankrupt, but in fact we now know it is not one more farmer 
is going to receive help from his government. 
 
Of course there were other promises too, like the 
balanced-budget legislation, fixed election dates, and open 
government.  To be fair, it only took two years to deliver on 
opening up the Board of Internal Economy.  So I guess we 
shouldn't expect things like developing an agriculture plan 
until . . . well perhaps towards 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government promised to improve 
provincial government services and community-based 
development opportunities.  But have they?  Is cutting bus 
service to rural Saskatchewan part of that promise?  Is 
closing schools and hospitals part of improving provincial 
government services?  Or is it raising utility rates and 
telephone rates? 
 
In 1991 the New Democrats promised to relieve the property 
tax burden in rural Saskatchewan.  Just how has the Minister 
of Finance done that?  Can she explain how this budget 
reduces property taxes for anyone in Saskatchewan?  Can she 
explain how it was critical for Ottawa not to offload on the 
provincial government but how it's okay for her to offload on 
municipalities?  Is that what delivering the promise means? 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

The NDP promised to keep . . . to work to keep property 
taxes down by working with municipalities to develop a fair 
and stable revenue-sharing program they can count on and by 
providing an increased share of school costs from provincial 
grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me read a quote from before the last election 
and let's see if the people can guess who's delivering this 
promise: 
 

 When you take all the rhetoric out of the budget speech, I 
would like you to explain to the young people of 
Saskatchewan how you can justify your government's 
decision to cut educational funding. 

 
I'll give you a hint.  You'll recall a fellow who used to roll his 
shirt sleeves up ever so slowly when he was giving those 
speeches.  You know who that was?  Quoted in Hansard on 
April . . . oh, I'm sorry, I'm talking about one of the other 
members; the Premier will get his shot later.  Hansard, April 
2, 1990. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Give us another hint. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Well that was the member from 
Saskatoon Broadway, the current Minister of Education. 
 
Now I look at page 33 of the budget and what do I see?  Well 
under K to 12 education, the Madam Minister of Education 
and Madam Minister of Finance, what I see under Education, 
that operating expenses are cut, grants are cut, and there is a 
cut to the education development fund.  Curriculum and 
instruction are cut, regional services are cut, and the budget 
for K to 12 education is being cut by 2 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when all the rhetoric is taken out of the 
budget speech, I would like them to explain to the young 
people of Saskatchewan how they can justify their 
government's decision to cut educational funding.  I'm 
especially interested in that explanation and the view of the 
statement made by their Premier in the Yorkton paper on 
October 16, 1990: 
 

 Increased spending is a priority for the NDP.  All I can say 
is we simply have to find the money (he said). 

 
In Moose Jaw he states: 
 

 Don't let any government tell you that they don't have 
enough money for education.  The money is there. 

 
Now do you remember him rolling up those sleeves?  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I guess that's another promise that didn't get 
delivered. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, referring to Moose Jaw just 
reminded me of another difference in the approach between 
the Liberal Party and the Government of Saskatchewan.  It's 
a question of attitude, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier likes to talk 
about forging a good working relationship with Ottawa, 
about being able to go to 

 the table and draw on his personal history with the Prime 
Minister. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier has done the people 
of Saskatchewan, and in particular the people of Moose Jaw 
and Wing 15 at CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Moose Jaw, a 
great disservice. 
 
One day the Leader of the Liberal Party is summoned by the 
Premier to a news conference to lend support to a request to 
keep the CFB Moose Jaw base open.  The Leader of the 
Liberal Party, the Leader of the Opposition, they both put the 
people of Moose Jaw first.  In fact, the Leader of the Liberal 
Party knew that the Premier would likely turn on her, as he 
so often does, if the federal government had chosen to close 
the base.  But the Premier just can't seem to pass up a chance 
to take a political shot even if it puts Saskatchewan people at 
risk. 
 
That's right, Mr. Speaker, instead of being appreciative of the 
level of cooperation shown by the other two party leaders, 
instead of showing some recognition of the phone calls made 
by the Leader of the Liberal Party to the Defence minister 
and to the Finance minister, instead of showing some 
optimism and happiness for the city of Moose Jaw when the 
government spared Wing 15 CFB Moose Jaw, what did our 
Premier do?  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, he went on 
television across the province and, in the most morose 
sounding voice, he dumped negative criticism all over the 
whole effort. 
 
(1930) 
 
That's right.  He couldn't be gracious and acknowledge that 
Moose Jaw was given a reprieve when other provinces were 
suffering the loss of their defence bases, that it was a good 
thing that had been accomplished, because he couldn't stand 
to give the Government of Canada credit. 
 
Now is that the kind of leadership we need, Mr. Speaker?  Is 
that how the Premier expects to get the ear of Ottawa the 
next time there is a serious concern?  I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Premier become more premier-like if he wishes to be 
seen like one. 
 
Now the members opposite get very upset when there is any 
criticism levelled at their budget.  The Minister of Municipal 
Government gets very defensive and sends some strong 
letters to SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) when they criticize government initiatives in 
the press.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this 
administration remember that it won't be the Ottawa New 
Democrats who get the ear of the Prime Minister, or the 
federal Conservatives. 
 
I think that the Minister of Finance should be a bit more 
generous in her acknowledgement of the revenues that are 
coming into this province as a result of the federal Liberal 
government.  In the provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, the only 
increase in revenues comes as a result of increases in the 
federal transfer payments, federal infrastructure capital, and 
gambling revenues.  I suggest that the Premier and his 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

government remember the old adage about biting the hand 
that feeds them. 
 
I just mentioned gambling revenues, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, it is interesting that a government who seems so 
committing to reducing -- no, eliminating -- poverty in the 
last election campaign is now so intent on creating it.  Mr. 
Speaker, the Liberal party has not ever said that it was 
opposed to gaming.  What we're opposed to is the 
government proceeding with a proliferation of gambling 
without putting forward competent studies, complete 
information, and allowing for total public input before those 
decisions go ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proceeding full steam ahead 
to promote gambling without presenting its strategy, without 
providing the revenue levels it needs to generate the profits, 
without doing proper social impact studies.  Mr. Speaker, 
that is fiscally and morally irresponsible.  For a government 
to undertake plans that could dramatically alter the social and 
economic fabric of Saskatchewan while trying to keep the 
numbers a secret is unconscionable. 
 
How, Mr. Speaker, can the government put numbers in its 
budget of these proportions, millions and millions of dollars 
of profits from VLT (video lottery terminal) machines that 
have only been operational for a few months, without tabling 
the information for the public to examine, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have put numbers before the minister to get 
some reaction, to force him to come clean with people about 
the true projections.  I remind the members opposite that it is 
the job and the responsibility of an open, honest, and 
accountable government to provide the public with the 
information when it is asked for.  It is not incumbent upon 
the opposition or the third party to have to invest time and 
resources to do the work that falls squarely under the 
mandate of that government.  But what choices are we left 
with, Mr. Speaker? 
 
When the minister refuses to put forward numbers to 
substantiate these unbelievable revenue projections, are we 
simply supposed to nod our heads and sit here as if it doesn't 
matter how much is at stake for Saskatchewan people?  Does 
the government expect that we simply let them plug numbers 
into a budget then slough off our questions about how much 
it'll cost to generate those gambling profits?  Does the 
minister expect that we will not put forward numbers for him 
to deny or confirm, as we have done in question period, in 
order to force him to put this information forward? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if this is the only way that we can get this 
open, honest, accountable government to come clean on 
gambling numbers I guess we'll have to put forward our best 
estimate and call the minister's bluff.  It would be far easier 
for us, and perhaps of greater benefit for the government, to 
try giving people the full information for once. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget should not be an exercise in 

hide and seek where the government hides the background 
information and the opposition has to seek out sources of 
information in order to get the government to reveal it.  But 
that seems to be the case, Mr. Speaker.  So we will accept 
that and make an effort to bring information to light on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan people who deserve to have that 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken an approach to the 
budget which brings taxes in the back door from 1993.  An 
approach which leads people to believe that there will be no 
damage inflicted but which will have a serious whiplash 
effect on the people in this fiscal year.  It seems to bother 
them. 
 
At the same time, they provide no vision, no direction, and 
no hope for the future.  In fact if it was not for the federal 
infrastructure program this provincial government could not 
point to one initiative in the past two and a half years that has 
done anything to create a climate for economic growth or 
investment.  And I see the Minister of Economic 
Development does take note of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that will slowly take its toll on 
rural Saskatchewan, business by business, school by school, 
hospital by hospital.  This is a budget which will see roads 
deteriorate, farm families opt out of crop insurance, and local 
governments cut back on services and raise municipal taxes.  
It is a budget that will wrestle control out of the hands of 
local communities and centralize power with the provincial 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that turns its back on the 
economic development and turns its back on the people.  Mr. 
Speaker, this is a budget that fails on delivering the promise.  
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased 
today to rise in my place and respond to this budget speech.  
I am pleased with the budget, Mr. Speaker, for several 
reasons, and I'm more than happy with the progress we have 
made to date.  I am more than happy with the progress we 
have made towards our goals, and more than happy with the 
progress we've made on our journey of renewal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know that I am a farmer from the Nipawin 
constituency in the north-east part of the province.  And 
responsibility for money, accountability with money, and 
efficiency with money have always been very near and dear 
to my heart. 
 
But also very near and dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker, is the 
idea of fairness, the idea of compassion, of cooperation and 
helping one another.  That is why, I believe, I am a New 
Democrat.  These two themes have always been part of the 
New Democrat and the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) tradition.  Mr. Speaker, these two themes are the 
two 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

things that caused me to try to be elected in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had watched the going-on by the former 
government for nine and a half years and I decided the time 
was not just to complain but, with the help of the people, to 
try to change things.  I watched with horror and disgust of 
the going-on, and I decided to be part of the solution with the 
help of the people. 
 
I watched as this former government took Saskatchewan 
from a province with a long tradition of spending no more 
money than we had available to spend, to one that had the 
highest per capita deficit of any province in Canada, to one 
that had mortgaged the future of my children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the long and glowing speeches, the 
promises, despite saying the right things for nine and a half 
years of rhetoric, they never balanced one budget.  Not one 
budget.  They were always going to balance it next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any family, any business, any farm, any 
organization, knows you cannot do that year after year.  Mr. 
Speaker, I said anyone; perhaps that's not quite right.  The 
former government obviously was an exception to that rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might just as well add here how amazed I am, 
and surprised, that the members opposite, in some of their 
speeches and comments, still maintain that they did nothing 
wrong.  They still maintain they did nothing wrong.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I want you to know that there was damage done 
to the province of Saskatchewan, and in fact there was 
damage done to this whole country of ours. 
 
This right-wing reign of terror that actually started under the 
Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau has caused severe, 
long-lasting damage to this country and this province of ours, 
and to every one of us individually as its residents.  Mr. 
Speaker, the damage was not only severe, but it was long 
lasting, as we will still be finding out for years.  
Saskatchewan people will be paying for this for years to 
come -- paying and suffering for electing such incompetent 
politicians to run the finances of their province and of their 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we keep hoping for them to change.  We keep 
hoping that right-wing governments will change and be 
concerned for the average common people.  But they don't.  
Two days ago we watched the federal government come 
down with their budget -- a chance to change.  But did they 
change?  No.  They had a chance, for example, to change the 
cuts to the Crow benefit to western Canada -- no change.  No 
change.  The same as the Tories, Mr. Speaker -- the Crow 
continues to fly away.  They say one thing and do another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just think of the millions and millions, in fact 
billions of dollars that we pay in interest, and will be paying 
in interest, plus the billions that we need to pay back -- 
money that's already been spent.  And 

much of that money that was already spent was just spent to 
line the pockets of already wealthy right-wing friends of the 
right-wing politicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said the last few days about 
what was promised.  There's been a lot of speeches about 
what was promised in the fall of '91.  Well I happen to have 
here on my platform a card . . . or the platform card that we 
campaigned out of.  And, Mr. Speaker, what it says is: first 
things first.  Proper financial management.  First things first. 
 
We said we'd open the books.  We would review all the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) privatizations and we would have 
a balanced budget within our first term of office.  First things 
first, Mr. Speaker, that's what we said.  It's a good thing to 
write these things down and to keep them on hand because 
I've noticed there are members opposite that have very 
selective memories about what was said. 
 
We said first things first and that's what we meant, and I am 
pleased with the progress we have made to date.  Our budget 
of a week ago today is part of keeping that promise.  Keeping 
the promise.  This budget is part of our journey of renewal.  
This budget is part of our balanced-budget plan, as we 
promised, as is recorded. 
 
(1945) 
 
And our balanced-budget plan is right on track, our 
balanced-budget plan is right on track.  Mr. Speaker, I want 
to congratulate the Minister of Finance, the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount.  I also want to congratulate the 
former minister of Finance, the member from Regina 
Dewdney, who was the one who started us down this road to 
recovery. 
 
But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the men and 
women, the boys and girls, the people of this province who 
are working together for a better tomorrow.  We're repairing 
the damage.  We're paying the bills.  We're planning and 
preparing for a better tomorrow.  We're not going to continue 
to mortgage this province on the backs of the next 
generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province, with the ministers 
of Finance that we've had, were able to take us in just over 
two years from a projected deficit of $1.3 billion, the worst 
in Canada per capita, to this projected deficit of $189 million 
which is the best in Canada . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I don't know if the other 
members might not be interested in listening to the member, 
but I do want to hear what the member has to say, so I ask 
them please to simmer down and let the member have his 
say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, in a mere two and a half years 
we've turned the finances of this province around over a 
billion dollars and our balanced-budget plan is right on track.  
These projections that have been 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

made in our last budgets, and made and met I might add, are 
the first projections that have been met in this province for 
years.  The last premier to do it was the Allan Blakeney 
government which was more than 10 years ago.  These are 
the first projections that were made and lived up to. 
 
We can all remember -- perhaps I should say all too well 
remember -- not only did the former government plan . . . 
The first year it took office it planned to spend more money 
than it took in.  Not only did they plan to spend more money 
than they took in, but they spent even more than they 
projected.  They couldn't even meet their own targets.  In 
some years they overspent by over 400 per cent.  Not only is 
it wrong to spend more money than you take in, but what 
kind of financial managers are you when you miss your 
target by 400 per cent.  They were always going to balance 
the budget next year.  Next year.  But next year never came.  
They said one thing and practised another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have already said, I am pleased with the 
progress we have made to date, but I'm even more pleased 
with the way the progress has been done.  Mr. Speaker, as I 
said before, I'm a New Democrat by choice.  We believe in 
fairness, we believe in compassion and cooperation, we 
believe as New Democrats in helping one another.  And even 
with the drastic measures that we have been forced to take, 
we have taken care in the cuts that we've had to make and the 
tax increases to be as fair as possible.  The worst is behind 
us.  There will be no tax increases from our provincial 
government this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Keeping: -- The tough measures are paying off.  We all 
know the comparisons with other provinces, Mr. Speaker.  
They have been repeated many times in this legislature in the 
past few days.  When you combine the taxes and the other 
government costs like utilities, health premiums, insurance, 
etc., Saskatchewan compares extremely favourable across 
Canada.  It compares extremely favourable with other 
provinces. 
 
The charges and taxes to a family earning $25,000 or less, 
we in Saskatchewan are the second lowest in the country, 
only behind Manitoba.  Even with families earning $75,000 
or more pay less here in the province of Saskatchewan in 
these areas than five other provinces.  And I might just add 
that four of those five provinces have Liberal governments. 
 
We started dealing with our problem here in Saskatchewan 
two years ago.  Only now are other provinces coming to 
grips with their financial problems.  Mr. Speaker, as you 
know, once again Saskatchewan is leading the way by 
example.  We're leading the way and setting an example for 
the rest of the country of Canada. 
 
I'm going to say again, I'm pleased with the progress we have 
made to date, and even more pleased with the way we have 
been able to do it, the way we have been able to keep our 
focus.  We have had our focus 

not on budget measures alone.  In the discussions we have in 
caucus, and committees, and in this legislature, our focus has 
not been -- and is not on -- budget measures alone.  But we 
have focused on fairness.  We have focused on compassion.  
We have been able to focus on measures to maintain, and 
even in some cases improve, protection for those least able to 
help themselves.  While we recognize the need to balance 
our budget, we have had to remain focused on fairness. 
 
Last evening I was watching the news, and I was watching 
the sports, and I saw the part where Myriam Bedard had won 
a gold medal for Canada -- a second gold medal for Canada.  
And she set out and hers was something like ours.  She had a 
race to run and she had a goal to achieve but every once in a 
while she had to stop and focus and concentrate on what she 
was doing and take aim at her target.  And I thought how 
comparable that was with what we've had to do and she did it 
well and we were proud of her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these things don't happen by accident.  We've 
seen how easy it is for governments around Canada -- 
right-wing governments particular around Canada -- to 
overspend and spend carelessly and spend recklessly and 
how costly it is to our nation and our people.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, this government of Saskatchewan, this New 
Democratic government, has had a long history of 
commitment to social justice and the words of Tommy 
Douglas -- and I'm not ashamed to use them -- humanity 
first.  And it will always be humanity first with us. 
 
In the good times . . . you would think in the good times that 
any government or anyone could be generous, but it takes 
real commitment and real focus and real concentration on 
your targets to be this kind of a government in times of 
adversity. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, we've added $4.4 million to the 
action plan for children to help prevent problems before they 
arise, more funding in the services for women who are 
victims of family violence.  And most importantly and best 
of all, money for jobs so there will be fewer people that need 
help. 
 
As the Associate Minister of Health often says, the Associate 
Minister of Health often says, a job is the best program.  
There is much more that we're going to do.  There is much 
more that needs to be done, but we will do it.  Slowly and 
surely we will do it.  With a focus on fairness we will keep 
our promises.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support this 
budget.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure today to rise to support the budget.  This is 
a real millstone . . . milestone for us. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Millstone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- It's a millstone for the opposition 
because they haven't got anything to 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

criticize.  For us it's a milestone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I would like to congratulate the 
Minister of Finance for bringing forth this budget.  When I 
think back to two years ago or a little more than two years 
ago when I came in as a green farm boy and sat down around 
the big cabinet table and looked at the numbers that we faced 
and the situation that this province faced, I realize how far 
we've come in that short time and I think we are well on the 
way to turning this province around.  And that I think has 
been as a result of, I think, good decisions by this 
government and by strong support from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This situation was not easy.  The numbers that came in from 
the Gass Commission and from Ernst & Young on the 
Crown side showed how serious the situation in this province 
was.  Some people would have . . . some people would have 
thrown up their hands in despair.  But I think what we knew 
all along was that the people of Saskatchewan built this 
province.  We don't live up here where it's 40 below and 
survive because we don't have the strength. 
 
People of Saskatchewan are innovative, they're productive, 
and they're cooperative.  They know how to work together to 
do things.  We've done a lot in this province.  And we knew 
that we had in this province the people who could rebuild it.  
We knew we had the resources here. 
 
We had a serious problem created by 10 years of 
mismanagement of the previous administration, and created 
by some problems in the agriculture sector, but we knew that 
there was a way to get out of it and we went to work.  And 
we have I think today shown that we can do it.  This budget 
is well on the way towards a balanced-budget target that we 
set forward.  We did this in a planned manner as opposed to 
what other governments have done. 
 
I think you look at what Alberta has done and what some of 
the provinces have done with hacking and slashing without 
any plan, if you look at what the federal budget that's just 
come down . . . picking around the edges and lots of studies 
and lots of thinking but not a lot of action and not a plan that 
shows the way out.  A whole lot of uncertainty in that 
budget. 
 
In our budget, in our plan, we took some tough decisions and 
we followed through with them.  I think we looked at some 
of the things that were easy to do, like you'd cut some waste 
and mismanagement, and those sort of things were easy to 
do.  But given the huge deficit that was there it became 
obvious to us that this problem could not be fixed by 
tinkering.  There was some tough decisions to make that the 
people of Saskatchewan were going to have to pay more 
taxes and get less services in order to pay off this debt, and 
there was no magic answer.  We wish there was.  We looked 
everywhere for magic answers.  I think some of us really 
would rather that we didn't have to cause the 

hardships that we did for the people of Saskatchewan.  We 
would not have had to ask the people of Saskatchewan to 
make the sacrifices that we asked them to make, but when 
you run up your credit card and you owe a debt, there is no 
magic answer. 
 
And I think maybe some people, such as the member from 
Shaunavon with his magic calculator, thinks there was magic 
answers and now he sits on the other side of the House and 
he still has the magic answers.  But in real life and in 
government there are not often magic answers, and what we 
did we tried to do fairly. 
 
And we asked the people of Saskatchewan to support us.  
And the plan is working and two years later I certainly feel 
very good about what we've done and I think we're well on 
the road.  So we're on the road to recovery, Mr. Speaker, and 
that speaks well of this government and well of the decisions 
that we've made.  And it speaks very well of the people of 
Saskatchewan, I think.  They are the people who deserve the 
credit for being on the road. 
 
The other thing that I really feel pleased with, Mr. Speaker, 
is that although we've dealt with the budget, we've dealt with 
the deficit, and we've accomplished what we set out to do in 
that field, we haven't been obsessed with doing this even 
though the deficit needed to be dealt with and it was a major 
problem that we were dealing with and there was no magic 
solution to it. 
 
We also did other things in this province.  I think our 
economic strategy with job creation and community 
development is a plan that needed to be done and is what has 
always been done in this province, and building those 
partnerships needed to be done even if we had not had the 
huge deficit that we had.  We couldn't continue to pour 
money into megaprojects and hope for that to be a solution to 
Saskatchewan's problem, so we developed the strategy that is 
good for Saskatchewan and will be good in good times and 
bad times. 
 
(2000) 
 
If you look at the health system, we're breaking new grounds 
in health reform.  The health system in this province needed 
to be reformed regardless of whether or not we had money.  
And we're doing it.  We're doing it under very difficult 
circumstances because we're doing it under tremendous 
budget and deficit pressures.  But we are doing it and the 
world is looking at Saskatchewan again as a leader in 
developing and reforming the health care system. 
 
And similarly in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we have 
developed a strategy.  We are moving in a direction.  It's a 
direction of the future.  It's changes that needed to be made 
even if we didn't have tough times.  And certainly those 
changes are more difficult to make when you have very 
tough financial times and it makes it more difficult for those 
things to carry forward. 
 
But in spite of the fact that we've been fighting this 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

deficit, we have brought forward plans and jobs and 
agriculture and health care and in other areas, and we are 
progressing.  So, Mr. Speaker, aside from dealing with the 
deficit, I believe we have also moved compassionately and 
with foresight, and moving into the future, and I think that is 
done within the budget plan.  And I think all of that speaks 
very well for the province and the future of this province. 
 
I want to say a few words about agriculture, Mr. Speaker, 
that being the field that I'm most familiar with.  As 
agriculture goes, so goes Saskatchewan.  And I think we 
know that this is still our major industry in this province.  It 
is still going to be the main driving force behind the future of 
Saskatchewan.  Agriculture is what we need to build the 
foundation of this province on. 
 
Agriculture came through 10 years of extreme stress from 
mismanagement of government and from world prices and 
from some weather problems.  And the farmers of this 
province survived through the 80's in spite of the government 
they had, in spite of the weather, and in spite of world 
conditions. 
 
And the reason they survived is because they are innovative, 
hard-working people, who have a desire to live in rural 
Saskatchewan and raise their families there.  And regardless 
of the economic conditions, they are determined to keep their 
communities and keep the province alive. 
 
One of the things that we did in agriculture is something that 
hadn't, I think, been done in this province before, is try to 
develop a long-term strategy.  We had in this province both 
federal and provincial administrations that treated agriculture 
in an ad hoc manner; poured money in close to election 
times.  Previous administration had the theory -- I think 
much like the member from Shaunavon has -- the theory that 
if you pour money out there it will automatically fix the 
problem, and it'll all come back, and we'll all be happy. 
 
Well I think we saw the previous administration pour out 
$1.1 billion through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) in loans.  That was going to solve the 
problem.   It would all come back in taxes and we would all 
be happy.  Well those farmers out there are still struggling to 
pay back those loans, the government of this province is still 
struggling to pay back the loans to New York, and it hasn't 
helped the situation. 
 
So what we did in agriculture is we went out and we 
consulted with the communities.  We consulted with 
producers.  We developed a strategy that's driven by 
producers, that we think will take this province forward.  
This agriculture will survive, and rural communities will 
survive, and they will grow.  But they won't grow because 
the government is pouring money into communities.  They 
won't grow because government has all the answers to the 
problem.  Those communities will survive, and they will 
grow because they want to, and because they will do it on 
their own.  And all they're looking for from government is a 
little 

leadership and a little assistance to do what has to be done. 
 
And they have adapted -- and continue to adapt -- to 
conditions in the world.  And we've seen the start of that in 
the past few years with the increase in specialty crops, the 
increase in red meats and livestock production, farm 
manufacturing, and a whole host of things are happening out 
there on the farm. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that this action has not been 
helped by actions of the federal government.  The federal 
government fails to stand up to the Americans in trade 
issues; fails to sign agreements that make sense to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
As pointed out earlier in the day, while we struggle to build 
agriculture and keep it going in this province, the federal 
government -- both the Tory governments and now the 
Liberal governments -- cut the WGTA (Western Grain 
Transportation Act) benefit, which is the program that hit 
Saskatchewan hardest.  They don't cut the GRIP program.  
They don't cut NISA.  They cut the western grain 
stabilization program.  And who does that hurt?  That hurts 
Saskatchewan producers.  Half of that money comes into 
Saskatchewan.  We're a land-locked province, this is a 
land-locked province, we very much need . . . we need that 
transportation support and that's the support that the federal 
government chooses to pull. 
 
But in spite of that we will continue to help the farmers of 
this province develop and grow.  And I think we are working 
now with the federal government to develop a new safety net 
which will have a long-term benefit which is affordable for 
both governments and for producers, that will be predictable 
and will not tell producers what to produce or how to 
produce it, but will be there in bad times to support them 
through. 
 
And we will be calling on the federal government and the 
Canadian people -- who benefit from the cheap food in this 
country -- to live up to their obligation to support our 
commerce through international price wars and through 
natural disasters that are no fault of the farmers.  And given 
that support from the Canadian people, agriculture in this 
province will develop and will have a bright future. 
 
If you go back to after the election we had a huge debt 
problem.  We addressed that through the six-year leaseback 
program.  It hasn't helped all the producers.  It certainly has 
helped some and producers continue to struggle. But we 
made that move, Mr. Speaker, because we wanted to save as 
many of these producers as at all possible. 
 
In the current budget, Mr. Speaker, we continue.  We are 
moving along the path that we set up in our strategy.  This is 
a strategy that producers designed, producers support, and 
we are moving to help producers to do what they've asked us 
to do. 
 
There were concerns about crop insurance, Mr. Speaker.  We 
have responded in this budget by making some changes to 
crop insurance.  We've put back in 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

the spot loss hail option.  We've insured new crops that we 
previously could not insure.  We've moved to bring forth a 
whole-farm insurance program that will allow producers to 
get bottom-line crop insurance for a lower premium, and 
we've helped . . . I think these enhancements to the crop 
insurance program will be well received by our producers 
and will help to stabilize the agricultural industry. 
 
Another major initiative that we've done in this budget in 
agriculture is the agri-food equity fund.  Communities out 
there, producers, have told us that we need to do more value 
adding.  We need to do processing and value adding in rural 
Saskatchewan because that's where we're going to create jobs 
for our young people on the farms.  That's how we're going 
to keep our communities alive.  We need to keep people out 
there to fill the schools and fill the hospitals and to keep the 
rural communities alive. 
 
And communities are not asking for government hand-outs.  
They're not asking for huge government projects; they're not 
asking for megaprojects.  All they're saying is, we want to do 
something, to do some value adding in our communities, and 
what can you do to help?  And what we've come up with to 
help with the value adding in Saskatchewan is $20 million 
over four years for an ag equity fund.  This will be equity.  
Many projects out there are just a bit short in equity.  The 
communities can raise some funds, they can borrow some 
money, but they often come up just short of enough equity 
funding to get these projects off the ground.  We think this 
will help.  It won't be all in a megaproject.  It will be small 
projects in rural Saskatchewan that create the 10, the 15, the 
20 jobs that communities so desperately need. 
 
In the beef development area we've got a fund of $1.35 
million which is going to be matched by the federal 
government to do research and development and marketing 
for the beef industry.  Again, that's what our strategy . . . and 
that's what producers were asking for.  We think that there is 
great potential in the red meat industry in this province.  And 
again we're not pouring in huge loans; we're not pouring in 
huge grants.  But what producers said is that we need a little 
bit of help with research to bring in new technology and new 
techniques and to help us with marketing and so on.  And 
we've responded to that, Mr. Speaker, by bringing forward 
the beef development fund which we think will help 
producers to increase the red meat, the beef production in 
this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I would like to say that the 
province, this government, has in the agriculture field 
brought forward a strategy.  And just as we did with the 
budget, we had a plan and we're following through with it.  
In agriculture we have a strategy, we have a plan, a 
long-term plan, and we are following through with it.  And 
you can see in this budget what we are doing to follow 
through on that plan. 
 
And I think that's what the taxpayers, that's what the 
producers and the farmers of this province want, is some 
leadership in developing a plan, telling them where you're 
going to go, and then carrying through 

 with that.  And I think this budget shows that and I think the 
agricultural portion of this budget shows it in agriculture. 
 
And I think that agriculture will again lead this province into 
prosperity and the rural communities and the rural producers 
will be the driving force that carries this province forward to 
greater prosperity.  And I look forward to the day when 
agriculture again is booming in this province and budgets are 
balanced and we will be again, I think, as we still are, the 
best place in the world to live and raise a family.  I think we 
have room to improve that and as we progress in our term of 
office, I think you will see that there is much to look forward 
to in this province. 
 
So I would like to again reiterate my support for this budget 
and I will be voting for the budget when the vote comes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sir.  It's 
with great pleasure that I rise to speak in support of the 1994 
budget.  And I really must thank the minister for the work 
that she put into this and congratulate her on the success of 
this budget. 
 
On a smaller scale, I know exactly what she's been through 
because I've been doing this for years in Gravelbourg as 
mayor, and we find that bad enough, but this one must be 
horrendous. 
 
You know, we're told the throne speech and the throne 
speech debate are a waste of time by the opposition there, 
and I suppose they feel the same about the budget and the 
budget speech.  I suppose to them after 50 years in the 
wilderness and then they go and throw everything away in 
nine years, to them it is a waste of time.  So they sit there 
with their backs to us and read cowboy stories instead.  You 
know, ashes to ashes and dust to dust and that's the way it 
goes. 
 
But I tell my constituents, sir, that this is just like being a kid 
at home again you know.  Mother used to say eat your 
spinach or your broccoli or whatever the vegetable happens 
to be, and if you don't, you don't get any pie.  Well, sir, we've 
been through the spinach stage with tax increases and 
program cuts but we don't seem to be quite at the pie stage 
yet.  Maybe we have to wait for the other kids, the other 
provinces, to catch up with us.  But the pie is coming, sir.  I 
can smell it warming in the oven. 
 
(2015) 
 
And this time last year, sir, I remember standing here and 
saying that the opposition was jeering and angry, not because 
they doubted whether we could balance the budget, they 
were angry because they knew well that we would balance 
the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Draper: -- And last year's budget came in $2 million 
better then we had estimated, despite the 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

efforts of the opposition and their friends in high places.  
That's a sad thing for them, sir. 
 
And this year, one year later, we're doing exactly the same.  
We'll do better then we said we'd do last year.  We promised 
and we're going to keep our promises. 
 
You know, on Thursday night of last week -- a week ago 
tonight -- the Minister of Finance appeared on television 
with a couple of journalists and an economist from the 
university and it was great, sir.  There was this fellow with a 
moustache that looked like a lavatory brush, who kept 
carping at everything the minister said, but everything.  And 
eventually the economist turned to him and pointed out that 
the minister and her predecessor, the hon.  member for 
Regina Dewdney, had laid out each year exactly what we 
intended to do and that each year we have done precisely 
that, so what was he complaining about.  And that shut him 
up good, sir.  It was a treat, a real treat, to see him get his 
comeuppance at last on television and not by our minister but 
by an economist from the university. 
 
But, sir, you've been snowed under by speeches that 
paraphrase the budget address, so if I diverge a little bit from 
the main truck be a little patient with me. 
 
You know already that we've reduced the cost of 
government, and so does the opposition.  You know already 
that we've cut MLAs' (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
expense accounts by 25 per cent, and so does the opposition.  
And you know that we've made government more open to 
the public, especially most recently with opening the Board 
of Internal Economy, and so does the opposition.  And it's 
good to reiterate it to make the point stick, sir.  But it can get 
boring from time to time. 
 
And I've always made a point of trying to add a little bit of 
humour to what can turn into a rather funereal debate, but 
this time I fear that I've been eclipsed by the antics of the 
third party tying themselves in knots, you know.  They're 
talking out of both sides of their mouth at once, attacking our 
budget while going into ecstasies over the billions rather than 
the millions of dollars cut introduced by big brother in 
Ottawa. 
 
But the Tories of course, they're happy as pigs in mud.  They 
can swing their toothpick at both provincial and federal 
budgets at the same time.  But I'd warn them to not do it too 
violently because they could either bust their gut or put their 
back out of joint because they're going to be doing this every 
year for the rest of their unnatural lives, and I'd feel 
embarrassed if they had to depend on our wellness model to 
put them back into physical shape. 
 
And talking about doing contortions, sir, I noticed that the 
Leader of the Third Party managed to get her reply to the 
budget address in on Monday.  That's very neat actually, to 
get her two cents worth in -- and that's a bit of an 
exaggeration of course -- before the federal budget comes 
down.  It relieves her of a lot of embarrassment.  And then 
she could leave the member for Shaunavon to do the 
equivocating, and if 

 he makes a mess of it, it doesn't really matter, he's 
expendable, he's not a real Liberal anyway. 
 
But having seen and heard that budget, he was pretty safe 
and he could afford to stand there and grin.  And whereas our 
budget is delivering the promise, Mr. Martin's budget by 
contrast is the fudge-it budget.  That's right.  They've fudged 
everything. 
 
Today The Globe and Mail editorial says: forget about Mr. 
Martin's budget.  And how appropriate.  And the headline in 
the business section says: Martin rewarded for aiming low.  
Oh dear, what a condemnation, sir.  And how does the 
member for Shaunavon explain that away, that the Minister 
of Finance is rewarded for aiming low after all his big 
speeches, and all the tub thumping and the jumping up and 
down. 
 
But the member for Saskatoon Greystone really showed her 
true colours on Monday, sir, what with her mechano-worship 
and her worship of the Premier capitulated to water and 
Quebec on cigarette taxes without a whimper.  Great stuff.  
And then she praised the noble Prime Minister for 
capitulating on NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), sir.  If that's her idea of major concessions on 
free trade, then heaven help us. 
 
You know the lament in Mexico is poor little Mexico, so far 
from heaven, so close to America.  We seem to be even 
further from heaven here, and at least in Mexico the weather 
is warm. 
 
And then the lady had the effrontery to tell us that we put the 
debt reduction tax up from 5 per cent to 10 per cent in this 
budget here. 
 
What is she saying?  People object to being told that there 
will be no tax increases when the deficit reduction tax 
doubles on the income tax form. 
 
Now I would like the member for Saskatoon Greystone to 
produce that income tax form because I have one.  So it came 
just before New Years or a belated Christmas present from 
our friendly neighbourhood income tax collector.  And the 
date on that form, sir, was 1993, which is last year. 
 
And I would like to point out that the tax increase was 
announced in the budget for 1992 and that it was 5 per cent 
in 1992 because it came into effect on July 1 instead of 
January 1, so it was in effect for only six months.  But 
perhaps the lady does not understand that.  So in 1993 it was 
applied for the whole year, and so of course it was 10 per 
cent.  But perhaps the member does not understand that. 
 
I would point out that the 1994 tax forms to which last 
week's budget will be relevant are not printed yet, sir.  They 
are not printed until after the federal budget and the federal 
budget was only the day after the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone made her speech.  But perhaps she doesn't 
understand that, sir, either.  In which case, you know, I don't 
really think she's qualified to lead a birthday party, let alone 
a political 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

party. 
 
But perhaps on the other hand, sir, she does understand it.  
Perhaps she understands it perfectly.  In which case she may 
not be misleading the House, but she's certainly confusing 
the public, and in that case she loses a lot of credibility.  She 
demonstrates that she's a stranger to the truth. 
 
And you know, there are many four-letter words which are 
not usable in polite society, but there's one in particular that's 
not usable in this House.  It begins with the twelfth letter of 
the alphabet and I think it could well be appropriate in this 
case, but I'll leave that to the judgement of my peers.  I'm 
merely pointing out that the use of spurious argument 
indicates a lack of genuine argument. 
 
And how does she explain her new colleague from 
Shaunavon's phone bills of $18,988 last year?  The highest of 
all the 66 MLAs.  Where on earth did he telephone to and I 
wonder who was at the other end?  Even the member for 
Estevan didn't spend that much, even with his China 
syndrome. 
 
And I'd like to remind members that the new red and white 
coat that the member for Shaunavon turned cost the 
taxpayers $70,000 extra a year last year.  I wouldn't like to 
have to buy a suit in that store, sir.  Ordinary citizens like 
Charlie McDonald of Swift Current were most upset about 
this and wrote to the paper about it. 
 
And the Minister of Finance told us in her budget address 
that the biggest single risk we face in our efforts to balance 
the budget in '96-97 is federal offloading.  And this, of 
course, is why federal budgets are so important to us in 
Saskatchewan, as in every other province.  But I see 
something looming on the horizon that's likely to cause us 
big financial trouble before 1996-1997, and this is the 
ongoing difficulty over the cigarette taxes. 
 
You know, what happens east of Quebec is unlikely to 
impact on us here, but what happens in Ontario certainly 
will, eventually.  Despite the Ontario government's brave 
declaration that they were not going to lower tobacco taxes, 
they were forced to capitulate.  And if they were unable to 
face down the combined efforts of the Liberal federal and 
Liberal Quebec governments who were in cahoots against 
them, if the Ontario Provincial Police, which is under 
provincial jurisdiction, cannot secure the Ottawa River 
against smuggling from Quebec, what chance does Manitoba 
have despite its valiant protestations, sir? 
 
Manitoba has a Tory government, so what sympathy will 
they get from Ottawa and Quebec?  And Manitoba is policed 
by the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), which is 
controlled and paid for by Ottawa.  I wonder what 
cooperation they will get from a force whose loyalty is to the 
central government, to police its land border with Ontario.  
Precious little, I suspect, and I fear that the dominoes are 
going to fall. 

Manitoba will follow Ontario, we will follow them, and 
Alberta us.  British Columbia may be lucky if they can blow 
the passes across the Rockies.  And if the federal and Quebec 
governments combined cannot secure the U.S. (United 
States) border against smuggling, what chance does anybody 
else have?  I think there's a lot of trouble coming. 
 
They tell us it's the last straw that breaks the camel's back.  
The problem is, even if you remove the last straw the camel's 
back is still broken.  We can remove a whole bale and it's not 
going to help us.  Once the camel's back is broken it stays 
broken, and no choice is left but to get another camel. 
 
Taxes are the straws and we the people are the collective 
camels, sir.  And the last straw, of course, was the goods and 
services tax.  And that started the tax revolt that those 
members whose constituencies abut the U.S. border will be 
able to confirm. 
 
Literally thousands of people flocking across the Montana 
and North Dakota borders -- that way they avoid both the 
GST (goods and services tax) and the health and education 
tax.  And we have some leakage along the Alberta border, 
but not so badly.  And the only thing that stopped the U.S. 
leak was when the value of the Canadian dollar fell to such 
an extent that the rise in exchange exceeded the gain in taxes. 
 
But the revolt was still there, sir, seething under the surface 
just looking for somewhere else to break out.  And it did 
break out again, sir. It broke out in the federal general 
election.  Two Tory seats, one in Quebec and one in New 
Brunswick.  Not a single Tory seat in Ontario, not a single 
Tory seat in Tory Manitoba, and not a single Tory seat in 
Tory Alberta.  How sweet it was. 
 
And what did we get for dessert?  We got 138 Tory votes in 
the Regina North West by-election, sir.  It was like cre pêpe 
Suzette.  The Tories went up in flames at the table. 
 
But now we have a liberal dose of indigestion.  Cigarette 
smuggling, compounded by that old phrase that used to come 
up in boy's books when I was a kid: the natives are restless. 
 
You know, since the Second World War, sir, the British 
Empire has been swept off the map.  The French Empire is 
gone, except for Saint-Pierre and Miquelon; the Belgians and 
the Dutch have yielded; the Italians were defeated; and the 
only natives in the world that have not been liberated are on 
this continent, sir.  And the natives are restless. 
 
And all our federal and provincial governments promised 
them the right of so-called inherent self-government at 
Charlottetown without bothering to explain what it would be.  
The Supreme Court was supposed to do that.  But that accord 
was defeated, sir, even in a liberal province like ours, a 
progressive province like Saskatchewan. 
 
My wife voted against it.  It was a great chance to vote 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

against the Tories.  It was rather sad, sir, because although it 
wasn't the best accord, it wasn't bad and our native 
population deserved better of us.  The anger was not against 
them, but against Brian Mulroney. 
 
But the aboriginals have suffered again because of him and 
they are smarting. They've suffered time and again from the 
perfidies of French governments, English governments, and 
now Canadian and U.S. governments. So why should they do 
anything to help us?  We deserve everything we get.  And it 
would be very fitting if what the Indians offered Sir Walter 
Raleigh so freely 400 years ago became the downfall of our 
governments today because of our greed. 
 
(2030) 
 
So now we have a situation where the Indians are smuggling 
boatloads of cigarettes across the border in broad daylight.  
And the Quebec provincial police, the se pécurite pé 
Que pébec, the RCMP, and the army are petrified.  They've 
grovelled and promised not to raid the reserves looking for 
cigarettes in case they set off another Oka. 
 
Why don't they just set up highway patrols outside the 
reserves and simply charge duty on any cigarettes that come 
through?  Don't attempt to seize them.  Simply demand the 
taxes and the duties.  And if the driver refuses to pay the 
taxes, tell him to turn his car around or his truck around, go 
back where he came from, and smoke his damned cigarettes 
there. 
 
But no, sir, there is an election pending in the province of 
Quebec.  And of course, our federal Liberal government is 
bending over backwards to get that provincial Liberal 
government re-elected.  Looks like we could end up not only 
with a camel with a broken back, but a government with a 
broken back.  The tax give-away is the obvious bribe.  Brian 
Mulroney paid $25 an acre to get his satraps re-elected here 
in 1986, or his cat's-paw, if the member for Moose Jaw 
prefers that. 
 
And I think we should strip aside the moralizing, get rid of 
the bafflegab and admit that cigarette taxes are high.  Not to 
discourage people from smoking but to collect a lot of 
revenue.  As Tommy Douglas said -- poor old Tommy 
Douglas, he must be turning in his grave -- when someone 
tells you it's not the money, it's the principle, you know it's 
the money. 
 
And once we get that settled we can get down to deciding 
how much money that particular traffic will bear and 
optimize it, if not maximize it, bearing in mind what taxes 
are like across the border.  High taxes not only increase 
smuggling, they increase the amount of internal crime 
because rival gangs steal each other's supply and truckloads 
of legitimate -- if that's the proper word -- cigarettes and 
liquor get highjacked.  Drivers get beaten up and even killed.  
Look what happened in the United States during prohibition.  
And we end up with a vast underground economy that we 
can neither control nor tax. 
 
And we are talking about a lot of money here, sir, 

 literally tons of money.  And the anti-smoking bigots, and 
the assorted health nuts, they're going bananas predicting the 
end of the world because cigarettes are cheaper.  But as 
always, sir, they're talking nonsense. 
 
You know in the United States the cost of cigarettes is 
one-third of the cost of cigarettes in Canada.  And I have 
information from the National Clearinghouse on Tobacco 
and Health, in Ottawa, that tells me that 28.1 per cent of 
American males smoke as against 31 per cent of Canadian 
males, despite the price differential. 
 
And despite high cigarette taxes in Canada, 30 per cent of 
women in Canada smoke, whereas in the United States only 
23.5 per cent of women smoke.  Now that's a big difference 
between 30 per cent and 23.5.  That's a difference of 6 as 
against 5.  And for both sexes together, the combined figure 
is 25.7 per cent of Americans smoke, whereas 30 per cent of 
all Canadian adults smoke. 
 
Now it must be noted that in the United States the figures are 
from the age of 18 up, whereas in Canada the figures are 
from the age 15 years up.  But allowing for that, there is not 
much difference despite the price differential. 
 
The organization tells me -- but it doesn't give me figures -- 
that in the United States, because cigarettes are cheaper, the 
people who do smoke actually smoke more cigarettes, but 
they don't give us the details.  But I'm nevertheless very 
reassured by these figures.  It is true that as the price of 
cigarettes comes down people will smoke more, temporarily.  
Just in the same way as when there's a price hike or a tax 
increase, the sales of cigarettes go down, temporarily, but 
then they come up again and they reach the same level. 
 
If we're going to stop people smoking it's going to be through 
education, pure and simple.  And please don't misunderstand 
me.  I'm not encouraging anybody to smoke.  I don't smoke 
myself.  But if people insist on smoking, let them do that, 
like anything else, in moderation.  Would anybody agree to 
take 25 doses of medicine in any day or drink 25 bottles of 
beer?  Of course not.  So why would anybody want to smoke 
25 doses of nicotine?  Surely 4 or 5 or 6 should be ample for 
anybody. 
 
On the other hand, sir, I tremble with fear that masses of 
people stop smoking at once because cigarettes and liquor 
taxes are consumption taxes.  And the GST and the health 
and education tax are also consumption taxes.  And I suspect 
that what would happen if others stopped smoking and 
drinking, that the GST and the health and education tax 
would soar to compensate.  And this would cancel out the 
drop in the value of the Canadian dollar and we'd go back to 
cross-border shopping.  So pray with me, sir, that people 
don't stop sinning yet, for a while anyway. 
 
Governments themselves create the crimes of smuggling and 
bootlegging.  There's a natural limit on the consumption tax 
differential across international and provincial borders that 
people will put up with. 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

But we only have one international border and we should be 
finding it easy to stay within that limit.  Imagine what it 
would be like if we were in the midst of a continent and we 
had five or six neighbours, all with different tax and customs 
and excise levels.  And this is why they've agreed in Europe 
to make these the same. 
 
No government or country can put up taxes excessively 
higher than those in a neighbouring country.  We force 
millions of people into black marketeering and smuggling.  
And everybody will tell you that they have no objection to 
taxes provided they don't have to pay them themselves.  
Nobody outside government considers smuggling a crime.  
They never have. 
 
In biblical times the tax collector was an outcast, witness St. 
Matthew in the New Testament.  And in the 18th century, 
Robert Burns -- himself a customs officer -- wrote satirical 
poetry about the devil kidnapped an excise man.  And is 
there any member of this House who can honestly say 
they've never smuggled anything through the Customs?  I 
doubt it.  I doubt it -- not even the Minister for Labour. 
 
We don't do it with criminal intent.  We do it for the thrill it 
gives us -- the excitement of putting one over on the 
government, like putting the car in cruise control at five 
clicks above the speed limit, like going one day past the 
five-year term for an election, just to show that you can do it. 
 
And now they tell us that we have a bootleg wine in the 
street.  There was an item on CTV News about it on 
Thursday night -- coincidently the same night as our budget 
speech -- two seizures, one of 20,000 litres and one of 8,000 
litres in Ontario the week before.  And they estimate that for 
every legal bottle of wine sold, one bottle is bootlegged.  
They estimate that 43 million litres of illicit wine was sold in 
Canada last year, and the vast majority of it was made in 
Canada from juices imported from the States. 
 
Contraband liquor they tell us, is coming in via Montreal in 
particular where the connivance of police and customs 
officers . . . I understand from the television that the bribe 
expected is $300, and you get your certificate signed. 
 
And as with cigarette smuggling, the problem seems to be 
based in the province of Quebec, for the Quebec government 
and the federal government are too scared to do anything 
about it.  Seventy per cent of all cigarettes smuggled into 
Canada come through the Mohawk reserves in Quebec, and I 
understand that drugs and alcohol come in the same way. 
 
And what has our new Liberal government done, sir?  It has 
capitulated with the usual pusillanimity.  Here was an 
opportunity to introduce real tax reform, sir, and what did 
they do?  They hid under the bed.  Perhaps they're looking 
for Paul Martin's new shirk boots.  But I fear that we're going 
to pay double in the next budget after the Quebec election. 

And if I seem to spend a disproportionate portion of time on 
these matters, sir, it's because they impact so strongly on our 
province, on our health, on our finances, on our law 
enforcement, and on interprovincial relationships.  The last 
thing thing we want to be is at loggerheads with Ontario and 
Quebec and the federal government. 
 
Is it not sad, sir, that smokers are getting a tax break while 
pensioners and the unemployed get tax increases and benefit 
cuts, respectively. 
 
And I've often heard of the military being called too as 
cannon-fodder but I've never heard them referred to as 
budget fodder before.  And The Globe and Mail, that NDP 
rag down in Toronto says, headlines and it's editorial: Martin 
cowers before debt mountain.  And a columnist says there 
and I quote: hoping that Bob Rae will be replaced by 
wishy-washy Liberals like themselves.  Maybe like the 
member for Shaunavon. 
 
You know talking about the member for Shaunavon, I was 
amused to be in this House on Tuesday of last week to hear 
that member attempting to usurp my function here in the 
back forty.  He was giving a history lesson.  How about the 
CCF and the NDP.  You know he managed to use both 
acronyms in the same sentence and he didn't choke.  And not 
only that, but his venerable leader didn't seem to make him 
wash his mouth out with soap, unless they took him behind 
the scenes and did it after they got him back to headquarters. 
 
Anyway, the gist of the history lesson was that the founders 
of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation were all 
turncoats just like him.  The argument was that they're all 
Liberal and Conservatives that decided out of sheer boredom 
to form a third party just for laughs, and that that party is just 
the same as the aforementioned libertives and conserverals. 
 
But what he doesn't seem to grasp, sir, is that those pioneers 
formed the CCF in the face of drought and abject poverty, 
because neither the one nor the other were in the least bit 
interested in doing anything to help the farmers.  The only 
help they got, sir, was dried cod sent by the fishermen on the 
east coast and apples sent by the farmers in B.C. (British 
Columbia).  They recognized that if anything was going to 
be done they would have to do it themselves.  And when 
they did try to ameliorate their conditions, they were beaten 
and shot by police and military hired by the Liberal and 
Conservative politicians across the West and in Ottawa. 
 
That birth in blood and fire was just as radical in its way as 
was the birth of Christianity in the first century.  You know 
Christianity, sir, was not just another religion.  It was not just 
a choice of worship in the Roman god Jupiter and his 
pantheon rather than the Greek Zeus and the Olympians.  It 
was a quantum leap of the kind seen only half a dozen times 
in the course of human history.  And if a Christian went back 
to paganism it was called apostasy and apostasy in the early 
days of the church was a capital crime, sir. 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

And similarly, the birth of the social democratic movement 
was a quantum leap in the political world of Canada, one that 
our neighbours in the South have not yet experienced. 
 
And it's not surprising that the leaders of this movement were 
Christian clerics, sir -- Woodsworth, Douglas, Stanley 
Knowles, Father Ogle from Saskatoon on the federal scene, 
and our own Associate Minister of Health and the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland-University. 
 
We on this side of the House are different from those on the 
opposite benches.  Most of us have experienced conversions 
of a very religious nature.  Sir, Gilbert and Sullivan in the 
1880s composed an opera called Iolanthe, and one of the 
songs in that opera went, "Every little girl and boy that is 
born alive is either a little liberal or a little conservative."  
They recognized that there was no major difference between 
the two parties. 
 
And we have heard mentioned in this House, sir, of a Mr. 
Whitney Friesen, who was young Liberal president of the 
federal riding of Saskatoon Humboldt.  Last week or so he 
was introduced in this Chamber as the new constituency 
assistant to the Tory member for Rosthern.  And Fred 
Petrowich who was formerly employed as a ministerial 
assistant to a Tory minister in the death throes before the 
previous administration and now he's reincarnated as the 
caucus communications coordinator for the Liberals. 
 
It's very reassuring to know that the third party is in the 
incapable hands of one of the bunch that sank the 
government of the member for Estevan.  With friends like 
that, sir, who needs enemies?  As Gilbert and Sullivan said, 
there is no difference -- Liberal, Tory, same old story. 
 
Had the member stayed and fought he may well have found 
allies on this side of the House.  And even if he had resigned 
the whip and sat as an independent member as a matter of 
conscience, he at least would have retained his respect.  As it 
is, instead of opening the window when it got too hot in the 
kitchen and letting some cool air in, instead of doing that, sir, 
he locks himself in the bathroom and hides his head down 
the hole.  There, sir, when he uses the big white telephone he 
gets no answer. 
 
We on this side of the House, sir, have the ear of the 
ministers and the Premier.  But after two years in this House 
the penny hasn't yet dropped for that member, that the work 
isn't done with grand, eloquent speeches to the backs of the 
heads of the opposition in this Chamber.  The work is done 
in committee and in caucus and in meetings in the corridor, 
by the mutual cross-fertilization of ideas across the lunch 
table and in our lounge out there. 
 
It saddens me that he's cut himself off from that for a mere 
$5,000 mess of pottage, to quote the King James Version, 
but perhaps he expects to be Senator Hazen Argue the 
second.  Robert Walpole told us in 1720s 

that every man has his price.  The member for Shaunavon 
had a fire sale, sir. 
 
But if I'm overly harsh on that member, I apologize.  And 
this much I can say in his favour: he is at least a modest man 
with much to be modest about.  And when this debate ends I 
shall be voting for this budget, sir.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure tonight to rise and respond to the NDP's third 
budget. 
 
After listening to speeches earlier this evening, particularly 
the member from Shaunavon's as he licked away at the 
scrawny bones of the government, it hardly leaves anything 
left for me, but I'll try to bring some of the stuff into 
perspective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the comments of the member 
from Shaunavon it just was dripping with sanctimony.  In 
fact, if sanctimony were retail space he'd have a shopping 
mall for sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP platform was good enough to get him 
elected, but somewhere along the road to Damascus he had a 
revelation come to him that it wasn't good enough to keep 
him elected, Mr. Speaker, and that's why I believe that that 
member crossed the floor.  The NDP platform was good 
enough to get him elected but then he realized, Mr. Speaker, 
that he was dead-ended in the party.  He had reached a level 
of incompetence that he couldn't exceed, Mr. Speaker, and 
that's why he decided to change to the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan.  Better not to be a back-bencher in the 
government, be second in command -- well third, maybe -- 
third in command in the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker.  I guess 
it just gives new meaning to the axiom that some people rise 
to their level of incompetence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget was titled, Delivering the Promise.  
And it's really quite ironic.  Ironic because the slashes and 
cuts the Saskatchewan families have had to endure for the 
past two years haven't stopped.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, when 
people get their income tax returns, they should . . . when 
they open them up, it should have a warning on it.  It should 
have a warning that says something like -- that's attached to 
their income tax return -- delivering the promise, now ante 
up.  Because that's what the people of Saskatchewan are 
going to have to do, Mr. Speaker.  Each and every person in 
Saskatchewan has to dig deeper to fund this government's 
thirst for tax revenues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Budget '94 means more property taxes.  Loss of health care 
services in rural Saskatchewan is only a small indication of 
what this true budget is about, Mr. Speaker.  The increases in 
utility rates, the endless increases in utility rates, the 
offloading of the provincial government on the backs of 
taxpayers, particularly property taxpayers in Saskatchewan 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

whether it be urban taxpayers or rural taxpayers. 
 
The health care services that people in rural Saskatchewan 
are having to put up with now, Mr. Speaker, are a shame in a 
province like Saskatchewan.  The government would have us 
believe . . . They stand in their place and say we have more 
acute care bed levels than anywhere in the country.  And I 
ask them, Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with that?  What is 
wrong with having the health care services that everyone in 
this province can be proud of?  What is wrong with having 
services that the people of rural Saskatchewan need? 
 
Now we see examples, Mr. Speaker, of that poor old fellow 
from out Davidson way that was in the hospital, shipped off 
to Lucky Lake and then over to a couple of other 
communities, had to take an ad out in the paper to let his 
family know where he was.  That's what he did, Mr. Speaker.  
Had to take an ad out in the paper to let everybody know 
where he was because the NDP was ferrying him around 
from facility to facility. 
 
You people should be ashamed of the health care reforms 
that you're doing, particularly in rural Saskatchewan.  You 
should be ashamed of your record of incompetence when it 
comes to health care reform, Mr. Speaker.  We see hospitals 
that have been opened in rural Saskatchewan since the turn 
of the century now being closed and you people say that this 
somehow or another is good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Somehow or another the people of Saskatchewan have to 
endure this because you're too incompetent to be able to 
figure out how to do it any different, Mr. Speaker.  As the 
member from Wilkie often said about the NDP's wellness 
plan -- get well, stay well, or farewell.  And that's exactly 
what is happening to the folks, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I think now we're going to 
be seeing over the course of the next little while it's going to 
get worse.  It's going to get worse.  Acute care bed levels are 
expected to drop even further -- 1.5 beds per thousand.  
That's what they're talking about, Mr. Speaker, further 
rounds of cuts to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And on top of that the government, I think, believes, I think 
they believe that they've kind of reached the level that . . . I 
think they finally believe that the level of discontent with 
health care is kind of dropping off and therefore they're just 
going to ride this thing out.  Don't hold any elections; don't 
hold any elections for the boards.  Make sure the people of 
rural Saskatchewan, and anywhere in Saskatchewan for that 
matter, don't have an opportunity to throw the people out that 
are destroying the health care system as we know it. 
 
That's the reason for not having the elections, Mr. Speaker.  
They don't want to get into this kind of difficult business of 
having people stand on an election platform for health care 
reform and tell the government, you were wrong.  Because 
right now they've got all of their political appointees out 
there, Mr. Speaker, that are running these health care boards 
and won't say a word about the government; won't 

 tell the people of Saskatchewan how difficult it is out there. 
 
The acute care bed levels that are going to be announced 
shortly, I'm sure, by the minister, is going to be a travesty for 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  Hospitals will continue to 
close, people will have better services . . . We've found out 
this from people calling our office, Mr. Speaker. They're 
saying that they have better veterinarian services than they 
do health care services for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How many more beds will be cut?  How many more 
hospitals will go?  Fifty-two hospitals.  The community that 
I'm from, Mr. Speaker, has had a hospital since the turn of 
the century.  They've had the same doctor, the same family 
of doctors.  The Holmes family of Eston have been 
administering to the health care needs of that community for 
71 years, Mr. Speaker, and now are being told that that 
hospital is no longer good enough to treat the good folks of 
my community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People in rural Saskatchewan have called their NDP 
government health care reforms dangerous -- place them in 
danger, Mr. Speaker.  They believe that they are . . . their 
very, very well-being is threatened by the reforms.  They say 
that because of your cut-backs, they don't really have 
emergency medical care any more.  And that's true, Mr. 
Speaker; they don't have that.  They say they cannot afford to 
lose any more acute care bed levels or any other kind of 
health care funding, for that matter.  The last thing rural 
Saskatchewan needs is further cuts to acute care in hospitals, 
but that's what Dan Perrins, the minister's assistant in the 
minister's office, in the minister's department, has been 
saying.  One of the top officials in the department. 
 
It'll certainly mean loss of jobs as well, Mr. Speaker.  Judy 
Junor of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses estimates in the 
hundreds of jobs will be lost as a result of the second wave 
of the NDP health care reforms.  Where is the promise to 
preserve jobs?  Where is our rural health care jobs placed in 
the government's priority list, Mr. Speaker?  They say that 
jobs are the number one priority.  What about health care 
jobs, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What about the promise to allow communities local control 
over their health care facilities?  What about that promise, 
Mr. Speaker?  The minister forces hospitals into districts, 
then she appoints every district health board member, mostly 
political appointees.  Now she refuses to give us specifics on 
the date of the election, Mr. Speaker, the first election that 
should have been held the day the health care reforms were 
introduced. 
 
And the minister not only will not be specific on an election 
date; she makes sure that they're not all 100 per cent elected, 
that only 8 of 12 members of the board will be elected, Mr. 
Speaker, and that the chairman will be appointed, not 
elected.  That wasn't good enough, I don't think, Mr. 
Speaker. 



438 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

The government, as well, has taken away funds from these 
hospitals, contingency funds, Mr. Speaker.  In some cases, 
Mr. Speaker, we're aware of people in this province that have 
passed away and have willed substantial portions, substantial 
amounts of money to health care boards and hospitals around 
the province. 
 
I'm sure, as everyone knows, it's not uncommon when you 
walk into a rural hospital these days, Mr. Speaker, you walk 
in and you see a little name-plate on the bed that this is a 
donation on behalf of a family, of a person who's departed 
just shortly before that.  You see that on a number of 
facilities in rural Saskatchewan donated by the Lions Club, 
the Legion, all of those kinds of things, the ladies hospital 
auxiliary.  Those kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, are what 
made the cooperative spirit in rural Saskatchewan what it is, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's ironic, it's ironic that the government takes over control 
of that money that belongs to those hospitals and now won't 
even let hospitals spend it on how the hospital sees fit. 
 
What they have told . . . As we understand it, what the 
government has told . . . the department has told the health 
care boards is that you can spend the money on promoting 
wellness -- whatever that is supposed to mean -- but not 
staffing, not on patient care.  It only can be spent on 
promoting the wellness model, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 
they've been told, you promote the wellness model, spend the 
money that people have willed to that facility.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that's a shame.  Mr. Speaker, I think the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that to be the case also. 
 
Local control?  I don't think so, Mr. Speaker.  It's ridiculous, 
and this budget does nothing, absolutely nothing to address 
that situation.  And the members will say they're placing 
another $10 million towards health care services in rural 
Saskatchewan -- it was announced in the budget. 
 
One has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, where the so-called savings 
are coming from that this health care reform was going to 
generate.  It was going to generate all kinds of untold 
amounts of money to the government and therefore that was 
the reason to bite the bullet and take the hit in rural 
Saskatchewan.  That was the reason. 
 
But now in your own budget you say you're going to 
dedicate another $10 million toward health care services in 
rural Saskatchewan.  There's no saving, Mr. Speaker.  Let's 
be very, very clear about that.  There is no saving to the 
health care budget as a result of the changes that they're 
talking about.  The pain hasn't been worth what you are 
putting people through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If health care reform was running as smoothly as the Health 
minister tried to make us believe, why then was it necessary 
to pump $10 million back in to provide services that rural 
people had in the first place?  What was the reason that you 
had to do that?  Was it because you were hauled into court, 
or you 

 were going to be hauled into court, and the people . . . once 
again the health care sore would be opened up again, Mr. 
Speaker?  I think that's partly the reason.  I think that's partly 
the reason. 
 
They feel they're over the crest of this health care problems 
and therefore put a little bit of money, 10 million bucks, back 
into the system, quieten down these people that are raising 
the concerns, Mr. Speaker.  And as the member says, it's 
working back there. 
 
(2100) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Grease the skids a little. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- That's what he's saying, Mr. Speaker.  He 
understands how this process works.  Sometimes I wonder 
about that, but he does, on this situation he understands how 
this works. 
 
Just give the people a little bit of money, Mr. Speaker, make 
them feel a little more comfortable about this, let the 
problems all die down a little bit, don't hold any elections, 
just kind of try and slide her through before there's any more 
problems. 
 
The goal, Mr. Speaker, of the wellness program was to 
improve health care services.  And, Mr. Speaker, I guess that 
begs the question: has that happened?  Has the wellness 
model improved the health care of Saskatchewan people?  
And I don't think it has, Mr. Speaker, and I don't think there's 
as many people out there in Saskatchewan that believe it has 
either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we'll see how many program cuts and how 
many taxes will be raised as a direct result of the '94 budget, 
Delivering the Promise, or delivering the utility bill, as it 
should have been called.  Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope the 
Finance minister, when she promised no tax increases, 
included utility taxes in that, Mr. Speaker.  Because that's 
exactly what they are.  When you heat your home, or turn on 
the lights in your home, or any of those kinds of services that 
government provide, telephone, you don't have an option, 
Mr. Speaker.  You can't in Saskatchewan, as we see today, 
particularly over the last couple of days when we have a 
raging blizzard out in the southern part of Saskatchewan, you 
can't turn the heat off just to save on the utility bill.  You 
can't do it. 
 
In a modern society, people have got used to the 
conveniences of a modern home, and they're not about to go 
back to the days of shovelling coal. That's right, Mr. Speaker.  
Back to the days of Tommy Douglas, exactly.  Back to the 
days of Tommy Douglas and all of the promises he made.  
At least he had the foresight, at least he had the foresight to 
put in the program for delivering power to farms, Mr. 
Speaker.  I don't think at that time though, he would have 
accepted the idea that that was going to be used as a cash 
cow to service the needs of a hungry and thirsty government, 
for tax revenue.  I don't think he had that in mind when he 
was delivering the utility to people in rural Saskatchewan.  
That wasn't the goal at that time.  It was simply to improve 
the lifestyle and the 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

well-being of people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  That 
was the goal at that time.  And he should be congratulated 
for it, Mr. Speaker. But he did not, I believe, foresee the 
kinds of things that this government would be doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan have had to 
bear unfair utility rate increases.  The members opposite 
supported . . . it's time, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite support our Bill that limits the kinds of increases; 
puts together an all-party committee to review each and 
every increase in utility programs, Mr. Speaker.  What would 
be wrong with that?  What would be wrong with that, Mr. 
Speaker, of having someone, have the utility has to go before 
-- SaskTel, SaskPower, things of that nature -- have to go 
before a utility review committee to determine whether or 
not the utility is justified in asking for an increase.  That 
seems to me to be an important thing that could be done by 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can't examine these utility rate increases 
after they are already implemented.  The people of 
Saskatchewan, I believe, want to have the opportunity to 
have their say about utility rate increases before they're 
implemented, Mr. Speaker.  It is good to be able to question 
the government, yet these discussions must place rates before 
rates are hiked, Mr. Speaker.  That's the way it should be 
done. 
 
There's no good reason for the government not to accept our 
proposal, I don't believe, Mr. Speaker.  The only thing, they 
want to drag their feet on this because they know that they're 
going to be able to raise substantial amounts of revenue and 
hide it in the Crowns, and then bring it back shortly before 
an election next . . . the next election that's called and put it 
in place for a slush fund. 
 
I guess we'll see in the coming days just how open and 
accountable the members will prove to be.  This Bill will 
come before this House, Mr. Speaker.  Utility rate increase 
type of legislation will come before this House, Mr. Speaker, 
and the government will have to respond.  The members 
opposite claim that no taxes will be increased, but they refuse 
to include utility rate increases in that promise.  And we all 
know what that means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of net income in 1992, SaskEnergy had 
increased rates.  Why did they do that, Mr. Speaker?  
SaskPower rates are up 10.7 per cent, which brought in an 
extra $55 million in spite of the corporation netting $118 
million in 1991 and $107 million in 1992.  These companies 
are profitable, Mr. Speaker, very, very profitable.  What 
justifies increasing the rate, Mr. Speaker? 
 
SaskEnergy has had rate hikes of up to 15.5 per cent in just 
two years and again that corporation was profitable.  What 
justifies the increase in rates?  Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy had 
net earnings of $27.4 million in 1991 and in 1992 net profits, 
net earnings of $51.6 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite, the members of the government, still try 
to justify their rate hikes. 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, people are getting used to 
the NDP using utilities as a cash cow and are used to NDP 
promises that have fallen by the wayside.  Just think of some 
of the promises that would have been implemented had the 
NDP made . . . while they were in opposition. 
 
Former Alberta New Democrat Leader, Ray Martin, used to 
hold up Allan Blakeney as a shining example of how a 
socialist party can be trusted with the management of the 
economy.  Mr. Martin said that this is because the NDP 
government in Saskatchewan held power for 11 years 
without once running a deficit.  On the economic front, Mr. 
Blakeney's deficits had little to do with good management 
and a whole lot to do with a lot of luck.  His term in office 
coincided with a period of tremendous growth in our 
province's resource sector.  Oil prices were strong.  Demand 
for Saskatchewan potash was high.  Even wheat prices were 
high, Mr. Speaker.  So too was government revenue -- it was 
also high during that time -- particularly the part that was 
derived from taxes known as resource taxes. 
 
Tax revenue increased 555 per cent over the NDP's 11 year 
term -- 555 per cent increase in revenues in their 11 year 
term, Mr. Speaker.  And the NDP showed little caution when 
it came to spending this windfall, Mr. Speaker. Spending in 
nominal terms increased 553 per cent over the same time 
span, Mr. Speaker.  The average yearly increase was $22.4 
million.  In constant 1971 dollars the former NDP 
government spending was 3.2 times higher when they left 
office in 1982 than when they arrived in 1971. 
 
So I guess there's two more reason why the members 
opposite made so many promises while they were in 
opposition.  Either they never intended to keep them or they 
had no problem with spending money to keep their promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former administration under the member 
from Estevan is roundly criticized by the government today 
for spending.  But what did the government . . . what did the 
NDP propose in 1986?  And there's many of the members 
opposite that are still around today, Mr. Speaker.  What did 
they promise in '86 when the levels of deficits in this 
province were starting to take off?  What did they promise at 
that time, Mr. Speaker?  They tried to outbid the PC party of 
Saskatchewan for the electorate to provide them with an 
opportunity to govern again.  They brought in a whole host 
of spending commitments that they were going to bring in, 
Mr. Speaker, and had those commitments been . . . had the 
NDP won government in 1986 we'd have seen a deficit 
significantly -- $5 billion of significance -- higher than it is 
today, Mr. Speaker.  That's what we would have seen. 
 
Well it isn't me that's saying that, Mr. Speaker.  A number of 
independent sources around Saskatchewan now look back on 
the promises made in '86 and say, how could these people 
responsibly believe that they could have brought that kind of 



440 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

government?  How could Allan Blakeney -- the former 
premier of this province -- suggest and promise those kinds 
of spending commitments? 
 
You remember some of them, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure.  And 
I'm sure there was members then that are still around today, 
Mr. Speaker.  It sounds like the budget of today.  Just listen 
about a few of them.  Five thousand new jobs will be created 
for young people through career start -- 5,000 new jobs.  
Now in the last budget the Minister of Finance had 2,000 
jobs -- an additional 7,000 this year, was it?  An additional 
5,000 this year, it's going to be.  Both promises never were 
kept, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Eighteen thousand new jobs from a comprehensive housing 
policy.  Now that sounds really good, Mr. Speaker.  What are 
they going to do to do that?  How are they going to 
accomplish that goal, Mr. Speaker?  They're going to have a 
program put in place that has a down payment of the first 
$7,000 to first-time home buyers, renovation grants of up to 
$7,000 for all existing homes, 7 per cent for seven years on 
the first $70,000 for all new and existing home mortgages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was in a period of time that interest rates 
were starting to take off and this government was promising 
to lock in $70,000 worth of mortgage at 7 per cent for seven 
years.  That program would have cost the Government of 
Saskatchewan billions and billions of dollars.  And now 
these people that like to portray themselves as the 
spendthrifts of Saskatchewan, at that time they were singing 
a different tune, Mr. Speaker.  They were trying to outbid 
anybody for the opportunity to govern once again. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker.  They were going to put together 
a payment based -- for agriculture this is -- on $6 wheat, $6 
wheat as the price of grain was declining to historically low 
levels, Mr. Speaker, under $2 a bushel.  These people were 
going to come up with a program that guaranteed $6 a bushel 
for every farmer in Saskatchewan. I'd ask the Minister of 
Agriculture to tell us today what that program would have 
cost -- $6 a bushel minus the price that people were getting 
of about $2 a bushel, a $4 top-up.  What would have that 
cost, Mr. Speaker?  What would have that cost the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
When we look at that, Mr. Speaker, the numbers become so 
large one can't even hardly imagine the cost that it would 
have been to the taxpayers in Saskatchewan.  Not only that, 
but on top of that, Mr. Speaker, they were going to reduce 
the cost of fuel to the farmers of Saskatchewan.  They were 
going to bring her down to 32 cents a gallon -- 32 cents a 
gallon.  I don't know what that is in litres, Mr. Speaker.  I 
guess it's probably something in the order of about 8 cents a 
litre -- 8 cents a litre was going to be what the fuel was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at all these kinds of things, 
you'd wonder why the people didn't vote for them at that 
time.  I recall on the campaign trail, Mr. Speaker, at that time 
-- in 1991, pardon me, Mr. Speaker -- when we were in the 
debate sort of thing of 

 who was going to be the government in 1991, the NDP 
candidate in the constituency that I ran in, he stood up and 
said, we're going to force the price of wheat up on an 
international level.  We have such significant clout.  We're 
the bread basket of the world.  We're going to raise the price 
of wheat around the world. 
 
And the people in these other countries like the United 
States, them small little players, they're just going to have to 
follow along, follow our lead. That's what he said, Mr. 
Speaker.  We're going to raise the price of wheat.  And I said, 
what about durum?  We're going to do it to that too.  What 
about canary seed?  We're going to raise it too, Mr. Speaker. 
We're going to put the prices up on every single one of them.  
And the farmers around that room, Mr. Speaker, I think were 
all asking themselves the question that night: why don't we 
elect this gu?; He's got all of the answers.  Why don't we 
elect this NDP candidate?  Why didn't . . . But where did he 
land, Mr. Speaker?  At the end of the day he landed on his 
feet.  He landed in a nice, fat, cushy job with Saskatchewan 
Transportation Corporation, Mr. Speaker.  That's where he 
landed and every time I see him walking up the stairs, 
coming into the legislature and happen to see him, he 
conveniently slips behind a corridor not to have make eye 
contact with me, Mr. Speaker.  That's what happened to him. 
 
Fair taxation.  That's what's going to be brought in too.  
They're going to refund the sales tax on a number of things. 
 
(2115) 
 
A fair share of resource revenue for Saskatchewan people.  
They're going to strip the revenues of the oil companies and 
hand her out piecemeal to the folks of Saskatchewan.  Small 
jobs were . . . small business, jobs, prosperity, and fairness 
were the top priorities, Mr. Speaker, of Allan Blakeney and 
the NDP in 1986.  The spendthrifts of '91, at that time, Mr. 
Speaker, were promising everything under the sun to get 
elected.  Every one of them was doing it, do whatever they 
could to get elected.  They were going to put people first, 
Mr. Speaker, and the member holds up the platform card of 
1991.  Do you have a platform card of the '86 election?  
Because I do; it's right here, Mr. Speaker.  Done them all.  
That's right. 
 
Putting people first.  Guaranteed minimum income for the 
Saskatchewan seniors 60 years old and over.  That's what 
they were going to do.  Pay equity for women, Mr. Speaker.  
They were going to do that.  Affordable and accessible 
quality day care, Mr. Speaker.  They were going to do that.  
Improved health care staffing levels.  Now if that isn't the 
biggest, the biggest promise that they made in '86.  They 
were going to improve health care funding and staffing 
levels, Mr. Speaker.  And instead, what are they doing?  
They're slamming the door shut on hospitals all over the 
place. 
 
They were going to reduce SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) vehicle insurance deductible 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

to $300 and allow for payment of licence and insurance on 
an instalment basis.  They were going to expand the dental 
plan, Mr. Speaker.  That was another promise that they were 
going to make. 
 
And most of all they were going to stand up for 
Saskatchewan in whatever ways possible, Mr. Speaker.  And 
there, Mr. Speaker, is the list of candidates that they had at 
that time in Regina.  And many of them, Mr. Speaker, are 
candidates and MLAs today.  Where did the change come in 
these people?  Where did the big spenders of '86 turn into the 
spendthrifts of '94, Mr. Speaker?  When did that transition 
take place, Mr. Speaker?  When did that transition take 
place? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the costs of all of 
those programs -- independent sources claim that it would 
cost up to $5 billion for the NDP promises in 1986 -- they'd 
have run a deficit of $3.5 billion in the budget of 1986-87 
had they been elected.  A budgetary deficit of $3.5 billion 
would have been your first budget had you been elected in 
1986. 
 
And somewhere along the lines the members, like the 
member from Swift Current, now stands in his place and tells 
everyone in Saskatchewan that they're going to be 
responsible.  They've seen the light, Mr. Speaker, and they 
are the most responsible government.  And the member from 
Humboldt holds his hand up and prays because he was one 
of those people.  He was one of those people that was going 
around making those promises.  One has to wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, how many jobs and how much that would have cost 
the people of Saskatchewan at that time? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 7-7-7 promise would have cost hundreds of 
millions dollars.  The elimination of poverty $481 million.  
The prescription drug plan -- they're going to bring that back 
-- $70 million.  Physiotherapists $4.5 million.  Health care, 
they were going to increase that by 12 per cent, $184 million.  
Reduce the student-teacher ratio to 16 students per teacher.  
That would have cost $14 million.  The provincial share of 
school operating was going to be 60 per cent or $110 million 
cost to that.  Increase the highways budget by $60 million, 
Mr. Speaker.  They were going to do all of those good 
things.  Allow the Indian and Metis to establish their own 
child care agencies, $25 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it proves conclusively to the people of 
Saskatchewan that had the NDP been elected in 1986 their 
promises would have driven this province into bankruptcy.  
And then all of the while while the government, the member 
from Estevan, was talking about making some changes, 
introducing programs, the members opposite stood one by 
one in their place and said it isn't good enough, you're not 
spending enough, you're not doing enough.  Spend more, 
more money for education, more money for health, more 
money for agriculture, all of those kinds of things.  All the 
while the member from Estevan's government was struggling 
with deficits, the members opposite at that time were saying: 
spend more, spend more, spend more.  We promise to spend 
more, you 

 should be doing the same, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they 
said at that time.  The seniors are going without their 
groceries, we need to spend more to help this situation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They were also going to lift the cap on utility rates.  Well 
they sure did that.  Lift the cap on utility rates.  That was 
going to cost $2.1 million.  Well they accomplished a couple 
of things in their days, Mr. Speaker.  They did that, they 
most certainly did that; we see increases almost on a 
biannual basis now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they promised as well, in the '91 election that is, that 
they were going to eliminate the PST.  You remember that 
promise, Mr. Member from Biggar, don't you?  You went 
around in your constituency making that promise, at 12 
o'clock midnight on October 21 the PST is done.  And person 
after person in Saskatchewan now believe that they were 
betrayed by you people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP's promise, Mr. Speaker, of delivering the promise 
hasn't been delivered in this budget, Mr. Speaker.  They've 
asked the people of Saskatchewan to give support to this 
budget.  But I think the people of Saskatchewan now are 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, that this budget has nothing but 
tax increases, retroactively introduced last year in the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and now they're seeing that the promise has not 
been kept, Mr. Speaker.  The budget should have been called 
breaking the promise, Mr. Speaker.  And for that reason, I 
myself certainly will not be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
could say an awful lot about what the last speaker was 
talking about, but at the current state of his and his party's 
relevance, I think I will keep it very short. 
 
Although I found it very interesting, very interesting, that on 
the 1994 throne speech, the member from Kindersley can 
only talk about the 1986 election.  Well, and I only want to 
say one thing about it.  Had we been elected in '86, as we 
have proven in the last two years, those things would have 
been delivered now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- And our mind has not been changed.  What 
happened between '86 and '91 was another billion dollars a 
year spent by the former government which forced us, forced 
us to put plans on hold that would help the people of this 
province and forced us to make the tough decisions that 
we're making today.  But as we have proven three 
consecutive years in a row, we are on the plan to debt 
recovery, to restoring the future of this province because 
we're on track and we are delivering the promise.  The plan 
is well entrenched and is well on it's way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a question of the member from 
Shaunavon.  I sat in this legislature many years . . . 



442 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

or not many, a few years with the member from Shaunavon.  
All the while he supported the transportation policy, the 
method of payment, or the Crow benefit, to the producers 
without a reduction . . . or to the railroads without a 
reduction.  I remember listening to him speak about the 
Conservatives cutting it 10 per cent per year.  I would like to 
see, I would like to see the letter the member from 
Shaunavon wrote to the minister, his buddy federal Minister 
of Agriculture, supporting a further reduction as the Tories 
had reduced it in the past, a further reduction of the 
method-of-payment dollars. 
 
Now I don't know if there's been a change of heart or if he 
was instructed.  My fear is that he has lost the battle with his 
leader, that he has again and again been told what to do, and 
she said, keep your mouth closed on the method of payment.  
So that's what happened. 
 
And I find that disheartening, Mr. Speaker.  Disheartening.  
Disheartening that that member who was so supportive 
wouldn't even stand up, his leader wouldn't stand up, or the 
third member of the bob-sled team wouldn't stand up, and 
say why, why, or what Mr. Minister of Agriculture of 
Saskatchewan did you say about the method of payment? 
 
So he finally got the opportunity today.  But none of the 
members of the opposition Tory Party.  I understand that.  
They support the cuts of the past.  But now we see, Liberal, 
Tory, same old story with agriculture, the same policy being 
continued.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we, 
as part of this budget, have put forward many initiatives in 
agriculture in order to assure, in order to assure that we shore 
up the farmers of this province. 
 
New initiatives in crop insurance.  Diversification program -- 
a very visionary program where farmers who before, if they 
wanted to grow a new crop that we had no statistics on, they 
took the risk entirely on their own; entirely on their own.  
And some of them did that.  But with the new diversification 
aspect of crop insurance, Mr. Speaker . . . And I am surprised 
that the members opposite wouldn't see this as a very 
positive program because this program, this diversification 
option, allows people to share the risk with the Crop 
Insurance Corporation.  They don't take all the risks 
themselves.  The risk is now being shared. 
 
It will, Mr. Speaker, not initially but slowly, but surely, it 
will encourage the growing of many, many new crops in this 
province.  I'll bet my bottom dollar on that because people 
are looking for . . . they're looking into the future, being 
visionary.  And Crop Insurance is right along there with 
them because this government has moved in that direction. 
 
Returning to a hail program . . . to a spot loss hail program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, very positive.  Returning to or adding a 
whole-farm income program.  I've talked to many people 
who said I want to reduce my premium.  I don't really need 
coverage on every crop, but I want a bottom line -- a bottom 
line.  And that's what we're giving, the opportunity of a 
bottom line. 

Mr. Speaker, as the member from Kindersley witnessed . . . 
as we witnessed him in this House today, as we have seen 
the members opposite, Liberal or Tory, as I said, the same 
old story.  They found very, very little, if any, legitimate 
criticisms of this budget. 
 
And you know why?  Because if they . . . That's why they 
have to talk about '86 and '91.  That's why the Liberal 
members talk about everything but the budget.  Because 
they'd be out of sync with most of the people of this province 
who, when they listen to the radio and hear people replying 
to the budget . . . hear people replying to the budget, ordinary 
citizens who are saying that this can't be criticized.  Because 
the plan was put in place, the foundation is being built, and 
we're carrying out the step-by-step process of progress to 
recovery in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as many of the previous 
members have stated, the Liberal budget is a budget with 
very many uncertainties in it.  We don't know all the reasons 
for that but we can speculate.  But the point is there are 10 
governments in this country.  Saskatchewan led the way in 
recovering.  We have seen many other provinces -- New 
Brunswick, Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario, and 
others following suit of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now some have done it different ways.  Good old Tory, Mr. 
Ralph Klein in Alberta, what he does is say, chop.  It doesn't 
matter, cut social services.  Even cut out, cut out payments 
for special needs people.  Can you imagine the psyche that 
must be involved there?  Cut out school boards.  Heartless 
cuts. 
 
The good old Liberal provinces, the highest taxation 
provinces in Canada.  The top four for 25,000 tax bracket . . . 
income bracket rather, the top four highest taxed province is 
Liberals; $50,000 income bracket for families -- and this is a 
combined income -- the top five provinces are Liberals; 
$75,000 income bracket, the top three are Liberals. 
 
Look at Saskatchewan's figures: $25,000 range, second 
lowest; $50,000 income, third lowest; $75,000 income, 
fourth highest.  The thinking is, ability to pay.  Ability to pay 
for those people who can pay, will pay, and together with a 
cooperative thought and cooperative process, we will bring 
this province out of the state it's in today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that I 
am very pleased to stand in my place and support this 
budget.  Because it will . . . I believe in my heart of hearts it 
will set the stage for a province which again will be able to 
deliver everything that the wishful thinkers over there who 
had the opportunity, the new bob . . . I shouldn't say that.  
Bobsled team, I shouldn't say that . . . wished they had the 
opportunity, but we will with the foundation, the heart, the 
desire, and the cooperation rebuild this 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

country.  Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
The Speaker: -- Pursuant to section 14(4) of the Rules and 
Procedures manual: 
 

 Notwithstanding anything else herein contained, the mover 
of the motion "That this Assembly do now resolve itself 
into Committee of Finance" shall in no case have more 
than twenty minutes in which to close the debate aforesaid. 

 
If the Minister of Finance wishes to speak, it is her chance 
now, 20 minutes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker.  I'm pleased to close the debate on the 1994-95 
budget.  The budget debate has revealed some very 
interesting information about the improvement in our 
economic and financial situation and it has also revealed 
some very interesting information about the members 
opposite and how uncomfortable they feel about our 
encouraging results. 
 
I want, first of all, to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 
Westmount for giving me the privilege of representing them 
in the legislature.  I also want to sincerely thank the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I appreciate very much their advice, 
encouragement, and support over the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budgets are team efforts.  The open and 
honest input I receive from my caucus colleagues was once 
again, invaluable.  Our entire caucus played a central role in 
developing this budget and they are essential to the 
continued success of this budget and this government.  When 
I stand to vote for this budget, I will be standing as a proud 
member of a team of people committed to working together 
to make this province a better place now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of two and a half years of steady, 
hard work, the 1994-95 budget delivered the promise.  The 
promise to meet our deficit reduction targets.  The promise of 
no major program cuts.  The promise of no new taxes and the 
promise that jobs are our priority. 
 
We have made tremendous gain since 1991.  We inherited a 
debt of $14 billion and a projected deficit of $1.3 billion.  
This year the deficit is $294 million.  That's a billion-dollar 
turnaround.  Next year the deficit will be $189 million, the 
lowest deficit since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In this budget, we can also begin 
to see some of the benefits of the difficult 

choices.  One of the benefits of meeting our deficit reduction 
targets is that we can invest more in jobs. 
 
Jobs is the reason we are acting further on our economic 
development plan, Partnership for Renewal.  The plan 
relies not on megaprojects, but on small businesses and 
co-ops for job creation. 
 
Jobs is also the reason we're investing in a northern 
development strategy.  And jobs is the reason why we're 
acting to promote value added processing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're also acting in this budget to revitalize 
agriculture.  Spot loss hail will be added to enhance 
coverage.  The options of whole-farm insurance and 
coverage for specialty crops will be introduced to promote 
diversification and lower insurance costs. 
 
And we can also begin to see some benefits in health care.  
We've established a new $10 million rural health initiatives 
fund to ensure that emergency palliative and 
community-based care are available in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- And we are expanding the breast 
cancer screening program to make it available for the first 
time on a province-wide basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's important to remind ourselves that again in 
this budget we've lived up to our commitment to protect the 
most vulnerable in our communities. 
 
As we look around at what other provinces are doing, this 
compassion really makes us distinct.  Recognizing that some 
in our communities had no more to give, we've actually 
increased our spending on social programs since 1991. 
 
In this budget we began to implement the children's action 
plan.  Measures include the creation of a Children's 
Advocate, preventative programs for children at risk, some 
enhanced support for women who are victims of violence, 
and enhanced enforcement of maintenance orders. 
 
Balancing the budget, Mr. Speaker, is not an end in itself.  It 
is merely a means to sustain a high quality of life now and 
into the future.  And as provinces around us struggle to get 
their financial houses in order, we can take some pride, and 
feel some security, in knowing how far we've progressed in 
restoring our financial health.  So we've come a long way 
and we've done it in a distinctly Saskatchewan way. 
 
For members opposite, I ask them to consider very carefully 
their objections to our approach and to our success.  Debate 
in this budget has led to some remarkable insights into their 
position.  The members of the official opposition dispute our 
numbers.  They suggest we're hiding something in the 
numbers.  Perhaps they believe this in part because they're 
past masters at manipulating numbers. 



444 Saskatchewan Hansard February 24, 1994 

I think they're going to have to take this point up, though, 
with the Provincial Auditor.  The Provincial Auditor is on 
record as saying that this government issues the best 
financial statements of any senior government in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- The members opposite should also 
listen very carefully to what the Provincial Auditor said in 
the Public Accounts meeting on February 5, 1993. 
 
The Provincial Auditor was asked outright whether it is 
possible -- given our financial statements -- to hide 
government monies.  This is what the Provincial Auditor said 
and I quote him: 
 

 Mr. Chair, members, you wouldn't be able to hide (monies) 
if you continue to follow the current practices that you've 
implemented.  I don't know how it (money) would be 
hidden unless you change your practices. 

 
Finally, I ask the members of the official opposition to 
explain the very positive evaluations of our fiscal record by 
independent financial agencies.  After examining our budget, 
Wood Gundy, a respected financial agency, said this: 
 

 Saskatchewan kicked off the 1994 provincial budget 
season on a positive note, delivering on last year's deficit 
promises and keeping intact the 1994-95 deficit target.  
The turnaround in Saskatchewan finances has been quite 
remarkable. 

 
Burns Fry, another respected financial agency, says: 
 

 The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 
record in reducing the enormous deficit it inherited.  We 
expect the government to continue to hit its targets and 
therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook as 
positive. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have some sympathy for the members of the 
official opposition.  Many of them are new, they were not 
here when the former premier ran up his huge deficits and 
concocted his megaprojects.  And they're trying to make a 
new start to rebuild the Conservative Party.  We'll also say 
this about the Conservative Party.  There is at least a certain 
consistency in their position.  They are, I think, taking an 
Alberta-like approach - lower taxes, cut programs, and 
balance the books in that way.  So there is at least some 
consistency there. 
 
Unfortunately, I cannot say the same thing about the 
members of the Liberal Party.  The Leader of the Third Party 
speaks at great length about the new politics.  I ask her to be 
at least a bit consistent in her objections to this budget and in 
her solutions to our fiscal problems.  Mr. Speaker, let me be 
very clear.  I demand of her and of her colleagues only what 
we demand of 

ourselves; that is that we are accountable. 
 
On the one hand, the Liberal leader said in her year-end 
interviews that we're not moving fast enough to bring down 
the deficit.  Then during this debate she says we're moving 
too fast.  So which way is it?  On one day we're moving too 
fast; on the next day we're moving too slow.  The critical 
factor, I think, for the Liberal Party is which day is it. 
 
And we're told by the Liberal leader that taxes are too high, 
so one day she would have us reduce taxes.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask her, if she reduces taxes, what specific program 
cuts should she make?  The only cut that she's had the 
courage to put forward are the costs of the legislature.  Well I 
can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we could eliminate the legislature 
entirely and all we would do is pay the interest on the debt 
for two days.  I ask her what she would do for the other 363 
days. 
 
I would also point out that the largest single increase this 
year in the cost of the government was the 37 per cent 
increase that went to her party.  If in fact she is so committed 
to reducing the cost of government, I make her an invitation.  
She can return to the treasury the 37 per cent increase which 
her party received. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- So there are some days in which 
the Liberals want to cut taxes, but of course, still balance the 
books.  Then of course there are those other days.  The 
member who crossed the floor, I now understand why he left 
this side of the House.  We weren't big enough spenders for 
him.  What a spender.  He stands on the floor of this 
legislature and he tells us about all the cuts that he would not 
make.  Even though he stood on the same floor of the same 
legislature and voted for those cuts.  But of course that was 
another day. 
 
I have been keeping track of the spending of the Liberal 
members opposite, and I can tell you in this session alone 
they've doubled the deficit of the province.  Which makes me 
wonder, how can one possibly balance a budget faster by 
doubling its deficit? 
 
So the position of the Liberal Party is, it depends on which 
day it is.  One day it's go slower on the deficit, another day 
go faster on the deficit.  One day it's cut taxes, another day 
it's spend more.  This is not our way.  Our way is to be open, 
honest, and accountable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- When we say we have a plan, we 
mean it.  When we say we're going to meet our deficit 
reduction targets, we mean it.  When we say we're not going 
to increase taxes, we mean it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- What is the Liberal plan for 
Saskatchewan?  Well the leader has talked about New 
Brunswick as a model.  I want to say we're very 



February 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

supportive of the government of New Brunswick and its 
attempts to deal with its financial problems.  But we do have 
to make a few observations. 
 
New Brunswick has balanced-budget legislation and 
tomorrow it's quite possible they're going to say they've 
balanced the budget in New Brunswick.  How did they 
achieve that?  They take all of their capital spending defined 
most broadly and they exclude it from the equation.  I can 
tell you, if we had the New Brunswick legislation . . . I can 
tell you, if we had the New Brunswick legislation in 
Saskatchewan, not only would we be balancing our budget, 
we'd have a surplus. 
 
I'd also like to look at some other facts about the Liberal 
model, New Brunswick.  Saskatchewan has an 
unemployment rate of 8 per cent.  New Brunswick has an 
unemployment rate of 12.6 per cent.  Saskatchewan has the 
sales tax of 9 per cent.  What about New Brunswick?  New 
Brunswick has a sales tax of 11 per cent on all goods and 
most services. 
 
Saskatchewan has the lowest utility rates in all of Canada as 
a package.  What about New Brunswick?  They have among 
the highest utility rates.  Families in New Brunswick pay 
$1,000 a year more than families in Saskatchewan for their 
basic utilities.  We're on track to balance our budget in a real 
way and we have a deficit of 294 million.  What about New 
Brunswick?  The Globe and Mail's estimate is that their 
deficit is hovering around $400 million. 
 
So what is the Liberal model?  The Liberal model is New 
Brunswick: high taxes, high utility rates, high 
unemployment, high deficit.  What a model.  New 
Brunswick is the Liberal model. 
 
Saskatchewan is our model. A model with lower 
unemployment.  A model with lower taxes and charges.  A 
model with the lowest utility rate package in Canada and a 
model which has reduced the deficit so that it is now the 
lowest per capita deficit in Canada. 
 
(2145) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude 
as I began by thanking the people of Saskatchewan.  We've 
come a long way in just over two years.  We're restoring our 
financial health.  We are revitalizing agriculture.  We're 
renewing our health care system and we're implementing our 
long-term plan for economic development.  We've been able 
to achieve so much because of the support of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
As I look around and I see other provinces struggling to get 
their financial houses under control, I'm proud that we've 
been able to maintain a consensus in Saskatchewan.  Not 
everyone here, I know, agrees with every single measure that 
we've taken, but there is a basic consensus.  People in this 
province understand that the deficit had to be tackled and 
they 

understand that everyone had to be part of the solution.  The 
people of Saskatchewan have been very supportive and 
understanding.  For this understanding and support, I am 
extremely grateful.  It has made all the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 21:47 p.m. until 21:49 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
Van Mulligen Lautermilch 
Wiens Calvert 
Tchorzewski Renaud 
Lingenfelter Murray 
Shillington Hamilton 
Anguish Trew 
Koskie Draper 
Teichrob Serby 
Johnson Whitmore 
Atkinson Flavel 
Kowalsky Roy 
Carson Cline 
Mitchell Crofford 
MacKinnon Wormsbecker 
Penner Stanger 
Cunningham Kluz 
Upshall Knezacek 
Hagel Harper 
Bradley Keeping 
Koenker Jess 
Lorje Carlson 
Pringle Langford 
 

-- 44 
Nays 

Swenson Goohsen 
Martens Haverstock 
Boyd McPherson 
Toth Bergman 
D'Autremont  
 

-- 9 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
The Committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:54 p.m. 
 
 


