




















































Hansard: May 24, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2525 

 May 24, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce the officials 

who have . . . Perhaps we'll wait for the officials to come in and 

then ask her to introduce them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce the officials.  John Edwards is to my right; he is 

the director of policy and legislative services.  And behind me 

is Lorne Tangjerd from that department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, 

Madam Minister, and to your officials as well.  I appreciate the 

opportunity to say a few words about this Bill in clause 1 

debate.  My comments will take up only about 10 minutes, and 

I'll have a few questions at the conclusion. 

 

The issue of changing the system of property assessment in 

Saskatchewan is both complex and contentious.  The current 

administration inherited the problem from the past 

administration and has, in fairness, embarked upon extensive 

consultation. 

 

Unfortunately the RMs (rural municipality) who have attended 

those discussions, the individuals who will be most affected by 

the government's action or inaction with respect to the 

Assessment Management Agency, have been left with the 

feeling that they have not been heard.  After the months and 

months of discussion as to how to improve the system of 

property assessment, the substantive issue remains unaddressed 

and is likely to remain so for some time. 

 

What has been changed as a result of this legislation is that the 

provincial government will offload a considerable amount of its 

financial responsibility for property tax assessment onto the 

municipalities.  What does this mean in terms of cost to 

municipalities?  It will cost the RM of Benson $2,361 last year 

and $6,308 next year.  The village of Marshall, $950 last year 

and $2,455 next year.  The RM of Pense, $4,356 last year and 

$11,637 this year.  The RM of Saskatchewan Landing, $1,675 

last year and $4,475 or 167 per cent increase. 

 

I have listened on many occasions to the ministers of cabinet 

talk about how difficult it is to absorb costs being offloaded by 

the federal government, and I'm 

certain that there will be even more opportunities to hear those 

laments in the future.  But it is interesting that the Minister of 

Municipal Government, the minister responsible for SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) has little 

hesitation in offloading the costs of SAMA to the 

municipalities. 

 

There were some interesting discussions at this year's SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

convention, Mr. Chairman, when local RMs asked why they 

should collect property taxes for education on behalf of the 

province when they're being asked to bear the lion's share of 

the associated assessment costs. 

 

While the minister has resolved nothing on the issue of 

property assessment, she has managed to alienate almost every 

RM in Saskatchewan by dumping these increased costs in their 

laps.  Just how does the minister expect to foster the mutual 

cooperation that will be needed to proceed to the next stage of 

SAMA reform when this is the working relationship she has 

created? 

 

I would remind the minister that we raised concern about this 

issue during question period on March 8, 1994 in response to 

the dozens of letters we had received.  Since then we have 

received considerable additional complaints from the 

municipalities across the province.  Last year the government 

provided SAMA with $7.5 million.  This year the government 

will provide only a total of 6 million and next year the 

government will only provide 4 million. 

 

The service is still necessary, but the provincial government 

has left the municipalities to raise the money themselves.  

Currently municipalities pay 13 per cent of the cost of SAMA.  

When the government passes this legislation -- as it will quite 

likely do -- the 1994 municipal share will move to 35 per cent 

of those costs and by 1996 municipalities will be bearing 77 per 

cent of SAMA's costs.  This Bill is a case of offloading.  There 

are other features and other details but the essential issue here 

is cost.  This legislation simply confirms the warning in this 

year's estimates that there will be a decrease in funding to 

SAMA.  As a direct result of this legislation the cost to 

municipalities for assessment services will go up. 

 

When you announced the proposed changes on May 3, Madam 

Minister, you said, and I quote: this Bill gives local government 

more financial responsibility for these services.  More 

responsibility indeed, Mr. Chairman.  Local municipalities will 

have more responsibility because they will have to shoulder an 

even greater portion of the cost of assessment services.  And 

this raises questions of affordability of those services. 

 

Others have noted that in two different RMs there are huge 

differences in the level of the increase.  They raise serious 

concern about the mechanics of assigning costs.  We have 

letters from a number of RMs requesting the government to 

reconsider their decision to offload the cost of assessments.  

Many of 



2526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

the organizations that contacted our offices noted that the rising 

costs of this nature, without any appreciable increase or 

improvement in service, brings into question whether SAMA 

should exist at all.  The Act provides for municipalities to 

arrange for their own valuation services.  Municipalities could 

therefore find their own solution to the task of performing 

assessments.  That poses the question as to how viable the 

continued existence of SAMA would become, whether SAMA 

could justify continued funding from tax resources. 

 

Can the minister tell me what number of communities would 

have to opt out of SAMA before the few who remain would be 

unable to cover the cost? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's not an easy question to answer 

because the formula that SAMA uses to calculate the 

requisition is very complex and it has a number of different 

variables in it.  So it is not at this time apparent what those 

costs could be or might be.  Certainly it's something that the 

board of directors and SAMA management will have to study 

carefully as they go through the transition phase for the next 

year or year and a half. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I find it incomprehensible that so many 

decisions are made without concern for the long term, without 

consideration for the impact they will have on Saskatchewan, 

particularly on rural Saskatchewan. 

 

There are some critical changes which will be necessary to our 

system of property tax assessment, changes which are long 

overdue, but about which there still has been no consensus 

reached.  Rather than alienate those who will be critical to 

achieving that consensus for the really important changes, I 

suggest that the minister should refrain from making 

nickel-and-dime changes to the SAMA Act until she has the 

whole package together and a new system to propose. 

 

Madam Minister, could you explain why the decision has been 

made to separate the funding for SAMA from the issue of tax 

assessments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Tax assessment -- I'm not quite sure what 

you're talking about.  We have property assessment.  Taxation 

comes from applying a mill rate to a valuation system, so tax 

assessment has no functional meaning.  And maybe you would 

rephrase that question, and I'd better be able to answer you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'll have to admit that I'm not clear on that 

question myself, so I'll move on to the next question. 

 

I know that we have received an enormous amount of mail on 

this issue, and I would like to know if the minister has held any 

further follow-up meetings since the SARM convention. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I don't think any issue has been 

discussed and has had more consultations around it than the 

issue of SAMA and the mandate and 

the function of SAMA.  We began our consultations about 

future change in SAMA in probably December 1991, and it has 

been ongoing since that time.  I can give to you a list, a long 

list, of the meetings that we've had both with SARM and 

SAMA and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) and SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) and with individual municipalities, from the 

largest cities to the RMs to many small urbans. 

 

We've discussed the issue at length in both the conventions, the 

SUMA and SARM convention.  In many respects SUMA does 

support the initiative that we've taken and the direction that 

we're going.  SARM had a number of municipalities who had 

expressed concern.  But in the end after the SARM convention, 

the SARM board of directors passed a resolution, and I don't 

have it here but I certainly will get my officials to look at it.  

And in essence that resolution said two things: one -- this is 

from the SARM board of directors in early March -- that they 

ask the provincial government to fund the core services part of 

the agency and to fund it from the Consolidated Fund; and 

second, they said that they would support a move where 

municipalities would pay for field services either on a 

requisition basis or from fee for service. 

 

Now I don't have the verbatim of that, but I certainly can get 

that resolution and pass it over to you.  That was passed by the 

board of directors of SARM in early March after their 

convention. 

 

So I guess to conclude, we have tried to arrive at a consensus, 

realizing that this is very difficult, and the issue of costs is 

extremely important as they look at their own budgets.  And we 

have tried to accommodate all of their concerns. 

 

I will read to you, though, a portion of a letter, and I will table 

it as well.  This letter comes from the local government 

federation which is made up of SUMA and SARM and SSTA 

and it says: 

 

 I am writing to provide you with the positions of local 

government federation on Bill 62, An Act to amend The 

Assessment Management Agency Act.  Representatives of 

the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association met May 5, 1994 

to review the proposed amendments and identify some areas 

of concern.  In general the local government federation 

supports the legislation and appreciates your interest in 

achieving consensus on the following amendments. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I would appreciate having a 

copy of that agreement or resolution. 

 

It is interesting that your government has been so resistant to 

allowing time for public debate on labour standards or The 

Trade Union Act or no-fault 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

insurance.  The argument being advanced is that the ministers 

believe that discussions have gone on long enough -- enough 

for those issues -- even though the Bills haven't been out for 

more than a few weeks. 

 

At the same time SAMA has been kicking the tax assessment 

issue around for years and we now hear that the decision could 

be put off until 1997.  I wonder if you could tell me what the 

actual timetable is for the complete overhaul of SAMA, 

including the assessment base; and what is preventing you from 

bringing in a proposal for discussion at this stage?  Or are you 

close to that point? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well what we are doing at this point in 

time, is constructing an agency that has a capacity to do those 

things that you talked about in regard to property assessment -- 

not property taxation, but property assessment of property 

valuation. 

 

When SAMA was formed in 1987, it was given an enormous 

amount of responsibility, but very little power to actually 

complete its work.  And what we have done over the past two 

years, is finish the work of making SAMA a workable and 

functional agency.  And this has taken a fair amount of 

dialogue and consensus forming. 

 

And we believe the first step into achieving a reassessment 

system in Saskatchewan -- a property valuation system that is 

fair and equitable and based on current standards -- the first 

step is to develop an agency that actually has a capacity to find 

out from its stakeholders, what the needs are and how to 

implement those new assessment reforms. 

 

So what we have is a Bill, first of all, that makes SAMA 

functional and the second step will be, as we go through the 

annual meeting and the resolutions that are coming from the 

various stakeholders, is try to achieve a consensus about what 

form reassessment will take.  And at that point in time, then 

we'll move forward if required on legislation.  But the form of 

that legislation is not at all clear and there is, at this point in 

time, no consensus whatsoever amongst the stakeholders, who 

are the municipal governments, about what reassessment means 

in Saskatchewan and what direction it should take. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Could you review for me 

exactly how this legislation puts SAMA on the road to being 

able to do those things. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The legislation has a number of forms to 

it.  What is not included in it, of course, is any issues related to 

reassessment.  But it talks about the process through which the 

stakeholders will work on all issues regarding property 

valuation and property management and so on. 

 

So I guess what I will say is, this Act deals first with the 

funding of the agency and establishes the commitment by the 

provincial government to fund the core services by $4 million 

consistently from the Consolidated 

Fund -- the provincial Consolidated Fund.  Core services means 

policy development and research, data and information 

services, quality assurance services, and preparation of the 

manuals.  That is the nerve centre of SAMA.  That is where 

work is done. 

 

The second part of this Act talks about the field services, which 

are the inspection services at the municipal level.  Field 

services is that part of the assessment program that develops 

the assessment roll on which the municipalities base their tax 

roll.  And that's another portion of this Act. 

 

This Act also talks about the board, and how the board will be 

constructed.  And the Act also talks about an annual meeting of 

all the stakeholders where the board of directors will provide an 

annual report and a budget and hopefully a strategic plan on 

how to move forward on assessment services.  So in a nutshell 

that is the content, leaving out a lot of the details of course, but 

that is a general overview of this Bill. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I've been handed five or six 

amendments here.  Could you possibly explain what their 

impact on the legislation is? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The House amendments.  When we put 

the Bill together there were a number of clauses that we had put 

in, and after talking to the local government federation and to 

SUMA and SARM, we decided that we would change a couple 

of the clauses in order to accommodate some of their wishes. 

 

One clause talks about the need to go back to municipalities 

after the annual convention to have them pass a resolution, 

either supporting or rejecting any intended legislative changes 

that are recommended from the annual meeting.  This would 

have had possibly a negative affect on trying to move forward 

with reassessment because it was a double process where first 

they go to an annual meeting and vote for legislative changes 

and then they would have had to go back and vote in their 

individual councils a second time.  And this was felt to be 

redundant by a number of the municipalities and would have 

possibly interfered with the process of the annual meeting.  So 

on their advice we withdrew that part in our Act that talks 

about going back to municipal councils, which is section 7. 

 

The other part in the Act that we have brought in as a House 

amendment deals with how SAMA can collect on their 

requisitions, and on section 10 of the printed Bill it talks about 

the ability of SAMA, the agency, to withhold confirmation for 

municipal purposes if municipalities fail to pay their 

requisition. 

 

On the request of -- section 9, pardon me -- on the request of 

the local government federation we are removing that and we're 

saying that if a municipality fails to pay its requisition, then the 

SAMA board of directors will not confirm their assessment 

role, and therefore you cannot apply taxes either on a school 

base, or on a municipal base, or a health base.  In other words 

the tax roll is not legitimate and cannot be used 



2528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

for any tax purposes.  Originally in the Bill it was designed 

only for municipal tax purposes but we expanded that at the 

request of the local government federation to include all those 

services that come off the property tax. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Can I assume then that section 4, 6, and 10 

don't have any particular meaning? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, section 10 was a request by the 

boards of education to include that, in which it says is, that 

before a municipality will choose -- you might use the words 

opting out -- but will choose to do its own assessment services 

that they will consult with the local boards of education first 

before they make any major decisions regarding the services 

that are provided by SAMA.  So it's merely a clause in there to 

ensure that the boards of education are consulted by their local 

government partners before there is any move made that will 

impact them negatively. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  In closing, I'm curious if you 

can quantify for me what level of support or opposition there is 

for these proposed changes.  You've spoken a bit about it but I 

wonder if you might quantify that for me and for the changes to 

the actual basis for assessment itself and what you see actually 

changing in terms of support or opposition if you wait until 

1997 or so to finish the legislative work. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well there is no point to wait to 1997.  I 

guess I'm not quite sure how to answer this except to go back to 

the beginning.  SAMA is an arm's-length agency that is under 

the direction and control of municipal governments and it 

establishes the protocol for assessment services in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there are a number of changes that are going to be 

required in the forthcoming years to update our assessment 

system.  This Bill does not deal with it, but it deals with the 

mechanism how we arrive at a consensus to move reassessment 

forward.  There is no point at this point in time in holding up 

the Bill until we can go into reassessment because this is a tool 

that you need in order to move reassessment forward and to 

make sure that the partners in the system have been given an 

opportunity to develop an assessment system that they want 

and have actually bought into it.  And the annual meeting and 

all the processes that we've outlined here provides for them that 

opportunity, to have their say and to influence the future 

direction of reassessment in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for going over that again with 

me.  You know it much better than I do and you explain it well.  

I'll turn it over to the Leader of the Opposition who I believe 

has a few questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that was very nice. 

 

Madam Minister, I've listened very intently to your responses 

to the member from Regina.  One thing sort of mystifies me 

about this process.  You're into this consultation, and you're 

going to have this convention.  But as I understand it, at the end 

of the 

day it all has to come back to the local level for ratification -- 

council by council by council.  So how are you going to talk 

anybody into attending in the first place -- to send delegates, to 

spend the money, to do all of these things -- if ultimately they 

have to deal with it at home?  The annual meeting's a good 

idea, and everybody gets it off their chest, but I'm getting a 

mixed signal here about why people should invest in this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well thank you for that question.  And as 

we developed this Bill, we talked to a number of municipalities 

that were frustrated with their inability to have their voices 

heard at SAMA and what they thought was a lack of 

responsiveness and a lack of accountability from SAMA back 

to the stakeholders. 

 

And so what we wanted to put in were a number of checks and 

balances, so SAMA couldn't get out too far ahead of where the 

municipalities were and that the local municipal politicians had 

an opportunity to discuss what was happening at their councils 

with their local ratepayers if they needed to, before there were 

major changes made that possibly they wouldn't agree with.  So 

as we developed the Bill, we put that mechanism in as a 

check-and-balance system. 

 

As we talked further with the municipal governments about 

this, they brought up the very issue that you talked about, was 

when you go back to the municipalities of course then you are 

in danger of overruling a decision that was made by the 

stakeholders at the annual meeting.  And so section 7 of the 

House amendment takes out of this Bill the very problem that 

you have identified.  And so you don't have a double-jeopardy 

situation developing.  You vote on it once at the annual 

meeting and that's the conclusion of it, and everybody will be 

given an opportunity to speak and to have their voices heard at 

that point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Perhaps what we need to do then, is you need 

to go through these amendments and give us an overview of 

each one, because I looked at this in section 7 and didn't get the 

same interpretation you have.  So perhaps for our clarification, 

why don't you run through the amendments and give us a clear 

understanding of what you're trying to fix?  And then we'll see 

if you've fixed it or not.  How's that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Are you talking about the House 

amendments or . . . I mean there are many, many amendments 

in the Bill but there's really only a few House amendments that 

are key. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The House amendments. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I will.  And I went over them a few 

minutes ago with the member from North West, but I'd be 

pleased to go over them again because they are somewhat 

complicated. 

 

Section 4 of the printed Bill, which says, amend 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

section 6(4) of the Act, which is . . . it just cross-references 

another section.  All right?  Let me put it to you this way.  

Section 7 is the section that takes out the system of going back 

to municipalities for that double-jeopardy vote, which is section 

3 and 4.  Section 3 and 4 on page 8 of your printed Act will be 

eliminated.  Not section 4; just section 3.  I'm sorry. 

 

Section 3 deals with where a majority of councils passed a 

resolution after the annual meeting.  That's being eliminated.  

That's one House amendment. 

 

The other House amendment is section 9 of the printed Act, 

and it takes out the word "municipal" in section 11.  Move to 

page 11 . . . subsection 11 and where it says: 

 

 (11) Notwithstanding any other Act, where the agency 

withholds confirmation of the assessment roll pursuant to 

clause (10)(b), the withholding applies only to the use of the 

assessment roll for the purposes of levying municipal taxes . . 

. 

 

Well we have taken out the word "municipal," and it reads "for 

the purpose of levying taxes" which will include education 

taxes, health taxes, library taxes and municipal taxes.  So that's 

the change there. 

 

The other change is section . . . subsection 22 . . .  Page 12, 

section 22, where we are adding in the recommendation that: 

 

 . . . the council of any other municipality may decide at the 

municipality . . . 

 

And then we're adding in: 

 

 , after consultation with all boards of education on behalf of 

which it authorizes levies, by itself or in conjunction with 

another organization or municipality, shall carry out its own 

valuations and revaluations, either directly or in some other 

manner, in accordance with the appropriate municipal Act . . . 

 

So this is where we have made sure that boards of education 

have an opportunity to be consulted before municipalities take 

action. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  Thank you very much.  What are you 

going to do if the RMs that have already publicly said they're 

not going to pay you, what are you going to do if they hold 

fast?  I mean we have them in bunches now saying that they 

simply will not pay this assessment.  What legally are . . . 

what's your Act say?  What are they facing in the way of 

repercussions from the provincial government if they don't pay 

their assessment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all let me correct what you 

say.  They don't pay us.  Their requisitions are not paid to the 

provincial government.  Their requisitions are paid to SAMA 

which is their agency, their organization.  We don't see that as 

our organization or an arm of government, so I wanted to 

make that clear first. 

 

Right now there is an obligation for municipalities of course to 

pay their requisition.  It's already in the old Act, and the SAMA 

can actually take court action and sue them, and that has 

happened in the past, and still has the ability to happen as well. 

 

But you're right.  There is a lot of talk around that issue.  We 

believe as we go out to the district and regional meetings with 

SUMA and SARM, and with the leadership of the president of 

SARM and SUMA, there will be a lot less controversy as those 

municipalities understand this Act and the ability it gives to 

them to control those costs. 

 

But within this Act, as I said, there's always a choice that 

SAMA can go to court to collect; but what we have specifically 

in this Act says, number one, that where a requisition is not 

paid by the municipality then SAMA has the ability to withhold 

confirmation of their assessment roll.  And if there is no 

confirmation of their assessment roll then they cannot levy 

taxes because it will be an illegal assessment roll and there will 

be no basis on which they can apply their tax mill rate. 

 

So first of all that is one very, very strong act that SAMA can 

take.  There is another one which is subsection (12), on page 

11, which says that where a municipality has decided that they 

will not pay their requisition then SAMA can come to the 

provincial government and ask the provincial government to 

transfer that amount of money to them from their 

revenue-sharing allocation. 

 

So there are two avenues I suppose besides the court avenue.  

One being simply withholding confirmation of their assessment 

roll; but another one being that they can make sort of a 

third-party demand on the revenue-sharing account that the 

provincial government holds for that municipality. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But are not these potential penalties unequal? 

Because as I understand the process, and you can correct me if 

I'm wrong, the four major cities have assessment agencies over 

and above, and have the ability to put their tax roll in place to 

do all sorts of things that other jurisdictions don't have. 

 

So one of the complaints all along with SAMA has been that 

those people, which is a large part of the population, have 

always been able to sort of manage their own end of the 

business whereas other people are totally dependent on the 

provincial agency in order to do their assessment.  So you can't 

penalize Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, or Prince Albert 

because they have their own assessment agencies.  Therefore 

they are different than everyone else. 

 

So these rural RMs that are telling you that they're not going to 

pay their assessment, their levy, you can withhold part of their 

funding, you can take them to court, you can do all sorts of 

things.  Do you consider that to be fair, that they aren't all 

treated the same? 



2530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I'm really glad you asked that 

question because we are now treating them the same.  When 

the Act was brought forward in 1986, the old Act said that the 

four largest cities with their own field services could do their 

own assessment, field inspections.  We're not talking about 

anything other than property inspections.  So the four largest 

cities always had their own assessors and they never paid a 

requisition ever to SAMA.  And SAMA only provided them 

with what you would call a manual on which they do their 

assessment. 

 

In this Act we have made all municipalities equal to the four 

largest cities.  And what we have said is if you want to do your 

own assessment services, inspection services -- like Saskatoon, 

Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw -- you now have that 

opportunity. 

 

So when you say we treat them different . . . any municipality 

that chooses to do their own assessment services, property 

inspection services, like the four largest cities, will not get a 

requisition because they will be indeed paying for their own 

services to develop their own assessment roll, just like 

Saskatoon and Regina does now.  So Saskatoon and Regina are 

an example of where we want to go with all municipalities in 

Saskatchewan.  And there will be an equal playing 

_field and it's just the point that you have made that we have 

moved on. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I mean a lot of the RMs that 

were mentioned by the member from Regina North West, and 

the type of requisitions that they're dealing with, will tell you 

that their need in a given year is nowhere close to that.  So in 

effect what you're saying is go out and we will have 4 or 500 

different agencies. 

 

I mean why would I buy in if I do two assessments a year?  

And in a lot of rural cases, that would be it -- two or three.  And 

the further away you get away from a city, the less need there is 

to do it.  So on one hand you say well, go ahead and do it, and 

then there's no requisition.  So if they all take you up on it, at 

some place here it's not going to work.  On the other hand 

you've got a bunch of rules in place to penalize people. 

 

Now the nine RMs north of Saskatoon, and some of the ones 

down on the border, wouldn't be telling you what they're telling 

you if there obviously wasn't a lot of displeasure with what's 

being contemplated.  And I'm told that they understand a lot of 

what you're proposing here fairly well.  This is in the last two 

weeks.  And your officials have been talking to them, and 

consulting with them, and they're still very unhappy. 

 

What are you going to do if they all take you up on your 

proposal that they can all be treated like Saskatoon and Regina?  

Where does that leave us?  Everybody doing their own thing -- 

tell me that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well you have to understand what we're 

talking about here.  We're talking about a field inspection 

service where the field inspectors go 

out and do the inspection of the property and from that 

inspection develop an assessment roll.  And we're talking about 

the core agency which maintains the manuals and does policy 

development and makes sure that they do the audits and 

reviews, and does the quality assurance part of it. 

 

Now those two separate functions are quite distinct.  And 

you're right, in that for a number of years the RMs particularly 

paid a very low requisition.  I don't know what the formula is 

that SAMA uses.  They don't tell us how they develop a 

formula on which they send out requisitions. 

 

There are a number of municipalities over the last couple of 

months that have been saying that it doesn't seem to me that 

we're getting our dollar's worth here; that we see our 

assessment going up and up and up; and that we have only had 

five or six pick-ups or reinspections in one year over the next, 

and that doesn't seem to be worth to us a $30,000 bill. 

 

What we're saying is, they may be right.  There may be cheaper 

ways of doing this.  And what we have to do is make sure that 

they have a way of finding out if there is a cheaper service.  

And as long as we maintain the integrity of the assessment 

system by virtue of having a strong core agency that has quality 

assurance as part of its function, as well as audits and reviews, 

and makes sure that they confirm everybody's assessment roll 

so everybody is using the same manual or the same assessment 

protocol, it doesn't matter who does the field services -- as long 

as they're qualified appraisers.  They can hire somebody from 

the market-place or they can hire somebody on a requisition or 

a fee-for-service basis who works for SAMA, as long as they 

get the service provided.  So I think the opportunity here is now 

open for them to look at those services that they're getting. 

 

The services I'm talking about is related to only the field 

inspection services and not to the quality assurance that is 

provided by the core agency.  So those two things are distinct, 

and you have to understand them as being distinct.  And 

municipalities, as we go forward in the next year and a half, 

will be able to evaluate the cost that they're going to be able to 

pay relative to the service that they're getting.  And I think after 

being able to do that, they'll have a better understanding of 

whether they want to buy their service from SAMA or from a 

separate firm. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Could you tell me then -- so that I understand 

this -- give me a ballpark breakdown percentage-wise of 

SAMA's costs between their core agency and their field 

services.  Can you tell me what that breakdown is? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Field services are $4 million, and right 

now what we call the field services are $5.3 million. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So approximately 65 per cent of their budget 

is in field services then.  And this is the portion that you're 

saying that RMs can go out and do with.  They can find 

alternatives to that, they don't have to 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

subscribe to that. 

 

Now my question back to you.  If they all go out and do that, 

what you're telling me is that the requisitions will drop by 65 

per cent across the province.  If RMs, towns, villages go out 

and take you up on your offer and they go find a cheaper route 

-- but which they will pay for by the way -- that the cost then 

will drop by 65 per cent. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, what you will find is the budget -- the 

operating budget of SAMA -- may drop by 65 per cent.  I don't 

know what the cost to the municipalities will be.  It may not 

drop by 65 per cent.  But the operation budget of SAMA will of 

course not require that amount of field services to be done.  So 

there will be a decrease in the operational budget of SAMA 

relative to what they are costing for field services. 

 

What the municipalities pay I can't tell you because it'll depend 

upon the number of reinspections they have and the number of 

audits that have to be done and the assessment base and so on, 

and how complicated their assessment system is.  So there's a 

number of factors that are going to determine what their actual 

costs of field services are going to be.  But the cost of SAMA 

will likely drop over the years as municipalities look to see if 

they want to buy their services from independent firms or they 

want to buy their services from SAMA. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Can you tell me why an independent service 

would be cheaper than SAMA?  I mean these are supposedly 

people with the same qualifications, the same services, the 

same . . . Why?  I mean if private people can provide the 

service why can't SAMA provide the service at the same cost?  

Why is that? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well we haven't made a statement saying 

that they will be cheaper.  We're saying that they have the 

opportunity now to go out and make that determination on their 

own.  They know that they have to develop an assessment roll 

every year.  They have to have that assessment roll signed by a 

qualified appraiser.  They know that they will have a certain 

number of pick-ups or reinspections to do each year.  And they 

know that within the next three or four years there's going to be 

general roll-over, a general reinspection, and a general 

reassessment system put in place, and that is going to require a 

fair amount of work. 

 

So we can't give them any assurance that whatever they're 

going to get by tendering that service to the market-place, 

relative to what they would get by buying it from SAMA, is 

cheaper or more expensive.  But what we're saying is they can 

make that determination and they're not obliged or forced to 

pay that service until they've gone out and made their own 

determination about it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well there's obviously something there, 

Madam Minister, because the larger cities don't 

use SAMA.  They use their own staff.  They use the core 

service as you said.  They have to have the manuals, they have 

to have . . . but the actual field staff are done separately in most 

cases.  They must feel that they get a bigger bang for their buck 

that way then they would by using SAMA. 

 

Now I'm just trying to follow the logic here.  Obviously there's 

somebody out there that does it cheaper.  The question I asked 

you is why are there cheaper people out there?  And if there 

are, I would guess that everybody is going to go that route 

rather than using SAMA, so you'll be back down to a core 

service.  Which is about the way it was before.  That's only the 

question I asked. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I think you have to go back and take 

a look at what we're talking about here.  SAMA always allowed 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw to use their 

own field inspections.  We're saying now that everybody has.  

You're saying is it going to be cheaper?  And I'm saying we 

can't guarantee it's going to be cheaper.  We know the work 

that has to be done and we're very strict in this Bill about what 

has to be done in order to follow those manuals. 

 

Now is everybody going to go out to the market-place?  I don't 

know how to answer that question because, as of yet, those 

determinations have not been made.  They know at this point in 

time that they get a requisition from SAMA based on a formula 

that nobody seems to understand very well and that they have a 

lot of arguments about.  The provincial government doesn't 

know what that formula is.  SAMA develops that formula.  

There may be a lot of cross-subsidization.  There may be a lot 

of inefficiencies.  There may be a number of reasons why the 

requisition is high. 

 

What we're saying is if they want to compete, maybe they'll 

have to look at their internal costs relative to what the 

market-place is. And maybe that's the best way of getting these 

requisitions down, and making sure that field services are first 

of all qualified and done according to the manual, and the 

inspections are done in accordance with the certified appraisers 

and the market-place will then dictate what those costs are 

going to be. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- I have from the minister an amendment for 

clause 4 as well as for clause 6 and 7 and then other clauses 

subsequently.  But the amendment for clause 4 and clause 6 do 

not make sense unless we deal first with the amendment for 

clause 7.  So if it's agreed, we'll proceed to clause 7 and then 

revert back.  Is that agreed? 

 

Clause 7 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 



2532 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Amendment to section 11.1 of the Act as being enacted by 

section 7 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by striking out subsection (3); and 

 (b) by renumbering existing subsection (4) as subsection (3). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 6(4) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 4 of the printed Bill, by striking out "subsection 

11.1(4)" and substituting "subsection 11.1(3)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Amend subsection 11(2.3) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 6 of the printed Bill, by striking out "subsections 

11.1(2) and (3)" and substituting "subsection 11.1(2)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I: 

 

 Amend subsection 18(11) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 9 of the printed Bill, by striking out "municipal". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I: 

 

 Amend subsection 22(4.1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 10 of the printed Bill, by adding ", after consulting 

with all boards of education on behalf of which it authorizes 

levies," after "other municipality may". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 

Clauses 11 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

amendments, Madam Minister, proposed in this Bill, appear for 

the most part to be tolerable.  But there are two aspects which 

represent real costs and real headaches for the real estate 

industry.  I wish to address these matters today. 

 

The basis for assessment in urban Saskatchewan has not been 

reviewed for many years, and the calculations of assessments 

use 1988 figures for land and use 1965 figures for construction 

costs.  The data is seriously out of date.  One Saskatchewan 

lawyer who is a member of the discipline committee of the 

national appraisers profession described just how bad it is.  

During a recent discussion of a property case among 

professionals from Newfoundland, Saskatchewan, Ontario, 

Alberta, and Manitoba, the room broke into gales of laughter at 

the very notion that Saskatchewan bases its decisions on a 

30-year-old database. 

 

Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada that does not 

have a market-based system.  Instead, Saskatchewan has a 1965 

system.  To base an assessment system on data this old is not 

only absurd; it is costly. 

 

We now know that a review of the assessment system will be 

delayed until 1997.  I recognize that it will take intestinal 

fortitude to enact changes to the assessment system.  The 

results may not be pleasant but the alternative is worse.  To put 

off the effort to reform and renovate the system is to shirk the 

administrative responsibility of government.  Because of 

built-in inequities, the cost to some businesses will mount and 

the problem will only get worse.  The costs, however, are borne 

by the real estate industry.  This province cannot afford 

outdated assessment base data.  The real estate industry 

deserves a better regulatory environment and it should be the 

responsibility of government to create it. 

 

The actual value of a piece of real estate is determined in the 

market-place by a number of complex factors.  Some of those 

factors are hard, tangible, concrete numbers.  Others are soft or 

subjective matters.  But in either case, in business, the value of 

a piece of land is about its contribution to the generation of 

income, and that's business.  But with this Bill, the government 

is saying that the value of a commercial property is not related 

to its ability to generate income. 

 

In this Act the government proposes to amend The Urban 

Municipality Act.  The intent appears to be this: that any 

property owner, for whatever reason, who is no longer as 

productive or profitable as before, may 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

not introduce evidence of this change to an assessor or any 

appeal board when appealing the property assessment. 

 

The amendment denies an assessor from considering evidence 

of prospective income earned or possible income lost when 

assessing the value of a piece of land.  So a vacant building has 

the same value as a fully leased property.  The Act calls those 

changes to the property economic or locational obsolescence. 

 

The term sounds obscure and overly technical but what exactly 

does this mean?  For instance, if a downtown building is given 

a heritage designation and there are limits on the extent of 

development, the property owner may be limited on the total 

income potential of the property.  This is obsolescence 

according to the language of property management. 

 

For instance, consider a roadside gas station.  If the highway is 

upgraded and turned into a divided highway, only one half as 

many people can turn into the gas station to buy gas.  The 

situation of the gas station has changed, and market conditions 

have changed, but the assessment of the property does not.  

This is what is meant by obsolescence. 

 

Obsolescence is the simple business reality that because of 

changes in the economy, or changes in circumstances, a 

property is no longer able to generate the income for which it 

was developed.  In the instances mentioned above, the 

assessment would have stayed the same even though the 

situation had changed and the income potential of the property 

was lower.  Compared to a similar neighbouring property the 

assessment would be unfair. 

 

To address the unfairness, a property owner might appeal the 

assessment of the property.  By showing that the income from 

the property is lower than may be possible in other 

circumstances, the property owner could argue that the 

assessment should be lower.  We now know that . . . excuse 

me.  If this Act is passed, the government will remove the only 

means available in law to remedy the unfairness.  It is critical to 

note that the costs of this are real. 

 

Imagine there are two identical apartment buildings.  One is 

beside a railway and one is not.  Because of the noise and risk, 

the apartment near the railroad has a lower rent than the other 

apartment by 20 per cent.  This lower rent was not the result of 

a lawyer's decision, not the result of an assessor's decision, it is 

the market's decision.  But otherwise the properties are 

identical and the property assessment is identical. 

 

(2000) 

 

The owner of the property near the railroad considers this 

unfair so the owner launches an appeal.  The Act says that the 

assessor shall take into account all circumstances affecting 

value including physical, functional, and locational matters, 

and the SAMA manual provides guidelines which suggest that 

an assessor should consider the impact of the railroad. 

Now the onus is on the property owner to prove his case.  With 

all this in mind, the property owner collects information 

showing the rents are lower in his building than in the one that 

is not near the railway.  If the property owner has prepared the 

information well, the case would be won.  But if the Act is 

changed, the property owner will no longer be able to use the 

loss of income in his argument for reassessment. 

 

Another illustration.  Consider a commercial building with 

main floor retail space and a second floor rental office space.  

Without an elevator any property manager will tell you that the 

second floor office space will be very difficult to rent.  Most 

property . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Why is the member for Regina Albert 

North on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the 

member for Regina North West and apologize for the 

interruption.  Mr. Chairman, in the Speaker's gallery are two 

friends of mine, Maryanne Federko, who is the president of the 

Yorkton-Esterhazy-Melville Labour Council and a SaskTel 

employee in taking a sales course. 

 

And seated next to Maryanne is her cousin, Errin Broshko, who 

is a recent political science graduate, and if anyone is looking 

for those skills I know Errin would be pleased to offer his up.  I 

ask you and all hon. members to join me in welcoming my two 

guests in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 20 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We'll go back to 

considering that commercial building with main floor retail 

space and second floor rental office space.  Most property 

developers will tell you that it's expensive to install an elevator.  

Two buildings in the same situation, one with an elevator and 

the other without, will likely be assessed identically, but the 

rent earned by the property without the elevator will almost 

certainly be lower if it is leased out at all. 

 

If the owner appealed the property assessment, the SAMA 

manual says the assessor should consider all factors in setting 

the value of the property, and the Act says the assessor should 

consider the loss of income in setting the value of the property.  

Upon the enactment of this Bill, the assessor may not consider 

loss of income, the assessments will be frozen, and the owner 

of the property without the elevator must simply suffer the 

consequences of lower rent for ever. 



2534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Many property owners and managers are facing these unfair 

costs, these hardships, as a result of the economic conditions in 

general and because of the unrealistic property assessments 

using an out-of-date database. 

 

The new provision has the effect of removing the very means 

by which these property owners who face hardship are able to 

seek some relief.  Until there is a general reassessment, now 

scheduled for 1997, there are no factors in the assessment 

system which deal with market forces.  The government 

proposes to remove the ability to use forecasts of income to 

assess obsolescence.  Now businesses already unfairly taxed 

due to obsolescence in their property can no longer even bring 

the evidence to the assessor or the appeal board.  By doing this 

the government prolongs the difficulty of property managers 

already struggling with an unfair system. 

 

There were signs that fairness would have been possible.  In 

1986 the assessment appeal committee began to endorse 

assessments based on income.  A few years ago the committee 

heard a landmark case from Torwest.  A property had been 

designated a heritage site and so the developer could not 

renovate the property into its most profitable form.  The 

developer appealed the property assessment, claiming the 

assessment did not fairly reflect the situation they found 

themselves in.  And the ruling made by the committee here was 

important.  It indicated that rather than deny the use of loss of 

income as an approach to measure obsolescence, it said in fact 

that measuring loss of income should be encouraged.  This has 

not been overturned by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and 

so would be considered to be still in effect. 

 

However -- and this is a big however -- assessors in 

Saskatchewan have been refusing to use the income a property 

produces as a measure of its value.  I am told there have been 

plenty of hours spent before appeal boards debating whether 

income can or cannot be considered in spite of that ruling of the 

appeals committee. 

 

In some respects the government's argument is that the 

mechanics of assessing income makes it necessary to leave out 

the factor.  They suggest they can't measure what can't be 

measured.  It is true the calculations to capitalize lost income 

are complex and tedious, but the very existence of the real 

estate industry is based on its ability to forecast income 

potential from property.  Perhaps government cannot assess the 

value, but the remainder of the industry believes that they can 

and they should. 

 

Ultimately the assessment of lands and improvements is an 

assessment of value.  In the real world of property 

management, real estate development, and real estate sales, the 

income stream from a property is the single central measure of 

its value.  The fact is, there is no other reasonable way to 

practically measure obsolescence other than by analysis of 

potential income and loss of income.  And unless taxes are fair, 

older, obsolete buildings will be less likely to be redeveloped. 

 

In other respects, the government's argument may be that the 

evaluation cannot be accurate.  In 1987 the Saskatchewan 

assessment appeals committee stated to assessors that, it is the 

opinion of this committee that if obsolescence can be calculated 

by capitalizing lost income, such computation should be 

encouraged. 

 

So to be fair, the ruling implies that accuracy is the issue.  It 

would be reasonable to imagine that with enough discussion 

and professional analysis the industry and the government 

could create an accurate method.  It appears that the 

government has not been successful.  So in spite of the ruling 

by the assessment appeal committee, Saskatchewan assessors 

continue to refuse to use income as a factor in assessing the 

obsolescence of improvements. 

 

One realty specialist advised us that as of April 1994 there were 

in excess of 400 assessment appeals pending, so it's not a small 

problem.  Because of the volume of cases, the appeals 

committee hasn't even dealt with the 1933 cases, much less the 

1993 cases.  Seen from the administrators' point of view, this 

Bill has the effect of clearing up the entire backlog of cases by 

removing the only provision by which fairness can be had until 

the overall review is conducted.  It is unfortunate if this 

government thinks it is desirable to solve administrative 

burdens by taking away the opportunity to redress cases of 

unfairness. 

 

I also understand that there are two cases that have been heard 

recently and for which decisions are due shortly.  It is possible 

that the committee has been consistent and has endorsed the 

income approach, making it the duty of assessors to consider 

income information.  The announcement of these cases is 

delayed.  It is unfortunate that the results could not be public 

now so that they could contribute to the thinking on this issue. 

 

It appears that SAMA has said, we need a couple of years to 

get our house in order for the big reassessment and we don't 

have time to deal with the income approach evaluation.  And so 

by removing the provision for using the income approach it has 

the effect of ratifying the position SAMA has taken all along.  

Is it true that SAMA cannot cope administratively?  I hope this 

question can be answered satisfactorily in the future. 

 

There appears to be a serious concern in the real estate industry 

over this amendment.  One letter I received referred to a 

growing discontent within the business community.  The 

owners of commercial property see this as a way for the 

government to freeze assessments without having the courage 

to say so.  In one letter I received, a real estate professional 

said, if the government wishes to freeze the assessments, it 

should have the courage to do so openly so the matter can be 

debated.  Government officials may argue that this is 

nit-picking or that once the Act recognizes categories of 

hardship it will be opening the 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

floodgates to other kinds of hardship. 

 

There are times and places where the government can and 

should step in to help relieve hardship.  The government has an 

opportunity to use the resources already at its disposal to 

relieve the hardship faced by owners of property which has lost 

its ability to earn income due to its age, its location, or its 

condition.  The proposed amendment will mean that the 

government will no longer have the flexibility to take those 

factors into account. 

 

On the other hand, we recognize that there is another side to 

this matter.  By keeping the provision in the Act to appeal cases 

using income information, it would be possible to reduce the 

assessment of some properties, but we understand that this 

would mean that municipalities would collect less tax revenue 

from some properties.  In times of rising prices, municipalities 

may not be able to cope with reductions in tax income. 

 

So on one hand we recognize the value of keeping mechanisms 

to reconsider assessments, and on the other hand, we recognize 

the value of stabilizing the tax base in municipalities.  Either 

way, the government is obliged to act definitively rather than 

prolong the problem. 

 

We contend, based on our consultations, that the property 

assessment system in Saskatchewan must evolve.  As part of 

that evolution, the system must become flexible to the point 

that tax assessment takes into account the income-earning 

potential of a property.  At the same time the system must 

recognize that municipal governments have little room to 

manoeuvre in their current budgets.  Whatever changes are 

made in the property assessment system, they must be largely 

revenue neutral.  Whatever changes are made, they must be 

made without unreasonable, unproductive delay.  Fairness, 

competitiveness, and common sense must begin to guide our 

tax system of the future. 

 

I've gone on somewhat at length.  I wondered if the minister 

might comment on this particular issue of the income value of 

the property. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Yes, I would. 

 

You have presented, I think, a very detailed overview of one 

side of the argument, and I will remind you there are other 

sides of that argument.  But I want to say this:  last year, after 

consultation with municipalities, and in response to their 

concerns, we prepared this Bill with Clause 13 included.  This 

amendment would have the effect, as you said, of suspending 

use of a particular property assessment appraisal method for a 

limited time.  Some municipalities have strongly recommended 

this type of amendment.  However, since introduction of the 

Bill, the stakeholders have suggested further review of this 

matter. 

 

Given the importance of a stable and secure property 

assessment and taxation system, I am accepting the 

advice of the municipal and the business sector and will not 

proceed with this amendment at this time.  I urge them to work 

together as we move towards an improved assessment system. 

 

For House procedural reasons I will not be replacing clause 13 

with a new clause, but I will be asking members to vote against 

clause 13 as currently stated in this Bill.  The remainder of the 

Bill, of course, I strongly support. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, and thank you 

to your officials. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The amendment, Mr. Chairman, I 

propose: 

 

 Amend clause 48.2(1)(a) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 5 of the printed Bill, by adding "in the case of a 

petition presented pursuant to section 88" after "petition". 

 

It is a housekeeping amendment that was overlooked in the 

original Bill. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- There was just something I wanted the 

minister to give me her best guess at.  In the explanatory notes 

when it was talking about this whole idea of income assessment 

-- and obviously we're all in agreement on some parts of that -- 

you talk about the needed time to train, collect data and train 

staff.  Can you give us an indication, if this were to change, 

what that time frame would be?  Maybe use other provinces for 

an example or what type of a training regime you have to go 

through in order to do that. 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this is a fairly complicated 

process, and it hasn't been used extensively before.  And it 

would require . . . We can't tell you what time and energy 

would be needed for retraining, but it would be a fairly large 

undertaking.  And it would depend upon the resources, both 

within the large cities and within SAMA.  So I can't give you a 

definitive answer -- I'm sorry -- except to say it would be 

complicated, and because of that we felt that there should be 

time given for them to get their resources and their house in 

order, if you like.  But given that we've withdrawn that Bill, it 

will be up to the municipalities now to make that 

determination. 



2536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Clause 13 negatived. 
 

Clauses 14 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act respecting the Superannuation of 

Teachers and Disability Benefits for Teachers 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Act, 1980 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that Bill No. 20 be read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have some 

questions for the minister on a variety of issues.  There is 

considerable debate in the library community and civic 

administrations across the country about the governance of 

libraries.  The tradition is for the public library as a steward of 

the community's freedom of information to be governed 

independent of politics.  In Saskatchewan we have achieved 

that through provincial legislation governing libraries and then 

delegating the power of appointments to libraries to local 

government.  Where does the minister stand on the matter of 

governance of public libraries? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  We passed item 1.  Generally all matters 

pertaining to Municipal Government could be raised.  If the 

member has questions about item 6, Provincial Library, then 

we should wait till we get to that. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you Mr. Chairman.  As I said there is 

a debate in the library community.  Could you tell me where 

you stand on the matter of governance of public libraries? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well the library system we have in 

Saskatchewan is one of the best in Canada, and we believe that 

there should be universal access by all of the public.  We 

believe that there are local issues that should be managed by 

locally appointed boards and that there are partnerships within 

municipal governments and the local system that we certainly 

feel are very valuable, and we endorse the system as it stands 

today and have no sense or need of changing it, except as I 

have said, we have appointed a multi-type library board that 

would enhance coordination between a number of partners in 

the library system, and this is simply to make better use of our 

resources and to allow the systems to support one another 

better and access by the public. 

 

So there will be no changes as far as I'm concerned in the 

ability of the local library boards to be autonomous and 

independent, and they are a system that are worth preserving, 

and we support them. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I agree with you, Madam Minister.  Is the 

legislation governing the Provincial Library adequate as it 

stands? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I suppose any system can 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

be improved, and over years we do make those improvements, 

but they're with the endorsement and support of the 

stakeholders, and that is why we have the Saskatchewan 

Library Trustees' Association -- and we work very closely with 

them -- and our Provincial Librarian, to make sure that where 

needs have changed and we have to make changes, then we 

make changes, but with the consent of those people who are 

involved in delivering library services.  It may be that in the 

future we will make changes, but I can't predict what they will 

be because they will have to be endorsed by the stakeholders. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Item 7 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, was the Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation collapsed or was the reporting structure 

merely changed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The corporate entity was changed but . . . 

retained, I'm sorry. The corporate entity was retained but the 

staff was rolled into the staff of the Department of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Does the housing operations 

budget handle the maintenance of existing housing or the 

development of new housing? 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well in years past, the housing authority's 

budget dealt with both the maintenance program and the 

allocation of new capital for new social housing.  But as of this 

year, there is no more new social housing program because our 

major partner, who happens to be the federal government, will 

not be delivering any new housing program any longer.  And 

so, without their partnership, we cannot deliver either. 

 

So we would like to be able to deliver new housing.  We 

believe it's essential, and critical in fact, to some communities 

in Saskatchewan, but it depends very much on the federal 

government.  If they want to put new money into a new 

program, then again we'll be delivering both a maintenance side 

and the new capital side. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The home improvement 

program subsidies are being phased out, as previously 

announced.  Is this the last budget in which there will be costs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not quite sure what the member is 

talking about, whether she's talking about the home 

improvement program that was brought in by the last 

administration and it was removed before we came to power.  

Is that what you're talking about?  Home improvement 

subsidies for what program? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'm not sure of the detail of this. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There is no home improvement program 

any longer.  That was a program that the last 

administration brought in. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for that.  Please describe how the 

27 million allocated to the Sask Housing Corporation will be 

spent.  And what are the priorities for housing development in 

the upcoming year?  What projects are planned for this budget 

year?  And what projects will be completed in this year?  And 

how much of the existing housing market should be replaced?  

Are we developing public housing fast enough? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's a question that requires some 

detail.  We don't have it with us, but we certainly would be 

prepared to give you that detail.  I can tell you that we know 

that there is a need in northern Saskatchewan for at least 600 

new units that we do not have the ability to deliver, that we are 

providing at this point subsidies for the urban native housing 

program and for public housing programs and for seniors 

programs, and will continue to do that.  But as far as specific 

allocations in each of these individual cases, I don't have it here 

but I'd be very pleased to provide it. 

 

What we're looking for in the future again is to expand upon 

our partnership with the federal government.  We are going to 

be going to a ministers' meeting next month and we'll be 

presenting to the ministers of housing and the federal minister a 

proposal for the federal government to re-enter the housing 

program and to deliver houses to remote and rural communities 

because we feel that, especially in northern Saskatchewan and 

northern Canada, that is where the need is the greatest. 

 

We of course don't have at this point in time, any assurance that 

the federal government will endorse our proposal but we are 

going there with the view of making a very strong argument 

that it is needed. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Could you 

tell me about collections of unpaid loans in the Saskatchewan 

home program?  I understand collection has been contracted 

out to the private sector.  What is the cost of the contract?  We 

have had some complaints about heavy-handed tactics in 

collections.  Have you had any complaints and are you satisfied 

with the service from the private sector? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Wherever and whenever possible, we try 

to make sure that our own people contact the people who have 

delinquent accounts and try to persuade them to bring their 

accounts current.  There are some instances where we simply 

don't have the resources and the time and the persuasive 

powers, I guess you would say, to accomplish a great deal. 

 

And for those accounts that are delinquent over a number of 

years, we have turned them over to a collection agency, and 

they have had a great deal of success in the last couple of years.  

And our delinquent accounts and our accounts in arrears have 

now been reduced substantially by over a couple of million 

dollars, I believe. 



2538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

So it was a concern to us in the past.  We had to take action.  

This is public money and there is a responsibility on the part of 

the provincial government to make sure that we protect the 

position of the provincial government.  And in those cases we 

have engaged the services of a collection agency. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Have you had any level of complaints about 

the . . . you have had some complaints? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well yes.  Of course the collection 

agencies are professional people who deal with people who 

have accounts in arrears and they employ certain methods that 

we don't, and we have had a number of people who have 

complained to us.  We have looked seriously into those 

complaints. 

 

We have provided for the collection agency, a criteria or a list 

of standards that they must adhere to.  We certainly do not 

approve tactics that intimidate or threaten people, but 

occasionally people interpret that to be the case when they're 

talking to a collection agency.  And we work very closely to 

make sure that wherever possible the collection agency 

accomplishes its task without putting a great deal of stress on 

the people that they're talking to, but it's not always possible. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I would appreciate on that 

question about the Sask Housing Corporation, if you could give 

me that information.  And thank you for your answers to the 

questions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I need to 

understand the criteria a little better on the local housing 

authorities, and I'll give you a case scenario which surprised 

me. 

 

The village of Chaplin have a low-cost housing thing; it's been 

there for a long time.  I believe right now they have six . . . it's 

either four or six units empty and they've been empty for some 

time. 

 

One of the local churches is getting a new pastor.  He's an 

American citizen and is in a catch-22.  He can't become a 

landed immigrant until he secures a job, which he's now done.  

He's graduated from university just last month.  He now is 

going to Chaplin to become a pastor. 

 

There's very little other housing available.  They wanted to 

allow him to use the low-cost housing because he draws a very 

minimal salary at present, but they were told they could not 

change the criterion, and they would have to charge him $50 a 

month more than what the maximum charge is if you are a low 

income individual.  And yet he meets all the criteria as far as 

income goes, but because he's currently an American citizen, 

and hasn't achieved his landed immigrant status, no one seems 

willing to bend.  And the units have been sitting empty for 

months and months and months and months and it's upset a lot 

of people in the community. 

 

And we're finding, around rural Saskatchewan, a 

number of these units now are becoming vacant for longer 

periods of time. And if we maybe can't, in this case, rethink the 

rules a little bit in order . . . because this individual will be 

helping that community a lot. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Why, you have mentioned an issue that 

we are also very concerned with, and if you will forward that 

individual to us, we can see what we can do about it. 

 

The standards or the criteria that the local housing authorities 

use depend upon the type of public housing that they are 

managing.  And we do have a federal partner, who also helps 

us establish those programs, and it would have to be with the 

consent of the federal partner because, as you know, we do 

provide a subsidy to those people . . . to those units that are 

being used.  So there's a number of issues here, and certainly I 

agree with what you're saying, and I'd be happy to look into it 

and see if we can do anything. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You mention, Madam Minister, that there is a 

federal-provincial conference on the issue.  Are criteria going 

to be a major part?  Because our population is changing 

dramatically out there and I mean we're seeing all sorts of shifts 

occurring, particularly in rural Saskatchewan.  So housing 

projects that were built 15 and 20 years ago are not applicable 

in some cases now, and goodness knows with the changes in 

health care, there are going to be all sorts of ramifications for 

people who currently are in some type of facility that may have 

to look at something else. 

 

A number of communities are looking, I know, at some of this 

housing as maybe being renovatable and home care or 

somebody can maybe use them.  Is this the type of thing that's 

on the agenda? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all, we are working very, 

very closely with the local district boards, because you have 

brought forward a problem that we're aware of, and we 

certainly believe that many times the option of providing -- 

especially seniors housing -- is a good one with adequate home 

care rather than moving into an institutional care.  So we are 

working on the very issue that you talked about.  We have a 

team of experts working very closely with the Department of 

Health. 

 

In regard to what we're doing at the federal level, the issue of 

the criteria around the programs and the subsidy levels is 

something that all jurisdictions are looking at very closely.  

And we are doing currently a national review on that to see 

where perhaps we can have a better harmonization of 

programs, make better use of some resources, perhaps redesign 

some of our programs to be more effective in the current 

economic climate. 

 

One thing we'll have to be reminded of though, is 

Saskatchewan has a large rural population, and Toronto and 

Vancouver and Winnipeg have a totally different type of 

problem.  So to find something that is consistent across Canada 

is sometimes difficult when we're looking for agreement from 

jurisdiction to 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

jurisdiction.  But we are working with the federal government 

to redevelop those programs, to redesign them, to find better 

efficiencies and we are also working with the Department of 

Health and the local district boards. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, you are the minister 

responsible for Sask Housing and there are some senior citizens 

in Radisson whose lives have been turned upside down because 

you appear unwilling to reverse a bad decision.  I have a 

petition here signed by 13 residents of the Villa Housing 

Project.  And I'm not going to present the petition in the House 

because I simply want to try to get you to make a common 

sense decision here and give them a commitment.  The petition 

says: 

 

 We are current tenants of Sask Housing and intend to pay our 

rent into a trust account that will be withheld until major 

changes are made to the Radisson Housing Board.  We feel 

justified in doing this because there has been nothing but 

upheaval since this board was put in place by Doris Lerch, 

your provincial representative.  We have only two demands: 

complete replacement of the Radisson Housing Board, and 

replacement of Doris Lerch as the provincial representative.  

News media and federal government will be advised as to 

how you are handling our crisis in Radisson. 

 

Madam Minister, all these people want is for their housing 

authority to make majority decisions of who should sit on the 

Radisson Housing Board.  They want your representative 

replaced on the housing authority, and they want the right to 

achieve a majority decision as to who sits on the housing board. 

 

They have given you plenty of opportunities to change your 

mind.  And you have stated on many occasions with respect to 

other matters that you do not interfere in the decisions of 

boards. 

 

Can you give me any good reason why you would want a group 

of seniors calling the news media and the federal government 

just to achieve a perfectly reasonable bit of democracy for a 

small town in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The issue that you bring up is an issue 

that has been bubbling along for quite some time.  The 

community of Radisson has had a very deep and long-standing 

rift within it, and there are certain people within the community 

that have had a problem coming to terms with some of their 

problems, not only within the municipal structure but now it 

has gone and become a controversy on the local housing 

authority, and we regret that. 

 

Housing provides what we hope is the very best services for 

those people who need public housing.  The people who have 

been appointed to the Radisson board are qualified, competent 

people who are very capable of making sure that the services to 

the tenants are the highest quality.  I will not replace the 

housing authority board, and I will not replace the provincial 

representative. 

 

I believe that the process that we have gone through is a 

process that has been followed for many, many years, maybe 

10, 20, 30 years.  We are doing nothing differently in 

appointing this board than we have done before. It's always 

been the prerogative of the provincial rep to make the final 

determination of who sits on the board.  We regret very much 

the controversy that has erupted there.  As I said, there is a 

number of personality conflicts involved there and I would say 

to some extent, sadly, some of it revolves around the new 

board's decision to tender out the maintenance contract that 

previously was undertaken by the manager at a cost above and 

beyond his contracted position as the administrative manager of 

those units. 

 

(2045) 

 

And it was that decision by the new board that erupted into this 

controversy and we believe that it is a reasonable and a 

responsible approach by the board to tender out the 

maintenance contract to see what the competitive price is.  We 

regret that the manager has seen fit to resign over this, but we 

cannot condemn the housing authority for taking this step. We 

believe it's the proper step, and I would say to you that there are 

a number of issues in the background here and you have only 

heard one side of the issue, and it's a very complicated process.  

And we're asking the community to put this behind them and 

we're sending our officials out to work with the people in those 

units to make sure that they have the very best of services. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, for years this housing 

project has gone along without a glitch, and as you say, there is 

many sides to this issue.  And I realize that there can be 

personality conflicts but please tell me what you've got to lose 

by responding to the request of these people to have the 

majority of the members on their housing authority agree to the 

representatives who administer their seniors' complex. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I guess we believe that there is a 

precedent here that the people who are living in the units 

obviously want to be able to live in a certain degree of 

confidence in the board, and we ask them to let the board 

operate and to . . . the board has done nothing at this point in 

time that would give the tenants any concern whatsoever. 

 

We are sending out a team of officials who will do a complete 

audit and a complete review of this housing authority going 

back a number of years, to find out exactly what has been going 

on there.  You say that this has been going along just fine.  I 

think we still have to make that determination.  As I said, I 

think the dispute really revolves around the local board -- the 

current board -- making a decision to tender out the 

maintenance contract. 

 

You have to listen very carefully to that. The local board 

decided when they came in that they were going to tender out 

the maintenance contract to make 



2540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

sure that the price that they were paying was competitive.  This 

action resulted in the manager deciding to resign.  The 

managers of the local housing authorities sometimes become 

very close to these senior citizens, and they feel a very deep 

and strong friendship, and I understand that. 

 

But there is also a responsibility on the part of the board to 

make sure those practices that are engaged in by the manager 

are ones that can be supported, and can be verified.  And we are 

undertaking a process right now to review the practices of the 

past manager and do an audit of that authority. 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I would like to ask you some questions about the 

Royal Saskatchewan Museum.  Does the museum have a 

marketing plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, it does. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Can you tell me what the museum's budget 

for marketing and public communications consists of. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have that here, but 

I know that when they opened the first nations gallery, they 

engaged upon a very extensive public relations media 

campaign, and last year they had a hundredfold increase in the 

number of visitors that are visiting the first nations gallery.  It is 

a tremendous asset to not only the first nations people but to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are also currently doing a long-term development strategy 

for the other parts of the royal gallery to reconstruct it after it 

was destroyed by fire, and so that is a long-term process that 

requires a fair amount of capital investment.  But we have 

engaged a firm now that will undertake the preliminary details 

on that design, and we see that as a process that will probably 

continue over the next four or five years. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The name of the Museum of Natural History 

was changed to the Royal Saskatchewan Museum last year, and 

there has been some sense that that part of it wasn't fully 

publicized.  And we're wondering when there will be more 

promotion of this new name because the museum had been 

known by one name for many, many years. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well you may point out a deficiency.  

They are very busy working at reconstruction of the top part of 

that museum, and certainly they are always willing to take 

advice or to take constructive criticism from the public about 

whether they're doing a job in publicizing the museum 

adequately.  They have to work within the resources that are 

allocated to them, and sometimes they don't stretch as far as 

they would like.  But we will certainly undertake a review of 

whether they're doing adequate publicity around the Royal 

Saskatchewan 

Museum.  Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- And then on the Saskatchewan Archives, the 

budget for the archives is going up 15 per cent by $232,000.  

What is the additional spending going to achieve?  And is the 

additional spending going to improve the quality of storage? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, the increase in that budget really is 

designated to the increase in salaries for the staff at the 

archives. 

 

You have laid your finger on a very critical point.  For a 

number of years the archives have been experiencing a severe 

storage space shortage, and we are undertaking right now with 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) a 

long-term strategy to try to identify both the costs and the 

locations so that we can move our archives into a more current 

condition and provide better access by the public. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Funding for the Western Development 

Museum, the MacKenzie Art Gallery, the Saskatchewan 

Science Centre, and the Wanuskewin Heritage Park have all 

been kept stable.  In fact the MacKenzie Art Gallery hasn't 

been kept stable this year.  Can you tell me how this will affect 

operations for all of them, including the MacKenzie Art 

Gallery? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well it's always difficult because every 

institution and agency that we fund has a priority, and it's very, 

very much a part of Saskatchewan life, and certainly the 

institutions that you just mentioned are important.  And we're 

doing the best we can with the resources we have to support 

them. 

 

The Western Development Museum is adding an expansion, a 

very important part, to their site in Saskatoon and it's going to 

be a very exciting part. So they are continuing to function 

under the 1.5 million that we allocate to them.  Wanuskewin is 

I think developing a very good marketing plan, and they are 

moving forward, and their budget seems to be adequate.  The 

Saskatchewan Science Centre -- we came to government, they 

were in crisis, we provided them with money, and we are trying 

to stabilize their budget and move them into a new 

self-sufficiency so that they will not permanently rely on 

provincial funding, and we're working with them. 

 

The area that caused some concern is a decrease in funding to 

the MacKenzie Art Gallery.  We decreased their funding next 

year.  They are very concerned about it because they do 

provide a lot of outreach, a lot of programing to communities 

outside of Regina, and this takes a considerable amount of 

resources, and we have been working to try to identify perhaps 

a better way of giving them adequate resources for this year 

that will not result in such a drastic reduction in their 

programing.  I think we have possibly some solution there. I 

can't tell you about it tonight, but there seems to be some 

glimmer of hope that perhaps we can help them out a little.  So 

we're working on it. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

We understand that the MacKenzie Art Gallery is of particular 

significance and certainly we don't like to see any programs 

cut, but sometimes you have to make tough choices. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well indeed I have received quite a number 

of letters on the MacKenzie gallery and I'm sure they'll . . . it'll 

be some comfort to know that you're looking at their budget. 

 

What percentage of the revenue for each of these organizations 

do grants from your department occupy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't have their budget here and I would 

have to look in their annual report to make that determination.  

I would say that something like the Western Development 

Museum gets a majority of its funding from the provincial 

government. 

 

The MacKenzie Art Gallery, although we provide them a grant, 

we also provide them with free accommodations and free 

utilities at their current facility. 

 

The Wanuskewin Heritage Park, I don't know what percentage 

it is, we could certainly find that for you.  These people have 

other funding partners and they also have patrons that provide 

them with grants. So we would have to look up the individual 

budget for each of those institutions and find out what the 

percentage of public funds as opposed to private funds are; but 

I can provide you with that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd appreciate that, and I'd also like to know 

how much of each of these agencies' budgets are made up of 

self-generated revenues. 

 

Do you know of any new revenue-generating activities in the 

upcoming years in any of . . . in the coming year or in any plans 

for new areas for generating revenues in these organizations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They're all engaging in their own 

marketing strategy and trying to determine their own best 

approach to getting the necessary funds.  I don't know of any.  

These are agencies at work at arm's length of the provincial 

government and they develop their strategy complete and 

separate from what we're doing. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Item 9 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, last week we raised an issue 

with you in question period regarding Mr. Lefler and a grant 

that he'd received from the Arts Board, and you gave the 

indication that you were going to look into it.  Maybe this 

would be the appropriate time, before we vote this fairly large 

sum of the taxpayers' money, if you could tell us exactly what 

has transpired there. 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I can tell you that last Thursday I sent a 

letter to the chairman of the Arts Board asking them to 

reconsider and review Mr. Lefler's application. 

 

I want to state that this government supports freedom of artistic 

expression; that we also reject any notion of discrimination 

against homosexuals and their lifestyles.  We are very 

concerned about invasion of privacy.  We are also very 

concerned about the use of public funds and we . . . I'll have to 

tell you, personally, I cannot defend the action of the Arts 

Board in approving this application.  I think it evolves around 

ethics in art and it should be examined. 

 

I apologize to anybody who has been harmed in any way by the 

action of the Arts Board.  It is a concern to us.  Under the 

legislation I do not have the authority to overrule the Arts 

Board decision.  I will say that I believe that they have 

abdicated their responsibility in exercising due diligence on this 

application.  I regret it very much and I also will say that I 

would hope that they would continue to review this application 

and that they would not rely solely on an unaccountable, an 

anonymous three-member panel to make the decision for them 

in the future and at this point in time that's the update that I can 

give you. 

 

I do not defend the decision of the Arts Board, and I regret any 

harm that has done to anyone in our community. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, I concur with 

your thoughts. 

 

The Arts Board, I believe some of those people are appointed 

by order in council, and some are nominated by various groups, 

is that -- that's the mix?  I wonder if you could provide me with 

a complete list of who is currently on there, when their terms 

expire, and which groups appoint them, please.  I think there's a 

lot of people in society today would like to know exactly who 

these people are and how they got there.  There's a lot of angry 

people out there who would like to write some letters and I'd 

like to be able to provide them with appropriate information 

and be able to tell people when terms are up and that type of 

thing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We will provide you with that 

information. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, the total arts budget it going down but fortunately 

only slightly.  How will this affect the ability of the arts and 

cultural sector to contribute to the Saskatchewan economy? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have undertaken this year an 

extensive review of the whole arts industry, arts and cultural 

industry.  We have about 12 separate reports that have been 

prepared for us, everything from integrating the library system, 

to status of the artist, and the single arts agency that was 

recommended by 



2542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

the task force; those are just 3 of 12 reports that we have. 

 

We are working at developing a White Paper that will provide 

not only a long-term strategic view of the position or the place 

of arts and culture within Saskatchewan both as an industry and 

as an intrinsic value to the quality of life, and we'll be bringing 

that report out as a White Paper and discussing it and hopefully 

it will point the way to new funding partnerships and to new 

legislative frameworks within the next two or three years. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- SaskFILM is allocated 1.5 million, and in 

the world of feature films and even industrial video and 

independent film-making, 1.5 million doesn't go very far.  

What will be achieved by spending this amount? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This $1.5 million budget hopefully will 

cover about two or three of their films that they can work in 

partnership with . . . They don't provide total funding for any 

one film.  It is provided as seed money as they look for partners 

both within Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan. 

 

It is a substantial industry.  It is growing.  It is, we believe . . . 

has a potential to grow even greater.  SaskFILM has also . . . 

They lend out the money and they recover the money so their 

budget is not limited to the $1.5 million that you see here.  It is 

a budget that is greater than that but they manage their 

resources very skilfully and they do make a dollar stretch, and 

they have a terrific economic impact on Saskatchewan's 

economy and we hope that it will grow in the future. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  What is the financial 

contribution from this subvote to the book publishing sector 

and what has it achieved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The Arts Board provides some funds to 

people who are publishing books.  They also get some money 

out of SCCO (Saskatchewan Council of Cultural 

Organizations) which isn't in this subvote.  So what you have in 

this subvote will be only dollars that are either allocated to the 

Arts Board where . . . As I said, some can be passed through to 

the publishing people but most likely you would see funds 

coming to the publishers through grants from the SCCO. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- There was a time when the government 

devoted a full-time position to the economic dimension of arts 

and culture.  The position was moved from one department to 

the next.  It was in Economic Development for a while and then 

in Community Services for a while.  Does this department still 

devote full-time attention to the development of the arts and 

culture as an economic sector? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well we have a associate minister by the 

name of Mr. Ken Alecxe who is the bureaucrat or civil servant 

responsible for the arts and cultural sector.  We have a number 

of very qualified people who have been working for a number 

of years 

with the arts and cultural people, in partnership with them, and 

we believe it's a very good partnership and one that has a lot of 

positive potential. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The salary budget in the arts and 

multiculturalism area is decreasing.  How was this achieved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You're talking in the arts and 

multicultural, subvote 9, and they decrease from . . . I don't 

understand where you see salaries have decreased.  For 

1994-95 the salaries are 400,000; for '93-94 it's 397.  I'm not 

sure of what you're talking. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'll ask the next question.  The arts and 

culture sector is facing considerable change since the Sask arts 

task force and the subsequent consultations toward the design 

of a new structure for funding the arts, culture, and 

multiculturalism.  What is the role your department will play 

this year in the redesign of funding mechanisms?  What is the 

status of the government's efforts?  What is your government's 

policy on funding the arts, and will your government consider 

additional tax-based funding for the arts and culture? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- You have mentioned a number of the 

issues that will be presented in the government's White Paper 

that we are preparing now and hope to release very soon, but all 

of those issues will be presented for stakeholder comment as 

we move forward to develop what we hope is a integrated, 

comprehensive, modern approach to supporting and enhancing 

arts and culture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- You wouldn't be able, at this point, to give 

some detail of your policy on funding the arts? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Not at this time.  As you know, under the 

SCCO, under Saskatchewan Lotteries, they are one of the 

globals and they receive some money through the lottery 

foundation.  What we have here is what you have seen, and we 

don't see enhancing those subvotes within the next two or three 

years. 

 

But we believe that we can still support a very positive and a 

very creative approach to arts and culture.  And I ask you to 

wait for the release of our White Paper, and I think we'll be 

able to provide you with more information at that point in time. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Item 10 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In recreation, on what do you spend the 

million dollars? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We support development of sport in 

many capacities in Saskatchewan.  We provide recreation 

services to a lot of small municipalities.  We have regional 

recreation directors across Saskatchewan who help develop 

programs for the people of Saskatchewan.  So whether it's the 

individual sports and the development of the Saskatchewan 

Summer Games or the Saskatchewan 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

Winter Games, there is money allocated in this program for 

that.  And there is also, as I said, money allocated year to year 

to develop programs through the assistance of the regional 

recreation directors for a number of the rural municipalities and 

small urban municipalities. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, in November 1993, the 

Public Service Commission co-sponsored a one-day seminar at 

which Ted Gaebler, author of Reinventing Government, was 

the guest lecturer.  In the course of his presentation, he 

commented that the whole exercise of reviewing expenditures 

and budget plans hinges on one simple question that I would 

like to ask of you now.  How is the quality of life of the citizens 

of Saskatchewan better as a result of your department's 

activities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Do you mean the whole department, 

Municipal Government, public safety, housing, or just 

recreation -- the subvote that we're talking about now . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I beg your pardon? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The whole department. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well we have a very broadly based 

department, and first of all we have a very strong and 

long-standing partnership with municipal governments.  We 

provide them with advisory services and community planning 

services.  Through public housing, as we just talked about, we 

enhance the quality of life of a number of the citizens who are 

not, through economic circumstances, able to provide their own 

shelter.  And through our public safety division, we provide 

regulatory support to not only the building standards and the 

building codes, but through, as you know, our services in 

certifying the pressure vessels certification. 

 

And I guess the public safety side is a little more difficult to 

explain, but we also have under us the Fire Commissioner's 

office, who provides advisory support to a number of not only 

the professional fire-fighters of Saskatchewan, but also the 

volunteer fire-fighters.  We have an emergency response 

division within our department that helps those communities 

that are facing disasters and help them mobilize in an 

emergency situation. 

 

And then we move into the area that we've just talked about 

which is heritage, arts, multiculturalism, and recreation, which 

of course enhances that other quality of the lives of the public 

of Saskatchewan through access to programing in arts, heritage, 

or culture. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Previous 

ministers have agreed to respond in writing to a number of 

written questions submitted by the official opposition.  I'd like 

to ask you today if you'd ensure that we have the same answers 

to those questions and the other things that you've said that 

you'd give to us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Certainly.  We'd be very pleased. 

I thought you already had those answers but if you don't have 

that document with the answers for the questions, we'll provide 

it.  And with any other information, whether you ask it this 

evening or at any other time, we'd be more than pleased to 

provide you with access to any information or answer any of 

the questions that you may have. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, and thank you for your time at 

the end of the session and for the time of your officials, who 

have been very helpful. 

 

Item 10 agreed to. 

 

Vote 24 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 22 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank 

the members of the opposition for the questions not only on our 

estimates tonight but on the Bills.  I thank you very much.  I 

believe it was a very good session and I want to thank the 

members of the department that were with me this evening, and 

for all their support through the years.  So I thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also would like 

to thank the minister and her officials for the session this 

evening.  We covered a lot of work and I appreciated the 

answers.  And as the member from Regina North West said, 

any of that information, we'd be pleased to get it as quick as 

possible. 

 

(2115) 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair: -- It has been some time since this department was 

last here, and I would ask the minister to reintroduce the 

officials who have joined us here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two 

officials with me this evening.  I have Pat Youzwa, who is the 

deputy minister of Energy and Mines, and Ray Clayton, who is 

the associate deputy minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as 

you know, we are interested in talking about the vision, 

objectives, plans, and guidelines for government departments; 

recognizing the volume of department estimates that we've 

been through, and some still to go through, I'll limit the range 

of my questions. 

 

Could you describe the senior management structure 



2544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

of the agency? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's the deputy minister, who's the 

permanent head of the department; there's the geological and 

mineral division, we have an executive director in charge of 

that; there's the petroleum division, we have an executive 

director in charge of that; we have the administration division, 

which Mr. Clayton is in charge of.  And is there one other?  

There's resource policy and planning which has an executive 

director in charge of that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  What are the specific public 

policy objectives that drive your department?  In terms of the 

objectives, who established the objectives, how are they 

reviewed and revised, and what means do you use to 

communicate them to your employees and to your clients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well in terms of policy, we want to 

maintain the reputation of Saskatchewan as a good place to 

make investments in the mineral sector, as well as the 

petroleum sector; and to have a sensible, efficient, and 

streamlined regulatory system that protects the interests of the 

public and does not impose unnecessary burdens on the private 

sector which we represent in the mining and the petroleum side. 

 

We have a set of fiscal policies that optimizes the government's 

revenues to assist in financing the public services such as 

health, education, justice, and the infrastructure of the province.  

And secondly to provide a reasonable return to the private 

sector so as to encourage ongoing investment and job creation 

within the province in those two main sectors that the 

department represents.  We maintain adaptability to the 

changing circumstances and conditions. 

 

The new oil incentives package, for example, it was developed 

in consultation with the industry as a good example of the 

adaptability of the department.  We also provide technical 

information to assist in the investment decisions and encourage 

development within the province of Saskatchewan.  I might 

point out to the hon. member that the Department of Energy 

and Mines is likely the only department in government that's 

had eight or nine years of consecutive budget reductions and 

still has the reputation with the mining sector, and oil and gas 

throughout Canada, as one of the best possible departments to 

deal with anywhere across this country. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- That's an impressive record.  Could you 

explain how you've been able to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- By having professional employees 

within the Department of Energy and Mines and having a 

consistent policy of government. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In the interests of facilitating the work of the 

House I'll move on to some other questions. 

 

The total budget for the department is increasing by 

$124,000 which is a 16 per cent increase.  I would expect this 

has meant some considerable changes in operations in the 

department.  What benefit will the people of Saskatchewan 

receive as a result of this increased spending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know what the hon. member is 

referring to.  We've not had an increase in the budget.  In fact in 

answer to your previous question I've pointed out that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- This is the administration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In the administration branch of the 

department?  The overall budget of the department this year 

compared to last year is a reduction of some $32,000.  The only 

areas where there's been an increase in the budget, there's 

$160,000 for accommodation and central service which is of no 

control within the department.  That's set by those elsewhere. 

 

In terms of mineral revenues, in the mineral revenue collection 

branch and the mineral compensation, there's been modest 

increases in the budget.  The mineral revenue collection is 

$24,000 increase; the mineral compensation is $43,000.  They 

represent, respectively, a 1.7 per cent increase and a 5.6 per 

cent increase.  Those two, and other than the accommodation 

and central services, every other item in the budget for the 

department has been decreased, resulting in a total decrease of 

$32,000 in the budget. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you explain why the central services 

is not accountable; that you don't have a direct influence on 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Those rates are set by the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation and you may want to ask 

that during the Crown Corporations Committee or some other 

venue.  They are viewed somewhat by our department as the 

landlord, or landperson if you may prefer, and they set the rates 

and we pay the rates.  We feel that they're reasonable and 

reflect the cost of doing business. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Revenues from coal resources are increasing 

by 400,000 from the 1993-94 forecast.  Your increased 

revenues are a cost to the industry.  What impact will these 

increased costs have on the coal industry in general and 

investment by the coal industry in research and development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well in terms of the coal industry, the 

coal industry has a very fortunate situation in the province 

because of the previous administration.  Only about 15 per cent 

of the coal that's mined within the province is bound for export.  

I believe that only 15 per cent is bound for export.  The rest is 

used domestically within the province.  Almost all, if not all of 

that, is used by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and any 

revenues that are . . . or any royalties that are paid by the coal 

companies in regard to coal supplied to the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation are in turn reflected in payments by the 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

Power Corporation to the coal companies.  And that's a very 

cushy arrangement that was arranged by the previous 

administration in some very ironclad contracts.  So I think the 

coal companies in Saskatchewan have a very enviable position 

in terms of their bottom line, the royalties they have to pay. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Revenues from natural gas are 

projected to increase from $34 million to $90.7 million.  Why 

is the percentage increase so large in a single year?  Is this 

purely a response to changes in volume produced, or does it 

reflect higher rates of revenue captured by the government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's been virtually no change in 

terms of the royalty structure for natural gas in the province.  

The increase in the amount of royalties that we're going to 

garner into the province from natural gas is because of the 

increased activity in the province. 

 

I think that shows, one, is that the price of natural gas in the 

market-place is determined to stay stable or rise upwards, as the 

member would be very well . . . as it did last year, and also 

some confidence in the overall scheme of things in the province 

that the gas industry is very active in the province last year as 

well as this year.  The overall drilling activity for oil and gas in 

the province is well up over 30 per cent of what it was last year 

in terms of exploration activity, and we expect that will 

continue.  Therefore with the expanded industry in the 

province, there will be increased revenues for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In mineral revenues, the cost to collect 

mineral revenues is going up.  What is being done differently to 

collect revenues, and will mineral revenues themselves go up 

proportionate to the effort expended to collect the revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Basically the royalty structure is the 

same as it was in the previous year.  What we have is a 

situation in Saskatchewan where there is some increased 

activity.  The member may know that the active companies in 

Saskatchewan are certainly increasing their exploration 

activities in regard to diamonds.  There's been a good amount 

of exploration in terms of uranium.  There's been increased 

activity looking for other base minerals.  I'm sure that the 

member opposite will know that Cameco has announced and 

will be having a ceremony very soon about the Contact Lake 

gold mine which is opening in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Again the increased revenues for minerals in the province are 

because of increased activities, not because of a change in the 

royalty structure. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Why is it necessary to compensate former 

owners of Crown oil and gas rights and holders of mineral trust 

rights? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It was part of the arrangement when the 

Crown took over those mineral rights, a contractual 

arrangement, whereby the previous owners would be 

compensated. 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The Department of 

Environment is responsible for the operation of the uranium 

board of inquiry.  This must be of considerable interest to your 

clients, the energy industry.  What have your clients told you 

about the process underway and the board of inquiry?  Are they 

satisfied with the process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I believe that the uranium 

companies within Saskatchewan are satisfied with the process.  

If not, they feel somewhat frustrated from time to time; not by 

the process itself, but because of the repetitive nature of many 

of the reports that they have had to do, and many of the 

accountability sessions you might say, with different agencies 

and departments of the federal government, and then different 

agencies and departments of the provincial government. 

 

So they do feel -- I must say to you -- that they feel the work is 

sometimes repetitive.  But they're good environmental citizens 

of the province and see the need to have the utmost scrutiny 

when it comes to uranium developments in the province.  And 

they are willing and sometimes frustrated participants in the 

process. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The mineral 

development program is being reduced by a 100,000 or 20 per 

cent.  This would appear to be a considerable drop.  Economic 

theory suggests that the mineral industry requires long-term, 

steady support, to correspond with a slow but steady growth 

profile.  A cut to the program appears that it might be 

counter-productive.  Why is the cut necessary, and what will 

change in the mineral development program, and what will the 

mineral development program achieve in the forthcoming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We believe that the reduction in the 

program will have minimal, if any, effect in terms of the 

mineral development program in Saskatchewan.  I might say 

that the hon. member may want to, in some conversations with 

your federal colleagues, talk about their withdrawal from the 

Mineral Development Agreement that was in place for many, 

many years, and we feel that it was beneficial to us in 

Saskatchewan.  We'd like to see that program continued, and 

the federal participation is very important not only in 

Saskatchewan but all of the provinces.  The $100,000 reduction 

from our part in the mineral development in the province 

should have very little effect. 

 

All departments and all agencies of government have had to 

tighten their belt to help recover in terms of the spending of 

government and this is just part of what's happened within the 

Department of Energy and Mines.  We feel that we can 

accommodate with internal efficiencies within the department 

and cooperation with the mining companies active in 

Saskatchewan to achieve even a greater level of success than 

what we had previously, but it does mean more work on behalf 

of the departmental officials and more diligence on the part of 

the mining 



2546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

companies involved in Saskatchewan.  We feel we do have 

good cooperation and a good understanding and it should not 

have any effect.  If there is an effect it would certainly be 

minimal. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Maybe I'm not getting it, but you say it 

doesn't matter if you don't have the $100,000, but you would 

like the federal participation to return to the program, but it 

doesn't have any effect.  And it's a little bit confusing to me.  

Maybe you could explain it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I believe this is the last year of the 

Mineral Development Agreement.  This is the last year of the 

Mineral Development Agreement.  It was a five-year program 

in which there was cost sharing of items that would qualify 

under the Mineral Development Agreement. 

 

What I'm saying to you is it would be nice if the federal 

government would continue the program.  In terms of the 

federal government they have completely cut out the program.  

We've reduced our participation in a similar type of program by 

$100,000.  We're still participating; we very much want that to 

happen.  And all I'm indicating is that if some chance in the 

future you could convince your federal colleagues to enter into 

a new Mineral Development Agreement, we as a government, 

and I think the mining sector, would be very much appreciative 

of that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What then would be the effect of having 

more funding?  You say that the 20 per cent cut, really, you've 

been able to work efficiencies.  What would be the benefit of 

having increased funding and support and continuation of this 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well if you can convince the federal 

government to re-enter a new Mineral Development 

Agreement, I'll assure you that the $100,000 will be back in the 

program next year. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In petroleum and natural gas, the operations 

cost appears to be stable.  Is there anything new underway in 

this branch? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Over the past couple of years there were 

two task forces in cooperation with the oil and gas industry.  

One was on the fiscal regime; the other was on the regulatory 

side.  There are items that are ongoing with the industry, in 

consultation, in partnership you might say with the industry, 

and we plan on continuing those cooperative measures with the 

oil and gas industry. 

 

I think that if you look at the increase in drilling activity in the 

province this year, it bears out what I'm saying to you, is that 

we've been successful within the department in restoring 

confidence, with the oil and gas industry being very active in 

Saskatchewan.  We plan on continuing that through 

cooperation.  You'll know that the fiscal policy that came in 

about January 1 of this year, I think it came into effect, 

whereby there is an agreement to do a number of things in the 

fiscal 

regime that are attractive to the province and that means that 

we're getting increased royalties.  It's also attractive to the 

industry in that they're increasing their participation in the 

province. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Does the province have a single, clear, 

comprehensive energy policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't think there's any province or any 

jurisdiction throughout the world that has a clear and concise 

energy policy; you can pick up one book and look at and say 

this is the energy policy for this particular jurisdiction.  We are 

making attempts in that direction. 

 

Currently the Department of Energy and Mines, in cooperation 

with other departments and agencies, is developing a 

comprehensive energy strategy.  The comprehensive energy 

strategy will be placed on my desk sometime this late summer 

and we hope to be able to release that later this year to the 

public for further development of the comprehensive energy 

strategy which will be a guiding document to guide us into the 

future, in terms of what we do with the energy, whether it's 

electrical generation or other forms of energy, and what the 

economic development opportunities are associated with that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What is the status of the interdepartmental 

review of the conservation strategy for sustainable 

development?  Is this what you're talking about in terms of 

what will be . . . it was planned for 1992 and 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'm not totally conversant with the 

sustainable development direction that you're talking about.  

The comprehensive energy strategy encompasses all of that and 

more.  As I said in the answer to your previous question, the 

comprehensive energy strategy will look at our options for 

energy into the future well past the year 2000 and examine 

what the economic development possibilities are associated 

with those developments. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  SECDA (Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Authority) was formed in June 

1992.  How many employees are there, and how many were 

Saskatchewan residents when they were hired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't have that exact information with 

me, but I'd be happy to provide that to the member, and I give 

her my undertaking that we would provide that yet this week to 

you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- While you're providing that, some of the 

other things that we'd like to know:  are there other, similar 

organizations in other Canadian provinces or in the States?  

What tangible results have been produced by this agency after 

nearly two years of operation?  And how much money has been 

spent on this agency to date? 

 

When it was formed, the minister claimed that this agency 

would advise other departments and agencies.  What 

departments and agencies have been 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2547 

assisted?  What specific services have been provided?  I think 

that's probably . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well it would be quite an undertaking to 

determine other jurisdictions throughout North America that 

play a comparable role to Saskatchewan Energy Conservation 

Development Authority.  I suppose if the member really wants 

that information we can undertake to acquire that for you.  It 

wouldn't be an easy task that we could acquire within a short 

period of time, I mean communicating with all other 

jurisdictions in North America to gather that information 

together for you.  And if you really have a purpose for wanting 

that, I suppose our aim is to serve you in that regard.  And if 

you want to communicate that further to me by letter, then I 

would undertake to provide that to you. 

 

In terms of the budget, the amount of money that's been spent 

on the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development 

Authority to date, I believe the budget within their first year 

was $300,000.  The second year was $1.5 million.  And this 

year again it's $1.5 million.  So if you total those together, it 

would be $3.3 million over a three-year period that's been 

expended with the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation 

Development Authority. 

 

In terms of providing advice to other government departments, 

it has not taken on a major role in that regard.  I don't know 

what you're referring to, what the minister said when SECDA 

first came into existence.  But the major part of SECDA right 

now is consumed by providing information which will be part 

of the comprehensive energy strategy.  Once they've completed 

that, they'll fulfil other items within their mandate. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well I'm not suggesting you spend that 

hundred thousand you saved on getting me the list of stuff from 

the States.  We're just curious as if there are other similar sort 

of organizations in the U.S. (United States) and in Canada. 

 

What specific technical advice and service has SECDA 

provided to SaskEnergy prior to becoming Wascana Energy 

and to SaskPower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'm not sure that the member 

understands what it is that SECDA is doing at this point in 

time.  In terms of providing information to Wascana Energy, I 

can't see any relationship whereby they would provide any 

detailed information.  They may have some communications 

with them to examine how a private sector company views the 

long-term energy options within the province and maybe even 

beyond the province. 

 

In terms of SaskPower, the role that SECDA performs right 

now, in regard to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, would 

be to look at the electrical generating options for the future, and 

that will certainly be part of the comprehensive energy strategy, 

and the member will have an opportunity to review that later 

this year. 

And when you look at the electrical generating options for the 

future, in regard to SaskPower, when you see that in the 

comprehensive energy strategy, you'll know that it's the 

Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development Authority 

that has produced that, working in consultation with 

SaskPower. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What sort of role would SECDA play in -- 

say -- the decisions about the Queen Elizabeth line or other 

generating projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- None. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Does SECDA have a role in serving 

municipal governments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It's not a priority now, but they may in 

the future.  And just by the nature of the work that the Energy 

Authority does, there may be some demand-side management 

options that they may develop packages on that could be used 

by municipal government in the future, but it's not been a high 

priority or a thrust of the Energy Authority at this time. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  What are your future plans for 

SECDA?  Is there a preplan termination date for the agency?  Is 

there a major review plan to assess the mandate and role of the 

agency, or will this become a permanent agency of the 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- That determination has not been made.  

I think that it's worthy of some debate within this legislature 

amongst all members, once the mandate has been completed by 

the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority, as to what the longer-term roles should be. 

 

And certainly right now the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Authority need to look at their 

mandate which is basically to look at energy options for the 

future; to look at conservation measures that may be used 

within Saskatchewan that are timely and cost efficient for the 

province as a whole and for the consumers; and to look at the 

economic development opportunities that are associated with 

that.  So those three items are the summary I guess of the 

mandate of the particular agency of government. 

 

In terms of the long haul -- and I'm thinking beyond the next 

three years or so -- I think that we all have to examine what the 

role is.  They may play a very valuable role or they may have a 

sunset clause at some time in the future.  But that's certainly not 

been determined.  They play a valuable role to the government 

at the present time and I think a valuable role to the public in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  SECDA produced a study titled 

Small Hydro Inventory Study.  What was the cost of the 

study?  It appears that all of the information and data contained 

in this report were readily available from SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy.  When the minister set up SECDA he said the 

agency would not duplicate the roles of existing agencies. 



2548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

What new information did the study yield? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I think it authenticates information 

that's already there.  Mainly because of questions in this place 

and questions by the public, it's valuable sometimes to have an 

independent assessment of what exists.  And I think that 

although this information may have existed within Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan, it gives some validity to having 

an independent assessment of that, so that members don't say 

there's some kind of a vested interest in the information that's 

already there. 

 

And I think that in itself, of having an independent appraisal -- 

which in this case I believe SECDA has done -- that's the value 

and I don't want to view it as a duplication because there may 

be items that they're looking at that are not contained within 

one of the Crown corporations currently. 

 

But certainly by having the independent assessment by SECDA 

it brings forward all of that information and brings it into a 

public light which I think is above question as to their 

methodology and the objectives and why they place that 

information before you and other members of the legislature 

and through us to the public. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Was there new information the study 

yielded? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't know that exactly at this time.  If 

the member requires that information, I can certainly give her 

my undertaking that I would provide that to you at an early 

opportunity.  It would involve not only the work that SECDA 

has done but for me to go back and have my officials determine 

what was there before SECDA actually did the study.  And I 

understand what you're asking for.  I don't understand quite 

what your objective is in wanting that information, but if you 

want that, I'll certainly try and determine that for you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well SECDA produced another study titled 

Background Document with Integrated Resource Planning 

Review: Saskatchewan's Electrical Energy Requirements.  

What was the cost of that study?  And just as with the previous 

study, it appears that all of the information and data contained 

in the report were readily available from SaskEnergy and 

SaskPower.  You had said that there would be no duplication of 

the roles of existing agencies, and again I ask, what new 

information did the study yield? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In the particular study that you're 

referring to, if I understand your question correctly, no new 

information but validation of the methodology and the 

information obtained in the load growth forecast for 

SaskPower.  A few years ago, all utilities across Canada were 

projecting somewhere between a 3 per cent and a four and a 

half per cent load growth factor in terms of the generating that 

would be required within any particular jurisdiction across 

Canada. 

The load growth forecast with the methodology used at 

SaskPower has dropped to one and a half per cent, to 1 per 

cent.  So the incline for load growth has gone down 

substantially.  Members of this legislature and members of the 

public questioned that, and I think through that somewhat 

question the integrity of SaskPower in terms of their 

methodology and their motives in providing the lower load 

growth forecast. 

 

There were a couple of items that . . . or a couple of actions that 

took place.  One was an independent organization that 

SaskPower asked to validate their methodology in projecting 

the load growth forecast.  And secondly SECDA also looked at 

the load growth forecast to see if the methodology and the 

information was something that could stand the test of any 

scrutiny that would come before it, either from this legislature 

or from elsewhere.  And that was the value in having that study 

done, is that it restored and validated the integrity of the system 

at SaskPower for projecting a load growth forecast. 

 

And so no new information as far as I know, but what it did say 

is yes, the methodology and the information coming out of 

SaskPower was accurate, it was correct, and there was integrity 

in the way in which they projected the load growth forecast and 

that is important in the accountability process.  It's also 

important in terms of planning how we generate and how much 

we generate electricity in the future. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Just in conclusion on SECDA, what other 

studies . . . on this part . . . what other studies has SECDA 

commissioned which are complete, which are in progress, 

which are planned but not yet begun? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't think we have that information 

readily available tonight but I will provide that to you. 

 

In terms of an earlier question that you asked, in terms of the 

employees at SECDA, there are 12 permanent staff and 6 

temporary staff.  As to the origins of those people, I can't 

answer that for you this evening, but I'll provide that at a later 

date to you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd appreciate that, Mr. Minister.  We would 

like to raise a concern about the level of taxation on mining 

companies.  How much of the total provincial corporate tax 

revenue is received from the mining industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In the overall provincial revenues we 

wouldn't have that information.  You would more appropriately 

ask that to the Minister of Finance during those estimates. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In 1992 the mineral taxes paid by members 

of the Saskatchewan Mining Association were just over 

one-half million dollars.  In 1993 the revenues you received 

from them jumped to 1.57 million.  Can you explain the 

reasons for the change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Can you explain what you mean by 

mineral taxes?  You seem to have us just a 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2549 

small bit stymied here in terms of the increase that you're 

talking about from the half million to the 1.5 million.  Could 

you just give us a little further information on what you're 

asking? 
 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I could not explain that to you, so perhaps 

we should talk about this at another time.  I can get more 

information on what we want. 
 

I think that concludes the questions I wanted to ask today, and I 

appreciate the many answers you've given me.  And thank you 

to your officials. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 35 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Vote 152 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Vote 150 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes the estimates for Energy and 

Mines and related votes.  And at this time I would ask the 

minister to thank the officials who have joined us here this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I would like to thank the members 

opposite for their questions here this evening, Mr. Chairman.  

And I'd like to thank Ray Clayton and Pat Youzwa for their 

assistance in the House, two very good and professional 

employees of the province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 

to thank the minister and his officials for their participation this 

evening. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair: -- I would invite the minister to introduce the 

officials who have joined us here this evening. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like 

to introduce to my left, the president of Property Management 

Corporation, Brian Woodcock. Immediately behind him is Al 

Moffat, the vice president of commercial services, and behind 

me is Norm Drummond the corporate controller. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, 

Mr. Minister, and officials.  I have a few questions for you this 

evening. 

 

Were there any reclassifications in human resources department 

of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation during 

the last year; and if so, please provide the details. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- My officials are just looking up that 

information.  If you have another question, we could maybe 

carry on with that as they bring forth that information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister; it relates 

to the same area.  What position does Barrie Hilsen hold with 

SPMC, and has Mr. Hilsen received a reclassification or an 

increase in salary over the last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Hilsen is the vice-president of 

human resources, and there has been no change in his salary 

level. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Has there been a change in his 

classification level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Has there been a change, Mr. Minister, 

in any of the other people working within the human resources 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much.  There were 

six reclassifications, and I can send across a copy of those if 

you would like. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm assuming 

that with the reclassification there will also be a change in the 

salary levels.  Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes there were.  I have the changes 

to salary levels, and those will be also included with the 

reclassifications. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you very much.  How many 

people are employed in the human resources department? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, as my officials are 

looking for that information, putting that together, there were 

some questions that were asked of us the last time we were 

here, and I have had the officials put that together and we can 

send that across for you this evening so you can peruse this at 

your 



2550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

leisure.  I think we have the numbers with respect to the human 

resources personnel.  We have 19 permanent employees, 3 

temporary employees, 2 part time, 2 casual, for a total of 26 

employees within the human resources department.  And I'll 

send this information that I had referred to earlier across. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You had 19 

permanent, 3 temps, 2 part time.  And what was the fourth 

category, if you would, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Casual. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How many of 

these, the temporary, part time, or casual, would any of those 

be summer students? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- In the human resources, I am told 

by the officials, that there were no summer students employed 

under this part of the department. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Are there summer students 

employed within SPMC in other areas, then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The number of summer students 

that Property Management Corporation has been hiring in the 

past couple of years is in the neighbourhood of 120 to 140.  

The officials tell me that, although all the hirings are not 

complete, they're anticipating in the neighbourhood of 140 

summer students that will be hired over the course of the 

summer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In the 

previous year what was the salary range for summer students? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told, Mr. Member, that the 

salary range for summer students varies depending on the kind 

of employment, the kind of job that they're doing, but that the 

salaries would average in the neighbourhood of between $10 

and $12 an hour. 

 

What we can is get a list for you in terms of the kinds of jobs 

and the rate pay of the summer students, and we can send that 

and we will send that across to you.  I don't know if they have 

that here tonight, but we'll get it to you at any rate. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

particularly interested in whether or not there has been a 

change in that salary scale from last year to this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The only changes that would be 

between last year and this year in terms of summer students 

would be what would have come through the collective 

agreement with the union.  If there was no change in the 

collective agreement then there would be no change in the 

salary scale for summer student employment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Students are 

therefore covered under the collective agreement, are they, 

when they're employed with SPMC? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes they are. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The reason I 

ask these questions is that we received a phone call that 

because of the increase in salary levels in human resources, that 

some of the summer students employed in that area were given 

a decrease in their salary. 

 

And this person was quite concerned about that.  They felt that 

the decrease was improper in that the students were then asked 

to work an additional two hours of overtime to bring their level 

back up to an agreed-upon salary scale.  Does SPMC provide 

overtime pay for students if they do work an additional period 

of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told by the officials that there 

has been no increase in the number of people that work in the 

human resources services arm of Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. 

 

Whatever would be covered by the collective agreement for a 

full-time employee, or a part-time or temporary employee, 

would be covered as well for summer students.  If under the 

collective agreement the regular employee, or a year-round or 

permanent employee, would be covered by overtime for the 

hours worked, then that would as well be covered for summer 

students. 

 

But in terms of any differentiation between the rates and the 

remuneration for overtime, it's the same.  It's dependent on the 

number of hours worked and the rate would be dependent on 

the kind of employment that that particular individual would be 

doing. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you'd mind looking into that situation though in the human 

resources sector to ensure that the students are being paid their 

full salary scale as laid out in the collective agreement and that 

there's not something happening there that should not be. 

 

The person who phoned in felt that perhaps your office would 

not be aware of the situation at the time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes.  I was just conferring with my 

officials.  I can say to the member that I certainly will look into 

the hiring practices and the salary, pay practices within that 

particular part of Property Management Corporation. 

 

It's been one of the goals of government over a long period of 

time to assist students and to try and create, when the holidays 

are taking place for the permanent employees, the ability to 

come in and take over some of those jobs, to assist them in 

helping with their post-secondary education.  And that program 

continues.  We think it's a very positive thing for the young 

people of Saskatchewan, and I say to the member that I 

certainly will be looking at how the employees in that branch 

are hired, what the pay practices are, and we will get to you a 

full report. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2551 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It is, I think, a 

worthwhile effort both in government and private industry that 

they do indeed hire students to replace the permanent 

employees while those employees go off on holidays during the 

summer months.  I might say that sometimes it's of benefit to 

both students and permanent employees if those kind of hiring 

practices can take place at other times of the year rather than 

just May, June, July, and August. 

 

Mr. Minister, there have been a number of terminations within 

SPMC over the last year, most recently the termination of a 

number of nurses.  Mr. Minister, where were those nurses 

employed, and why were they terminated, and will they be 

replaced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes. I think what you may be 

referring to is . . . there was a change in terms of the structure 

of air ambulance and how the nursing staff are dealt with. 

 

Property Management Corporation did abolish two positions in 

terms of full-time nursing, and I am told that one of the people 

who had those jobs went on long-term disability, and the other 

one retired.  They are now looked after by the Department of 

Health.  The Department of Health is responsible for staffing, 

and for nursing staff to air ambulance.  So those I think may be 

the positions that the member may be referring to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I have your globals 

that you sent us across and this is in Saskatoon.  I have one, 

two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, 

twelve, thirteen, fourteen, just on this one page alone, and I 

have a number of other pages with nurses listed; and these 

nurses are in Regina and Saskatoon.  Nurse classifications 2, 

terminated all of them on the 06-08-93.  Now I'm assuming 

that's the sixth month, the eighth day -- but you can correct me 

if it's the other way around -- of '93 and just wondering where 

all these people are working and what were they doing, and are 

they being replaced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I am told that the number of nurses 

that you're looking at here, and they're mainly based in Regina 

and in Saskatoon, were casual nurses that were used and maybe 

picked up for an hour here and an hour there and used through 

the air ambulance process.  When this staffing was moved to 

the Department of Health and it became their responsibility we 

no longer then had the need to keep these nurses on our casual 

list.  But I'm assuming that they would have been picked up, 

some of them, if they felt they wanted to transfer to the 

Department of Health, that that could have been an option for 

them.  But when we moved the nursing staff over to the 

department, there became no need for Property Management 

Corporation to maintain a list of casual people that they would 

call in when the need required. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I 

find it surprising though that there'd be two pages of nurses' 

names that were no longer needed, and hopefully they did find 

some employment elsewhere. 

 

How did air ambulance work if they had so many part-time 

nurses on call?  I would assume they were.  Whenever air 

ambulance needed a nurse, they simply called the first one on 

the list or just what happened? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There were and had been under 

Property Management Corporation two nurses on a full-time 

basis, and the rest of the nurses were called in when the need 

would arise.  For an example, if it required the staff be on a 

flight to wherever it might be and there was a need for someone 

to be in the station in case another call would come in, then the 

air ambulance operation would call a nurse and ask them to 

come in on a casual basis. 

 

This list was developed, I guess, over a period of time.  It 

wasn't the list that was always active.  Some of these people 

may have in fact been on a list, and this list had been built over 

a period of months and years.  But basically there were only 

two full-time employees at air ambulance in terms of the 

nursing staff, and those two full-time jobs had been moved over 

to the Department of Health.  Who is staffing them now, I'm 

not sure.  But I'm sure during Health estimates you'd be able to 

find out who staffs the air ambulance with respect to the nurses. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I see that 

SPMC has a sales staff out at Fort Qu'Appelle.  What does 

SPMC sell that they need a sales staff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What those positions are are just 

classifications for the moment, and we believe there is one 

person stationed out at Echo Valley at the conference centre.  

They're in the process, as I understand, of revamping that 

position to give it a more appropriate title in keeping with the 

actual work that that employee does. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  When I 

look at the globals here we have quite a number of people who 

are classified as sales staff.  It says sales service attendant 1, 

and just on this page alone there's seven or eight of them and 

then if I flip over to the next page, I notice that there's more on 

there still, so there's more than one person who is performing or 

whose classification is at least sales.  Could you explain what 

that's all about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What these are are the 

housekeeping staff out there and it's an inappropriate name 

really for the job that they do because what they do is look after 

the rooms, make the beds, do the dusting, and those kinds of 

things.  And SPMC is in the process of putting a proper 

classification to these particular jobs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because 

my next question was, how much money did these sales people 

raise.  But since they're looking after rooms, I gather that they 

would not have generated a lot. 



2552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to deal now with leases and SPMC.  How 

many SPMC leases were renegotiated during the last fiscal 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials are just 

putting that information together.  There have been a number of 

properties, as you will know, throughout the province from one 

corner of Saskatchewan to the other and what they're doing is 

putting that information together.  So if you have another 

question that you may want to continue with, we'll get that 

information to you, or I can send it across or read into the 

record -- whichever you prefer. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If you just 

send it across, that will be fine. 

 

My next question also deals with the leases, though.  How 

much money did the government save through these 

renegotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What you're asking is fairly 

detailed, and we can compile an aggregate figure in terms of 

the amount.  I have, on this sheet, a list of different properties 

that some action was taken on in the year.  Some were renewed 

leases.  Some were revised in working with the owner of the 

facility.  And in this page there's probably about 30 of them, I 

would suggest.  We can get together in terms of each individual 

one, and then put together an aggregate figure for you if you 

would like.  And we'll compile that, and we'll send that all 

across to you if you're interested in that information.  I think 

that's what you're asking for. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Yes, I was 

interested in how much total was saved. But if you didn't want 

to bother adding them all up and if you just want to send that 

across, that would be fine -- also, if you would define all of 

them. 

 

On another issue on SPMC, Fort San, I was wondering if you 

could explain the status of Fort San now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- We had a very busy year over the 

last few months.  We were looking at the facility in terms of its 

long-term viability, what we may be able to do to turn that 

facility from an annual cost to the government to a break-even 

or even a profit-making operation at best. 

 

The analysis that was done on the facility was that, in order to 

establish a revenue base, we needed to secure an anchor tenant.  

So the officials, working with the federal administration, 

started looking at what we may be able to do with the sea cadet 

program.  They were housed . . . this particular sea cadet 

program was housed at Gimli in Manitoba.  The facility was in 

very poor shape.  They looked at what we had to offer at Fort 

San in terms of the lake, in terms of the physical facilities.  And 

it was determined it would be worth while for the provincial 

government to work with the federal government to see if we 

couldn't put together a proposal that would work in the best 

interests of Ottawa and of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

We were able to reach an agreement with the federal 

government to secure a long-term lease that would give us an 

anchor tenant, would give us a base of revenue, that would 

make an investment in that facility to bring it up to the 

standards that they require, that would make that a good 

business decision.  So based on that analysis we continued the 

negotiations and were fortunate enough to secure a contract 

with the national Department of Defence to secure the sea cadet 

program out at Echo Valley. 

 

We as well are looking at leasing it or contracting with groups, 

with individuals, as a low-cost conference centre, and we're 

certainly hopeful that we'll be able to secure a busy facility 

there year round to be able to make sure that that is no longer a 

drain on the public purse, but in actual fact would generate 

some revenue for the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I support the 

agreement with the sea cadets.  I was never a sea cadet but was 

in the air cadets and found it to be a very valuable program.  

The agreement you have with the sea cadets, what proportion 

of the cost of operating Fort San would that agreement cover -- 

50 per cent? 75? 20? What type of numbers are we looking at 

here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- It actually is a fairly substantial 

portion of our revenue.  The annual contract with the 

Department of Defence is $582,000.  Our overall revenue is in 

the neighbourhood of $1.2 million and our total expenses are 

just around $1.191 million.  So basically that program almost 

accounts for 50 per cent of the costs of operating that facility.  

So what we were able to do is to achieve a fairly substantial 

anchor tenant that certainly puts us in the kind of a position 

where, with a little bit of work, a little bit of marketing, we 

should be able to put that in at least a break-even position. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you used the term anchor tenant before or after sea cadets 

moved in.  Mr. Minister, how much time do the sea cadets 

utilize Fort San?  Is it a couple of months a year that they're 

receiving for this payment?  Or what kind of a time frame are 

you looking at that is available for others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Our anchors generally arrive in 

around July 1 and are there through until the end part of 

August.  There's a little preliminary, and some of the instructors 

will come in a little early to ensure that they have things 

prepared for when the sea cadets come in.  But basically the 

brunt of the activity is from July 1 to the end of August. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 

encourage you to find further tenants for this facility, or as was 

previously contemplated, perhaps the sale of it would also be 

appropriate.  I think it's one of the areas where the government 

isn't necessarily needed in this type of enterprise, that it's 

perhaps better dealt with through the private sector rather than 

the public sector because it doesn't provide directly a 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2553 

benefit to the province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Minister, I notice that you had some significant computer 

purchases on the globals -- actually $472,000-plus which were 

tendered.  I wonder, Mr. Minister, what was purchased and 

where was it purchased from? 

 

(2230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- As you will see, the aggregate 

amount with respect to computer purchases is just in the 

neighbourhood of $475,000, of which 473,000, roughly, was 

tendered.  There was about $2,500 that was not tendered.  The 

officials are looking for the list, who the purchases were from 

and what the amounts are, and we will send that list over to 

you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Are you 

contemplating any further increases in computer equipment in 

the upcoming budgetary year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The officials are anticipating 

expenditures in the neighbourhood of $150,000 for this year.  

And basically what it is is part of the equipment . . . we're 

serving a $3 million computer system.  We deal with all of the 

government's mail, with the operations, the procurement, the 

purchasing, the tendering process, so it's a fairly elaborate 

computer system that Property Management uses.  I certainly 

wouldn't suggest to you that we'll be able to maintain a level of 

$l50,000 because, as you will know, computer . . . the life of a 

computer is fairly limited in terms of the changes in 

technology, what's available, and the fact that sometimes 

electronics do break down whether we like it or not.  So next 

year's a relatively small year in terms of purchases for 

computer equipment.  But certainly in upcoming years, we will 

be increasing that expenditure fairly dramatically. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I do 

understand that computer technology is moving ahead fairly 

fast and that computers that you may have purchased today are 

obsolete by the time you put them up in your office.  But those 

computers are still able to perform the duties that are required 

of them, and you don't necessarily need the fastest and the 

latest to do the job, that sometimes the older computers can still 

function properly and still do the necessary job that you have 

required of them. 

 

And I would encourage you to look very carefully at the 

expenditure dollars when you are spending them on computers 

because it is very easy to go for the latest and best where 

perhaps the second or third tier down the line would do the job 

sufficiently even though they may not necessarily have all the 

bells and whistles. 

 

Now perhaps if you let the Minister of Labour in there he 

would have some influence on that.  But I'm not sure just 

exactly what direction it would go in.  So while you may take a 

look at the equipment he uses, I wouldn't suggest though that 

you necessarily follow his example on this matter but that you 

take care and 

consideration when you are ordering new computers to make 

sure that they will do the job, but that you're not overbuying for 

the situation. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 

The Chair: -- Although there's no estimate as such for this 

year, the members do have an opportunity to ask questions.  

Are there any questions?  For the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority there are no loans or advances required for 

this year.  No questions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could I'd like to 

thank the member for his questions and I'd like to thank my 

officials for their work this evening and their work that they do 

throughout the year.  We will certainly heed your advice with 

respect to our purchases.  Finance department generally makes 

pretty good sure that we don't overextend ourselves.  And the 

budget seems to be shrinking, so we have to -- it seems -- do a 

little more with a little less.  But I thank the member for his 

questions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 

for their cooperation.  I know that he's disappointed that we 

didn't ask any questions tonight on gambling and liquor, but we 

will get to you on that one. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Although 

I'm not going to get into, Mr. Minister, your book, Agriculture 

2000, I did have to make a comment on it and that being that 

this would have perhaps been a good document from say 

October 22, 1991 until about March 1, 1992. 

 

But to have come out with it earlier this year I think was an 

inappropriate time for this kind of a document.  I think this year 

would have been the time to come out with a document that 

had some substance in it, that outlined some real programs and 

some real solutions rather than some airy-fairy ideas that will 

actually be projected until the year 2000 before there's any 

meat in it, because the farmers of this province need some 

meat-and-potatoes answers dealing with the problems that 

they're facing today, and Agriculture 2000 does not provide 

that.  In fact it provides very little of anything other than 

wasting 26 pages worth of paper. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask you a few questions about 



2554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

the tripartite stabilization program.  That program is 

discontinuing, and what kind of a program are you bringing in, 

in the interim to replace it?  And what are you bringing in for a 

long-term program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member is right; 

tripartites are being discontinued for most commodities.  As the 

member knows, we're out of tripartite for beef, moving out for 

hogs and honey and sheep and others.  That was not necessarily 

a Saskatchewan decision.  In fact in the beef tripartite, we voted 

against the winding down that program but lost the vote 

because of the amending formula which says that six provinces 

and the federal government are needed to change or eliminate 

the program, and hence we are out of it. 

 

Saskatchewan is working very hard to come up with new safety 

nets to replace those with, and we hope to have some of those 

in place by the end of '94.  And the federal government has 

assured us that this is possible, and we continue to work very 

hard to replace those programs that are being eliminated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What kind of 

an interim program, though, are you looking at before a 

permanent program would come into play? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons 

for winding down the tripartite program was the trade problems 

that they presented.  Many of the cattle producers wanted out of 

tripartite programs because of the potential countervail from 

the Americans.  And we already have a countervail on the hogs 

so any interim program really only makes that problem worse. 

 

We are trying to put some money into a beef development fund 

and possibly in some other commodities having development 

funds to help the industry.  But until we get a whole-farm 

program, and one that is trade-neutral, an interim program 

winding down -- a program because it's countervailable -- and 

then introducing a program that is more countervailable is not 

logical. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  While 

you may not have agreed with the discontinuation of the 

program, it did happen, and it had an impact on agricultural 

producers in this province.  While at the same time, your 

government -- of which you are one of the cabinet members, sit 

around the cabinet table -- have authorized increases in utility 

rates which have had a major impact on meat producers in this 

province, particularly those in an area of high-intensity . . . well 

hog operations but also in the feather industries where they 

have a high cost of heating, a high cost of electricity. 

 

And that has had a very major impact on the viabilities of those 

industries.  Mr. Minister, what are you doing, or what have you 

done, to try and lessen the impacts of those increased utility 

rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, in the 

supply-managed industries, which are some of the 

intensive operations, those things are built into the 

cost-of-production factor, which will help those particular 

farmers.  Certainly energy rates are somewhat subsidized for 

our farmers in this province.  We cross-subsidize and we're 

able to do that because we have Crown corporations that can 

make those decisions. 

 

But certainly there are some concerns for farmers with utility 

rates and that's the reason we need to develop new safety nets 

that will help farmers get through tough times; although the 

livestock industry is not now in as tough a situation as the grain 

industry is. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The cattle 

industry is doing fairly well but as I talk to the hog producers 

they always seem to have a complaint that they're not receiving 

enough for their commodity, and they in particular are affected 

by the increases to the natural gas rates.  And perhaps I should 

be directing these questions to the minister for Energy when it 

comes to this particular issue but it's a direct impact on 

agriculture, Mr. Minister.  And I would encourage you to talk 

to the Minister of Energy to try and decrease the costs that are 

directly affecting agricultural producers and the hog producers 

of this province. 

 

You state that the market board industries, the feather 

industries, are protected because that's computed as part of their 

cost and what they receive for their product would go up 

correspondingly.  But for the hog industry that doesn't happen. 

 

You mentioned that the Americans apply countervail against 

our hogs as they go across the border because of such things as 

tripartite.  But I would suggest that if they were receiving a 

lower cost of energy that that would not be directly attributable 

as a subsidy to that industry if all farmers were to receive that 

across the board. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think it's very important that whatever can 

be done to lessen the utility costs to farmers should be 

encouraged and should happen.  Now perhaps you will have to 

twist the Minister of Energy's tail at the cabinet table to get him 

to give this some consideration but I would certainly encourage 

you to do so. 

 

You say that an interim measure would not be appropriate 

because of the possibilities of countervail against the red meat 

industry if some sort of a safety net program was put in place.  

What are you looking at then for a long-term solution to the 

problems that the red meat industry faces that would not be 

subject to countervail? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in regards to 

the natural gas, the member will well know that natural gas 

prices at the wellhead, where SaskEnergy purchases, went up 

something like 40 per cent and we only passed on a small 

portion of that to all of our natural gas consumers; so certainly 

the Minister of Energy and Mines has done his share to help 

mitigate the problem. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2555 

As regards to the safety nets, in order to be 

non-countervailable, one solution is to have it whole farm.  

And as the member pointed out, if it applies to all farmers 

across the piece then it would not be countervailable and it 

certainly . . . under the new GATT rules I'm not sure that 

anybody knows the exact answers as to how to design 

programs that won't be countervailable.  But certainly there are 

ways to do that that can prevent countervail and that's what 

we're looking at. 

 

(2245) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The problems 

of trade are not just a problem of north-south.  It's also a 

significant problem going east and west.  My constituency 

borders with Manitoba and I may have brought this up to you 

last year, but the situation hasn't changed. 

 

I have a butcher at Gainsborough who receives meat from 

Winnipeg.  The actual animals come from Moose Jaw, go to 

Winnipeg, are slaughtered or processed . . . they may be 

slaughtered in Moose Jaw and processed in Winnipeg, come 

back into his store, his butcher shop in Gainsborough.  He has 

contracts that he could supply into institutions in Manitoba but 

because his butcher shop is not federally inspected, he can't 

ship across the border.  I mean his neighbours . . . he's two 

miles from the Manitoba border and he can't supply meat that 

comes from Winnipeg in Manitoba back to Manitoba.  Mr. 

Minister, what are you doing about these kind of situations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

rightfully points a very serious problem and I think he is also 

right in that it has been ongoing for quite some time, in fact a 

good number of years, as one of the problems that we're 

working on with the federal government to try to iron out 

differences in regulation. 

 

If you are not federally inspected -- the member is right -- you 

cannot ship into other provinces, or out of the country, and it 

becomes a problem.  We have some federally inspected plants, 

and some provincially inspected plants, and it's one of the areas 

of overlap and duplication that we are working on with the 

federal government; and also some other areas of duplication, 

and trade barriers, and so on that we're hoping to make some 

headway on very shortly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Can you give 

us some sort of a time frame that I might pass on to my local 

butcher so that he can look at expanding his business?  He had 

the opportunity to get the contracts into a couple or three co-op 

stores, just across the border, but he couldn't supply it.  What 

kind of a time frame are we looking at here before anything 

will change in this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, there is a 

committee that's working on some of these issues.  They have 

resolved some of the easier ones.  This one, along with some 

other complicated ones, are being 

worked on by a committee and we will be getting a report in 

July, at the Ag ministers meeting, back from this committee 

and hopefully we can make headway on some more of these 

difficult issues. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It may be 

complicated on the grand scale, but for my local butcher and 

the co-op store at Reston, it seems like a fairly simple issue that 

his meat comes from Manitoba and why can't he send it back to 

Manitoba.  To the people that have to deal with this, to them, it 

seems like a fairly simple thing and they just can't understand 

why the bureaucracies can't see it all so that it's a fairly simple 

issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, like tripartite, the cereal grains, oilseed 

safety nets are in a position where they're winding down.  Mr. 

Minister, what do you see in place for interim programs in 

those areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as the 

member knows we are in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program in Saskatchewan for this year.  This will be 

the last crop year for GRIP.  Other provinces certainly will be 

moving out, I think the member rightfully points out, will be 

moving out of GRIP probably very shortly.  And we're working 

again to develop a safety net that will replace not only 

tripartites for beef and hogs and honey and sheep, but also for 

the grain industry, which will also soon not have an adequate 

safety net. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think everybody 

knows that we're moving out of it.  But what are you bringing 

in to replace it?  We have a situation in the north-east that I'm 

sure you're fairly familiar with since a lot of it occurred in your 

own constituency, where the farmers up there suffered a 

devastating loss and yet crop insurance provided minimal 

coverage.  If GRIP had been in place as it was in 1991, there 

would have been some significant funds available to 

compensate those farmers and yet very little has happened to 

this date, because of the changes to GRIP. 

 

Now it may not help the farmers in the north-east, a new 

program coming in, but it will alleviate other problems that will 

develop in the future.  Because Saskatchewan is a fairly diverse 

environment and we have a drought in one area and 30 miles 

up the road we may very well have a flood.  I'm trying to seed 

and I have a flood right now.  So we need programs in place 

that can deal with all of these issues across the province and yet 

the safety nets are disappearing and nothing is coming into 

place.  What can the farmers count on from this government 

this fall, next fall, and on down the road? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this 

government is spending in the neighbourhood of 10 per cent of 

our money into agriculture and farm aid.  So certainly we will 

continue to spend a good chunk of our budget.  But we cannot 

carry agriculture by ourselves.  As the member well knows, this 

is a split jurisdiction between the federal government, that any 

new safety net that's developed will have to be 



2556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

developed in conjunction not only with the federal government 

but with other provinces.  I think all provinces agree that we 

need a national safety net and one that's a level playing-field 

across this country. 

 

I think all provinces agree that the safety net system that we 

have now is not very functional. It has created trade problems, 

or will create trade problems, with the new agreements that 

we've signed; that it's not adequately keeping farmers on the 

land; and it's not the best use of taxpayers' money.  And all 

provinces and the federal government agree that we need new 

safety nets. 

 

Certainly Saskatchewan, I think, is leading the way in 

developing those.  But we cannot unilaterally develop a safety 

net without some consultation and some cooperation with the 

federal government and other provinces as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Indeed 

we can't move unilaterally.  There is a federal component here 

and it needs to be a significant federal component.  But we 

don't hear of this government pushing ahead for those kind of 

programs.  We hear very little from this government on any 

agricultural issue. 

 

Your Agriculture 2000 is nothing.  It provides no information 

and no hope.  The things that it contemplates are already 

happening in agriculture.  Diversification into the livestock 

industry has already been happening for a significant number of 

years.  And so to promote that is fine but to base your pamphlet 

on that provides very little for anyone in agriculture.  And the 

people in agriculture today need to have some hope for the 

future.  And your programs so far have not done it. 

 

Your support for agriculture, where people can see it and hear 

it, haven't provided that hope either.  As far as the majority of 

farmers in rural Saskatchewan, when they stop and think about 

the Saskatchewan government and agriculture, in their minds it 

doesn't exist any longer; that there is very little support for 

agriculture, very little thought from this government directed 

toward the agricultural industries, Mr. Minister.  And that 

needs to change.  If Saskatchewan is going to lead the way in 

pressuring the federal government on some issues, then you 

need to come out and do that, where people can see it's 

happening, that you are doing something and that you are 

getting some results. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have a third issue here dealing with crop 

insurance.  I went to do my crop insurance the other day and 

my agent asked me, what are you seeding?  So I told him.  He 

said, what was seeded there before?  So I told him.  He said, 

well did you know that if you seed wheat on wheat you may 

not receive any crop insurance coverage?  And I said no, I 

didn't realize that. 

 

And he said, well it's on this little letter here.  I said yes, I got 

that letter.  I read the front page of it because it said you have to 

have your crop insurance done by March 

31 or April 30, or whatever the date was -- April 30.  So, like 

most people who are in a hurry and you're reading this while 

you're trying to sit down and eat dinner, or supper, as you're 

rushing back out to the field, I read the first page and it told me 

the date, and I thought that was the important information. 

 

But you flip over on the back side of this letter and it has some 

other information on it, and even that, Mr. Minister, when you 

read it it doesn't clearly say what it means because it was 

written by a bureaucrat.  It doesn't say, if you grow wheat on 

wheat you may not receive any protection.  So, Mr. Minister, 

how many farmers know about the fact that they may not be 

receiving crop insurance coverage even though they've paid the 

premium because in the minds of your department you may 

say, well you didn't follow good husbandry practices; you 

seeded the same commodity twice in a row and the reason you 

have this problem is because of that.  Mr. Minister, it was not 

clear on that letter and I think that it needs to be made clear if 

that is actually going to be the policy. 

 

In this province, wheat is still king.  It's changing, but it's still 

there and there's a good many farmers in this province that 

grow nothing but wheat.  And some of them change and some 

of them don't want to change.  They say, I'm going to be in 

farming for another 10 years and I don't want to learn how to 

grow lentils.  I've grown wheat all my life, and that's what I like 

to grow, and that's what I want to continue to grow.  But your 

program is telling them, even though they've paid their 

premiums, that you might not cover them.  If they do put wheat 

on wheat and pay the premiums, and you decide that they're not 

going to be covered for that, will you reimburse their 

premiums? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, to the . . . Mr. 

Chairman, pardon me, to the first tirade on safety nets -- we are 

not leading the way as others have in this area -- we have 

decided to take a consultative approach, to be constructive.  We 

have consulted very much with producers.  We have a Farm 

Support Review Committee that worked very diligently, actual 

grass roots farmers with dirt under their fingernails who gave a 

report to me. 

 

We are talking constantly with the other provinces.  We've had 

an agreement at the last Ag ministers meeting.  The four 

western ministers signed an agreement as to what principles 

and design that we would like to see in a safety net.  We met 

very diligently with the federal minister and even though we 

have had differences on many occasions, we have taken an 

approach of trying to work out the best solution for our 

producers rather than a lot of rhetoric and high public profile on 

trying to score political points. 

 

As regards to the crop insurance problem, what the letter says 

is: 

 

 In areas experiencing wheat midge infestations, the 

corporation would like to remind wheat producers to take 

appropriate measures to prevent loss.  Producers should be 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2557 

prepared to use proper crop rotations as well as chemical or 

other control measures to minimize damage.  Failure to 

attempt to minimize damage may result in denial of insurance 

liabilities. 

 

And certainly this is nothing new for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance.  We have always insisted that we cover farmers for 

losses which are not within their ability to control. 

 

In areas where there has been wheat midge infestation last year, 

particularly on fields that have suffered wheat midge damage 

last year, if producers seed wheat on those particular fields and 

take no cultural measures like seeding early or using chemical 

spray or some such measures, it's almost certain that they will 

receive significant losses this fall.  And if that's the case, as 

with any other cultural practices where farmers obviously do 

not farm according to accepted practices we reserve the right to 

reduce the coverage that's available. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You may 

be taking a cooperative and consultative approach with farmers, 

and the four provinces, and with the federal government, but as 

of yet you've delivered no results for your consultation or your 

cooperation. 

 

Mr. Minister, on the issue of the wheat midge, I believe in my 

area that Carlyle was classified as a wheat midge area.  Now 

I'm not sure if you blanket how large an area with crop 

insurance based on a wheat midge infestation, but to the best of 

my knowledge, no one within my particular area has had any 

wheat midge. 

 

Now I'm 30 miles from where the report was at Carlyle.  What 

distance, what areas, what measurements do you use to base 

whether or not a person would classify within an area of 

infestation? 

 

(2300) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The criteria would be whether or 

not the farmer is using acceptable farming practices and I 

would suspect that it would only apply to cases where there 

was known damage from wheat midge last year. 

 

So if you had no wheat midge damage, and none of your 

neighbours had wheat midge damage, you could not be 

expected to anticipate large damages this year; and therefore it 

would be a normal sort of loss and would be covered.  It's only 

in cases where it's obvious that there is a problem, and risk, and 

farmers take no steps to prevent it, that we use uninsurable 

causes and not cover the full loss. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So any farmer who did not suffer a 

wheat midge loss last year would be relatively safe then in 

seeding wheat on wheat and that they would not be affected by 

a cut-back in their coverage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, certainly that would 

certainly be the case.  I mean there might be situations where 

the next door neighbour obviously had it, but generally 

thinking if they had no damage last year that . . . there are not 

going to be large numbers of farmers who are going to seed 

wheat on wheat if they know there's going to be damage.  I 

would suspect that it would be a very rare occasion where a 

farmer knowingly goes out and seeds wheat where he knows 

it's going to be seriously damaged, or almost certainly going to 

be seriously damaged, without taking some steps.  Certainly 

some farmers will seed and use chemical treatment or will try 

cultural practices to control it.  And if that's the case and 

damage still does occur, then it would be covered.  But it's 

strictly a situation of protecting Crop Insurance as we always 

do and restricting it to loses that are caused by things beyond 

the control of the farmers. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, a couple 

of questions relating to a personal call that came in.  How many 

production loans are still out in the province regarding the 

production loan program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- There are a total of 22,179 loans in 

the production loan area. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, how many of those loans are 

recoverable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are 10,508 of 

those loans that are now in arrears.  Certainly most of those will 

be recoverable, but we don't know exactly what proportion will 

not be. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the question that arises comes 

from a constituent in the Fleming area who basically went 

through a mediation process.  Farm Credit called the loan.  

There wasn't a lot of finances available to cover his operating 

expenses plus maintain his loans.  And basically at the end of 

the day he just turned everything back to the banks and Farm 

Credit and he thought ACS (Agriculture Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) had also accepted the fact that he had no way of 

paying off anything.  He basically just walked away from 

everything and let the creditors take over. 

 

However, he's been receiving letters lately from ACS asking 

for the repayment of a $6,600 loan.  And the name of the 

gentleman is Scott Russell, I believe, from Fleming, and he 

asked me to raise this because he's trying to subsist.  He's found 

himself a job with the local RM, but it's just a seasonal job; it's 

not a full-time job. 

 

Where Farm Credit has basically accepted the fact that he can't 

pay the loans, they've taken the land in lieu of that and they've 

written off the debt, and the other creditors have written off the 

debt, it seems ACS is still looking to try and recover the 

production loan which he doesn't have the funds to pay back.  

And he's just wondering what the policy is. 

 

And I'm just wondering, in other situations, what is ACS's 

policy on this?  Is it ACS's policy to continually harass through 

letters to try and recover that funds?  I 



2558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

know lots of people say if you've got a loan you pay it back.  

But if you don't have the funds and everyone else has basically 

said, well there isn't anything there, and you voluntarily walk 

away from that business of farming operation, we're going to 

forgive your debt and just get on with life.  Where's ACS in all 

of this and what's their policy regarding those type of 

operations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would 

certainly take up the individual situation with the member 

opposite at some time if he's interested.  In general, our policy 

normally would be to deal with the individual when the other 

lending institutions have dealt with them on a business basis. 

 

It may have . . . sometimes it arises that people just 

automatically assume that we're not collecting and don't come 

in to see us and then obviously they will continue to get bills.  

But we certainly . . . it would be based on ability to pay and 

security we hold and so on, but we certainly would be prepared 

to look at that individual case. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I have 

forwarded the name to your office and I believe . . . (inaudible) 

. . . is doing some follow-up and I just wanted to make sure that 

we weren't . . . it didn't get lost in the shuffle and maybe we 

wouldn't hear anything. 

 

One other question, Mr. Minister, and that's regarding ACS as 

well.  you're quite well aware of the situation in the Corning 

area with Mr. Pander and the problems over the years of trying 

to recoup some loans and his, I guess you would say, failure to 

move off the property.  ACS basically just tried everything, as 

it would appear, to give him a chance to operate but finally he 

had to move. 

 

I'm wondering . . . the question has arisen: how much money 

has ACS spent to date in legal bills, not only in this situation 

but in other circumstances where they finally had to take action 

against individuals who simply refused to make any amends or 

come up with any type of terms to come to an agreement with 

ACS in repaying their loans, or paying their loans or paying up 

their obligations to try and continue to farm? 

 

If you'd like, you could get that information if you don't have it 

all just in front of you, and certainly compile it and get it to us. 

 

One other question while you're looking at that.  I'd like to 

know what the cost of recovery is in going and foreclosing 

versus the value of the assets recovered.  At the end of the day 

is it costing you more than the value of assets recovered?  

Maybe an option is to look at ways in trying to help people 

continue to maintain some kind of an operation versus sending 

them . . . foreclosing on them and possibly putting them in a 

situation of ending up on the welfare rolls.  That'll cost the 

financial costs that you're incurring, going through all the 

hoops and the legal challenges whether or not there's a benefit 

at all. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly we can try to get 

the breakdown of ACS legal costs.  The case that the member 

refers to was nothing to do with ACS.  That was a lands branch 

lease situation and the legal costs incurred there were incurred 

by the Department of Justice, and not by us.  But the ACS, 

certainly we can get those numbers if we can. 

 

We deal on a case-by-case basis and try to deal on a 

businesslike basis.  I think the member's absolutely right.  In 

many cases ACS is the least secured of the creditors, and we 

have a better chance of getting something if the operation 

continues to survive rather than have it collapse. 

 

But I can certainly get our legal . . . numbers from our legal 

bills and forward those to the member. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, in your estimates under item no. 3 you have ethanol.  

And I notice you have 3.165 million allocated this year for 

spending in that area as compared to 3 million last year.  What 

is that being spent on?  And are you promoting and 

encouraging further ethanol production in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The ethanol expense that we have 

in our budget is the grants that we pay, the subsidies that we 

pay to the ethanol plant at Kerrobert and the one at Lanigan.  

These are two pilot type projects that have a government 

component to them and certainly hoping that we can begin new 

ethanol production without large government subsidies.  And 

these two pilot projects, I think, are leading the way and 

showing people that it can be done.  And there certainly are a 

lot of interest in ethanol, a Weyburn group and others, who are 

very close to being, I think, off the ground without government 

subsidies. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is the money 

going to Poundmaker in Kerrobert, is that a direct subsidy or is 

that a write-off of some of the taxes that they would normally 

pay on that type of fuel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is a direct subsidy on a per 

litre of ethanol produced. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 

certainly encourage the government to aid and assist and 

encourage others to get into the ethanol industry because I 

think it's certainly an area which we can utilize some of our 

excess grain production, our lower quality grains. 

 

Under item no. 4, land and regulatory management, I notice 

losses on sale of land.  Can you explain why the estimate last 

year was $600,000, and the estimate this year is again 

$600,000, and what did the actual numbers turn out to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, the number that shows up 

there as the loss on land is because of the accrual accounting 

system we've gone to.  If the government sells land, such as 

former land bank land, that we sell for less than we originally 

pay for it, it shows as a loss in our budget. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2559 

We don't have the exact number here.  I can get it for you.  I'm 

told it's in the neighbourhood of 400,000 rather than the 6 that 

was estimated, the actual number for last year.  I can get that 

number for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes if you would please supply that for 

us, Mr. Minister.  The next item on that list is land revenue, bad 

debt allowances, and 1.8 million.  And this again the same 

number as utilized last year, so based on your accrual 

accounting, you're carrying it forward.  What is that item for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That simply is leases or lease fees 

that we have to write off that we're unable to collect, situations 

like the case that your colleague mentioned earlier, where 

people are unable to pay their rent, and we have to write it off. 

 

(2315) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  This 1.8 

million, is it a reoccurring annual loss -- so it's 1.8 million 

every year -- or is this accumulated loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This is the annual estimated loss.  

We look at the accounts each year and set an estimate, and we 

just set the two years' estimate identical.  But it is an ongoing 

annual cost that we estimate each year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If when you're 

supplying the numbers for the losses for land sales, could you 

provide also the actual losses for land revenue bad debt 

allowance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes we can. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, a 

question that comes to mind . . . and I spent a good couple 

hours in a home one day of a land bank tenant.  Needless to say 

the general feeling was that this individual has had this land, I 

believe 22 years.  He's been making payments, and basically 

the payments they've made over the 22 years roughly put the 

value they put into that land double what the original price was.  

Of course his argument to me was that now it's time it should 

be turned over to him because he's basically paid two times the 

equivalent price of the land. 

 

I'm not sure exactly how you argue because I don't necessarily 

agree with that type of principle, but I'm wondering, Mr. 

Minister, what your policy is, whether the department is 

making any of this land available for sale, if people request it, 

if you've got a policy on that, and what your viewpoints are 

regarding land that people have come to the point of saying 

they've put so much in maybe it should be just . . . the title 

should be handed to them already.  Nobody else really gets that 

opportunity, but I'd like to know where you stand on 

that issue, and whether or not you've got a policy as far as 

trying to move some of this land out for the private and get it 

off of your shoulders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we do have a sales 

policy for land.  Anybody who is leasing land can apply to 

purchase it.  We would appraise it within the department or 

alternatively allow them to have an independent appraiser 

appraise the land and sell it to them on a cash basis. 

 

As to whether or not we should turn over the land, I guess I 

could point out that our rent is less than commercial rent in 

almost all cases that I can think of, so while these people get 

the land for less than commercial rent, they're not making 

payments on the land.  They're renting land as they would from 

any other landlord and certainly with the tough times on the 

farm we would like to be able to turn some of this land over but 

I'm not sure that would be fair to the taxpayers. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Item 5 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, since we're dealing with policy and planning on this 

particular area, I think there's some issues in the news right 

now that would deal in that area.  And I read the headline from 

today's copy of Agriline: Mexican trade officials may launch 

anti-dumping legislation.  This is a carry-on of the arguments 

with the U.S. that also deals with Argentina and Brazil.  What 

effort is the government doing to counteract this kind of 

attempt to stop us from selling our products around the world? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I think this rises from the 

American protest.  Certainly their allegations are groundless.  

We're not subsidizing wheat to a greater extent than the 

Americans are.  They've attempted to bring in other countries 

around the world as allies. 

 

I discussed this issue as recently as Friday with Mr. Goodale.  I 

think there may be some things we can do in terms of public 

relations.  There is a meeting of western governors and 

Mexican and western premiers coming up, and we may want to 

have some representation at that meeting to make our case.  

Certainly in Saskatchewan I think we'll do what we can to try 

to educate and to defend in the world what we're doing.  I think 

it's not us who has to defend; I think it's the Americans who 

should be defending but they seem to have us on the defensive 

on this particular issue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, when the items keep 

coming up that we are subsidizing and therefore should be 

eliminated from the market, it's our grain that is being 

condemned or an attempt made to prevent our grain from 

entering in the markets, I think we have to defend our positions 

and do so in a very forthright and forceful manner.  And I 

would encourage you to do it in exactly that manner with the 

federal minister and with those other jurisdictions that 



2560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

may be involved -- and seek allies amongst the other provinces 

to carry forward with that. 

 

The second item of interest in this particular Agriline reads, 

Sask Pool is making contingency plans.  The potential for a 

strike there still looms, Mr. Minister.  It seems to be moving 

forward, closer and closer every day to a strike actually 

happening.  Hopefully it won't, but that doesn't seem to be the 

circumstances.  What kind of contingency plans is the 

government putting into place if that does indeed happen, if a 

strike occurs in the major grain collection system that we have 

in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly I've 

written letters to both the union and to Sask Wheat Pool 

outlining our grave concern.  We certainly do not need another 

work stoppage in grain movement this year.  We've had a bad 

year as it is and so we've certainly made that quite clear.  I 

think the government and the Minister of Labour and Minister 

of Economic Development have offered our assistance in 

helping in whatever way we can to mediate the dispute. 

 

As the member knows, again this is federal jurisdiction that 

comes under federal labour law, the whole grain handling 

system.  And so we've also written letters to the federal 

ministers, several federal ministers, to attempt to be sure they 

understand the gravity of the situation should grain movement 

cease in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Has the 

government offered its support to the federal government if it 

has to move and take some action to ensure that grain continues 

to move in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we haven't told them 

how they should carry out their responsibility, but we certainly 

have made it very clear that we want to keep the grain moving, 

and they should take whatever action is absolutely necessary to 

keep it moving. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let me put it to you 

straight.  Will you support back-to-work legislation if that's 

what it takes to keep the grain moving? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly we would like to see 

a collective bargaining solution to the problem.  And if 

sometime in the future something else seems to be what's 

required, we will certainly look at that position.  But we 

certainly do not want to take sides in this dispute.  We do not 

want to make the issue worse by appearing to take sides in it, 

but we certainly do believe that the grain has to keep moving. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Items 6 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 11 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, regarding Crop 

Insurance, it was two or three years ago or four years ago the 

big game depredation was put under the crop insurance 

program.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is that program still up 

and running?  Where does it sit?  Is there spot-loss damage 

available for big game depredation and what's the policy to 

date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The compensation part of the 

program was moved out of Sask Crop Insurance.  We decided 

to go to a program of prevention where we were getting a better 

bang for our limited dollars.  This fall with the disaster -- crop 

left out, particularly in the north-east -- we were able to 

convince the federal government to come in with us for half a 

million dollars each so that we have a million dollars that we 

will be paying out shortly for damage to crops that were left out 

last winter. 

 

And we're still working.  There's a committee that's reporting 

back.  I think there was a final report on wildlife compensation 

and we'll see what flows from that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So what you're 

saying, Mr. Minister, we really don't have a big game 

depredation program in place at this time that addresses the 

concerns of individuals that face it on an ongoing basis. 

 

And I guess if you just look at crop insurance, certainly the 

concern with crop insurance was the fact that you'd have a loss 

of maybe two or three acres here and four or five acres there, 

but in the overall scheme in a crop, it wasn't enough to 

basically affect it.  But it's certainly an economic loss when 

you're looking at . . . depending on the type of crop you're 

growing. 

 

And the concern we have out there in talking even to our local 

wildlife people, I think a number of people are beginning to 

realize that if we're . . . the wildlife associations want to be 

protecting wildlife.  Maybe they need to be looking at and 

offering some alternatives to how we address the problem of 

big game depredation damage. 

 

I think for the sake of individuals who are affected on an 

ongoing basis, we should be looking at something, and maybe 

through your department as well,  whether we discuss it with 

Environment and forest management and/or the wildlife 

associations, how we address this ongoing problem, a problem 

I would suggest that the department take and come up with 

some ideas and put their heads together, you and your 

colleagues, and we'd certainly be willing to offer some ideas as 

well along that line to address the issue and I would encourage 

you to do that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly it's an issue of concern to 

us as well as to the members opposite.  One of the problems is 

a shortage of dollars and we were getting better prevention . . . 

better bang for our buck with prevention, but certainly as I say 

the committee has been ongoing, we've had good cooperation 

from SARM and from the wildlife federation and other 

stakeholders and so hopefully we can work together to solve 

the problem. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2561 

Item 11 agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Item 3 

 

The Chair: -- Advances to the Saskatchewan crop insurance 

fund pursuant to The Crop Insurance Act.  There is no estimate.  

Are there any questions?  No questions. 

 

Advances pursuant to The Agricultural Safety Net Act for the 

purpose of the Gross Revenue Insurance Program Agreement.  

There is no estimate.  Are there any questions?  No questions. 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

 D 

Supplementary Estimates 1993-94 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 1 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1993-94 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 146 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 146 agreed to. 

 

(2330) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'd like 

to take a moment to thank the minister and his officials for 

giving us of their time tonight to address a number of questions 

-- and not only this evening but on other occasions when we've 

had the opportunity of being able to quiz the minister regarding 

the spending in his departments.  We appreciate the time 

they've given.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also like to 

thank my officials for the time they've given up and the 

sacrifice of missing a good hockey game to be here tonight.  

And thank the members opposite also for their dedication of 

also missing a hockey game and being here.  Thank you. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the minister, and 

welcome to your official tonight.  Mr. Minister, just a couple of 

questions. 

 

Number one, regarding economic development throughout the 

province, certainly over the past number of years a number of 

individuals have come up with ideas and tried to put their ideas 

into practice.  They've been looking for ways and means of 

accessing any avenues of funding that may come from 

government or just information that would help them in 

developing and designing their business program.  And over 

the past number of years, there have been rural economic 

development corporations sitting around the province that have 

been available to sit down with people, look over their ideas, 

try and put them together, try and put a business plan together.  

Are these corporations still in existence and what type of work 

have they been able to accomplish in the past year regarding 

new businesses opening up across the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, the RDCs (rural development 

corporation) are still in place and will continue to be in place as 

long as the local communities are supportive of them. 

 

In addition to that, you mentioned the regional economic 

development authorities.  I believe we now have four up and 

running in different regions of the province and it looks like by 

the end of the full cycle, when all of them have completed their 

work, we'll probably have between 25 and 30 REDAs (regional 

economic development authority) in the province.  There are a 

number that are very close to being announced, and will be 

announced over the next few months.  We've established a 

1-800 number which sort of opens up the single-window 

concept into the business advisory role that the department 

plays. 

 

As well, you'll know that during this session we have 

established the Trade Development Corporation, the Tourism 

Authority, which will work with tourism people jointly with the 

government; and as well, you'll know that the Sask 

Opportunities Corporation has now been officially established 

and will come into place about July 1.  So there's a myriad of 

operations that are open to business people in the province. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, another question that continually 

arises, and I go back to a Leader-Post . . . I believe it was in 

the Leader-Post about a week or so ago, regarding the 

Saskatchewan government growth fund, and the indication that, 

if I'm not mistaken, I may be out a few numbers, but it seems to 

me there was, the article indicated there was roughly I think 

around $65 million that has now been distributed or put into 

business enterprises in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

forget if they gave a number as to the amount of money 

available. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us an idea of 

how much money has been in the program to date, the money 

that's been made available to 



2562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

businesses, what type of businesses have been helped by the 

government growth fund?  And what format that individuals 

would use in approaching the government growth fund to 

possibly access some of the funds that may be available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What you have to remember with 

the Saskatchewan government growth fund, that this in fact is 

private sector money through the federal program whereby 

people can buy their immigration papers to Canada.  And the 

growth fund is one of many growth funds.  The Saskatchewan 

government growth fund is one of many programs in the 

province that carries out this function. 

 

Within that program at the present time there's about $105 

million, the majority of which has now been placed. I think 

there would probably be . . . I can get you the exact numbers, 

but probably about 15 million of that still to be invested.  And 

it's invested in such things as Flexi-Coil, which was one of the 

first endeavours undertaken by your government.  And more 

recently an expansion at Canamino in Saskatoon.  And so it 

looks as well at the six clusters that we've identified as being 

fast-growth areas in the economy of Saskatchewan.  And so the 

immigration funds in the province of Saskatchewan as a means 

of calculating by per capita, we probably have one of the 

strongest immigrant investor fund investments of any province 

in Canada. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you 

indicated that there are a number of dollars that have been 

made available and are out working.  It seems to me that most 

of the money has been invested basically in large-scale 

projects.  And I'm wondering if there's any guidelines in place 

that would suggest or at least allow or request some aid that 

would ask the growth fund to even look at smaller projects and 

investing in smaller amounts. 

 

Because it seems to me that unless you've got a grandiose 

program to invest in, if all you're looking for is maybe 2 to 3 or 

$500,000, basically you really don't stand a chance of even 

accessing any of those funds from what I gather from your 

comment there.  And I'm wondering if the government growth 

fund itself has some limitations to it or whether it's just you're 

telling us it's outside of government; it's a private investor type 

of program.  They are specifically just looking . . . from your 

information, are they just looking for large projects or do 

smaller opportunities have the ability to access some of the 

funds? 

 

And if they do, Mr. Minister, what's the process and who would 

they contact to possibly make a request and determine whether 

or not their project would be a feasible project for the growth 

fund to look into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well there are some smaller projects 

that are invested in by the growth fund or by other immigrant 

investor funds for that matter.  But you're right in saying that 

these are not government-administered programs. Although it's 

called the Saskatchewan government growth fund it really is 

arm's length and there's no direct relationship 

either management-wise or otherwise from the government to 

the fund. 

 

But one of the, I guess, more local projects would be Wapos in 

Swift Current, the rabbit processing plant, where a couple of 

hundred million dollars was invested through the . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . pardon?  Yes, by Saskatchewan government 

growth fund, so these are the kind of numbers.  I don't think 

that there are many below 100,000 that are given simply 

because the administration costs are relatively high, and the 

growth fund's management simply have decided that those are 

sort of the bottom limitations of where they will get involved. 

 

If you're looking at where smaller companies might come, if 

they're looking at small manufacturing, small processing, Sask 

Opportunities Corporation of course fills in part of that gap.  

And then the very small ones, of course, the SBLAs (small 

business loans association) or the small business loans program 

sort of fill in the bottom end, the 5 to $10,000. 

 

So when you look at the area where monies are made available 

-- the regular lending institutions, the credit unions, SBLAs, 

then the Sask Opportunities Corporation and then all of the 

immigrant investor funds and some of the other investment 

tools -- we are not finding in Saskatchewan that good projects 

are lacking in funding.  In fact we're continually scrambling to 

find good projects. 

 

There are many projects that go unfunded of course in any 

province or any jurisdiction, but when it comes to good, solid, 

hard projects that have a good bottom line, there aren't very 

many that I know of, if any, where it's a lack of funding that 

keeps them from going ahead at the present time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one quick question.  What's the 

process or who would a person contact regarding the 

government growth fund to see whether or not they would fit 

the criteria that the growth fund has established for some 

funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Right now the easiest way would be 

to call directly to the Department of Economic Development or 

the 1-800 number.  This would give you the entry into the 

system, and then you'd be streamed off to the Saskatchewan 

government growth fund. 

 

The way the system works, we actually have the Saskatchewan 

growth fund itself, which deal directly, and then four agents 

that deal on behalf of the growth fund.  And any one of those 

agents would be able to bring your application or your needs 

assessment into the system to be looked at and 

recommendations then would go forward.  And your program 

would be reviewed, and in relatively short order, although 

there's always need for a fair bit of due diligence. 

 

And one of the things that I always advise people if I'm talking 

to them is they should be prepared for a rigorous examination 

of their project.  They shouldn't come in on the back of a 

cigarette package and say, I 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2563 

have a wonderful idea, and I need a million dollars, and here's 

my analysis of how I'm going to pay back the money.  It really 

is a relatively sophisticated process; that you have to come in 

with your business plan, cash flow projections, a strong history 

of where your company has been and where you're planning to 

go.  And it takes some months rather than some days to go 

through this process.  And so people should not be disconcerted 

by the fact that if the money isn't in their hands within a week 

or 10 days, that somehow the process is working too slow. 

 

With many risk operations, where there's an element of risk or 

where there's a new application, this is going to take some time.  

It's not like a banking institution where you've banked for 10 or 

15 years on your farm, and you go in for a loan in the spring, 

and you've done this for 5 or 10 years. This can happen 

relatively quickly.  But if you're a company that's coming for 

the first time, this will take some weeks and months to go 

through the process.  So people should be ready for that kind of 

a process when they come forward. 

 

(2345) 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Item 4 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I notice there's 

some $7 million expenditure in this next subvote on tourism, 

and I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could give us an idea 

of what that funding is for, where it's going, and what programs 

it's delivering, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the $7 million for tourism 

development in the province will basically go for 

administration.  It goes for funding of some of the local tourism 

authorities.  Some will go into the TV ad campaign.  I guess 

TV isn't probably the best one; we do a lot of direct mailing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Any Get Smart? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, we don't do any of the Get 

Smart advertising any more.  The vast majority in fact would 

go into print material.  In fact I'm not sure that we're doing any 

TV ads this year, and this comes as a recommendation from the 

private sector. 

 

But as you know, with the establishment of the Tourism 

Authority, on a prorated basis, the vast majority of that money 

will go to the Tourism Authority in a direct grant.  And ours, it 

would probably split about 1 to 6: 1 million staying in the 

department for administration, and a bit of long-term expansion 

within structures, and then the $6 million would actually go to 

the Authority for the help in their administration. 

 

So when the Authority is up and running, if this were next year, 

it would be about a 6:1 ratio if the numbers were still 7 million.  

Now when the Authority kicks in, 

you'll see the balance of that budget being prorated on sort of 

that kind of configuration. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, does TISASK (Tourism Industry 

Association of Saskatchewan) receive any funding under the 

tourism program, and also does this part of the department offer 

any help to communities trying to set up tourism programs or 

tours and packages to promote their community or their area of 

the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We have a bit of money going to 

TISASK for the visitors' information centres as well as a small 

grant for operation of TISASK. 

 

Then there are some grants that flow through the regional 

tourism boards in the various areas for small projects that they 

might be doing. 

 

But these are not big numbers, and we're not talking about a 

tourism board that might want to build a museum or build 

something that would create a great deal of tourism.  These are 

small grants that help with the management of the various 

projects in the areas.  But I say again: these are not large 

numbers when compared to what might be needed to get 

tourism going. 

 

The fact is, is that most people believe that most of the 

investment in tourism will come from the private sector and 

what government should be doing is working with them to help 

with their ad campaigns through the Tourism Authority and 

that kind of thing, but there are some small seed grants that are 

allocated on an annual basis. 

 

Item 4 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I believe that I have the number 

here; it's 1-800-665-3366. 

 

Items 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Item 7 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, to the Minister, this business 

investment programs expenditure of $11 million.  I noticed you 

. . . it talks about administrating programs to increase 

investments in Saskatchewan businesses, including community 

bonds, business immigration and equity investment, partnership 

agreements and communication, technology and rural 

development. 

 

How much money is being made available through community 

bonds this year?  How many groups are coming forward 

requesting community bonds?  And also what I'd like to know 

is the rationale for the other expenditures of funds under this 

part of your department, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just so you keep in mind there's 

about 4 million through the community bonds in terms of 

guarantees which we are required to establish.  This is also the 

area, Mr. Chairman, where AECL's (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) grant comes 



2564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

through.  I think about $6 million would come through that 

portion.  And then there's a package for product development, 

and those would be the three main areas that would be included 

in the $11 million. 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Item 8 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, regarding the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation, I believe this is the corporation 

that's basically taking over for SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation).  Regarding the SEDCO 

portfolios that are still available, will they just be rolled into 

and operated under the Saskatchewan Opportunities program, 

or are you going to try and maintain a separate division?  

SEDCO just continue to operate until it's expenditures are all 

taken care of and brought in and SOC (Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation) Co as we know it today is going to 

begin totally anew.  Is that your intent, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, in a general way that's true.  At 

some point as SEDCO winds down, if there are only a few 

investments left, it may make sense that the performing loan 

portfolio out of SEDCO actually be rolled into Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation.  But at the present time it's expected 

that there'll be a barrier between the two companies in terms of 

both automatic moving of staff . . . There will be no automatic 

moving of staff or loan portfolio so they really will run as two 

entities, one being wound down and one being racked up. 

 

But at some point in the future there may be someone who 

decides that in the best interest of the taxpayers, that rather than 

keeping SEDCO going for an extra year to wind down a few 

remaining portfolios, that it would actually be better to manage 

them through Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation.  But at 

the present time it's the mandate of the two corporations to 

have very different structures and very different mandates. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess that's the 

concern we have in the fact that we're forming a new 

corporation and basically you're having a whole new 

administrative process, and the fact that you have 

administration under a new program plus the old 

administration, and at the end of the day wouldn't it be just as 

simple once you've got . . . SEDCO will no longer be putting 

out any more loans.  Basically it's just a matter of handling the 

portfolios that are already out there and it might seem that those 

portfolios that are there really wouldn't make any difference if 

SOC Co took them over rather than having the two 

administrations, one just to administer old portfolios and 

another one administration to get on with the new life of 

providing loan opportunities or investment opportunities to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  So that's just the point I was really 

getting to, is the rationale as to maintaining the two entities 

when they're basically doing the same thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes.  This debate went on as 

we were setting up Sask Opportunities Corporation because we 

really looked seriously at three options: one, shutting SEDCO 

down and not having any tool for government involvement in 

economic development in terms of lending; we looked at just 

simply keeping SEDCO in place and revamping it and basically 

trying to create a new company out of it; and then we looked at 

the two parallels of winding SEDCO down and setting up Sask 

Opportunities Corporation. 

 

When we consulted with business people it became very clear, 

the vast majority of them, first of all wanted SEDCO wound 

down.  But they also clearly wanted some much smaller, leaner 

operation to continue to do strategic lending, strategic 

syndicating of loans or direct investment. 

 

And so it came, as a result of a lot of consultation with 

business, that there shouldn't be linkages between the two, that 

SEDCO was sadly tarnished and really couldn't be revamped.  

And it was believed that keeping the two separate really would 

give a new and proper life to Sask Opportunities Corporation 

and so that's basically why we've gone that route. 

 

But I say again, at some point there may be someone who may 

make the argument that it would be better rather than 

completing the absolute wind-down . . . although my particular 

view is, is that you should not mix the old and the new. 

 

I say again, people who want a job at Sask Opportunities 

Corporation, if they're interested from SEDCO, will have to go 

through the same process of applying for jobs as anyone else in 

the job market.  And my belief is, is that the two should remain 

separate and apart from one another for that reason. 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Vote 45 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development 

Vote 167 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 167 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, certainly a word of 

appreciation and thanks to the minister and his officials for 

joining us this evening, and discussing and kind of wrapping up 

the discussion and debate we've had over the past number of 

weeks regarding Economic Development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd like to thank the members of the 

opposition and also my staff, Bob Perrin, who came out quickly 

on short notice, and I understand left a very exciting hockey 

game which at 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2565 

 the time was tied 3-3.  And unfortunately Vancouver went on 

to win 4-3.  But thank you very much, Bob, for coming out 

tonight. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12 a.m. 

 


