




















































Hansard: May 24, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2495 

 May 24, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly a group of 18 grade 7 students.  They're from St. 

Augustine School in Regina.  They're accompanied here today 

by their teacher, Cathy Jelinski. 

 

I had a brief visit with them, and I look forward to next year so 

that they can have a longer stay in the legislature.  I would ask 

all members to please join me in extending them a warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the House 

an 8-person working group from Jilin province who are here 

today in your gallery.  They are led by Guo Shaokun, who is 

the deputy minister of foreign affairs office, Jilin province, 

People's Republic of China.  And I'd like him to stand, and I 

would like also others to stand when I have finished my other 

comments. 

 

The Jilin working group arrived on Sunday, Mr. Speaker, and 

they will be visiting various private sectors throughout the 

province.  As well, they will be meeting with government 

officials to discuss the Fifth Plan of Action to be signed in Jilin 

this June. 

 

I have the honour of having dinner with this group from the 

People's Republic of China tonight, and I'm looking forward to 

that.  And I'd like members of the House to join with me in 

extending a warm welcome to our friends from Jilin province 

in the People's Republic of China. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Deputy Premier in welcoming the group from Jilin to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

About 18 months ago I had the opportunity to be in Jilin in 

Ch'ang-ch'eng, and visited many beautiful spots in that part of 

the world.  And I want to say to the visiting delegation, I hope 

that our province -- and I'm sure they will -- treat you with the 

same amount of respect and appreciate your company as much 

as I appreciated the hospitality given to me while I was in Jilin 

visiting with you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have the distinct honour 

today to introduce through you and to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly two representatives of the well-respected 

international 

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, or 

the OECD. 

 

I'm proud to indicate Jennifer Evans and Josette Combes have 

come to Saskatchewan from their home base in Paris, France, 

to study two Saskatchewan projects which they have deemed 

exemplary projects for dealing with children and youth at risk.  

They will visit Princess Alexander School in Saskatoon and the 

West Flats Community in Prince Albert. 

 

I would ask all members to help me welcome these 

international guests to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Child Care Week 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  May 22-27 has 

been proclaimed as Child Care Week in Canada.  This week 

affords child care groups the opportunity to promote awareness 

and the importance of providing quality services. 

 

We are also pleased to acknowledge the dedicated work of 

child care providers. Their work is challenging and so vital to 

our children's future.  Quality child care is a service that must 

be planned and delivered by skilled people who understand and 

are able to respond appropriately to children. 

 

Quality child care ensures that children are able to develop and 

grow in an environment that is healthy and safe.  Even in these 

difficult times, this province is committed to continuing its 

support to child care.  For the third year in a row we are 

providing more child care services for teenage parents 

attending school.  We provided more funding for emergency 

child care and for preschool children at risk. 

 

We are facilitating an aboriginal child care network to enhance 

the delivery of aboriginal child care services.  Through forums, 

workshops, information sharing, and giving peer group support, 

aboriginal child care providers will have greater access to 

culturally appropriate programs and services.  We are 

continuing to work with the provincial association and 

community groups to improve child care services in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Nurturing and caring for children as we guide them through 

their developmental stages is a valuable investment in our 

future.  We thank the many care-givers who are contributing to 

our province's children.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ceylon Students Writing in Golden Taffy Book 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A few weeks ago the 

member from Moose Jaw Palliser mentioned that 

Saskatchewan, with 4 per cent of Saskatchewan's 



2496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

population, has produced a disproportionate number of 

significant Canadian authors.  On a slightly smaller scale, a 

similar large literacy contribution has been made by a small 

school in my constituency. 

 

Recently six students from Ceylon School had their writings 

selected for publication in The Golden Taffy Book.  The 

Golden Taffy Book is published by the Saskatchewan 

Teachers of English Language Arts.  There were 1,119 

submissions by Saskatchewan students from kindergarten to 

grade 12, entries in poetry, short story, essay, and illustration.  

Only 200 were selected for publication -- six from Ceylon 

School, a school of 94 students. 

 

Impressive figures, but not when one considers the creative 

ability of people in the constituency of Bengough-Milestone 

and not when one considers the dedicated ability of teachers 

who inspire our students to exercise their imagination through 

the arts. 

 

I congratulate the teachers and principal of Ceylon School and 

the talented students: Trisha Sorenson, Landon Lillejord, 

Ashley Bousfield, Carla Rowland, Kaela MacCutcheon, and 

Susan Ayotte for their accomplishment and for the honour they 

have brought Ceylon School. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

OECD Visit to Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As we heard a few 

minutes ago, Saskatchewan is honoured to have two guests this 

week representing the Organization for Economic Co-operation 

and Development. 

 

Jennifer Evans and Josette Combes are international experts on 

educational services for children and are here as part of a study 

being conducted by the OECD, an international study on 

service integration for children and youth at risk.  This study is 

phased over a three-year period and covers the preschool, 

school-age, and transition-to-work periods. 

 

OECD experts like our guests will be visiting sites in Europe, 

the Pacific region, and North America.  They will study 

innovative approaches to service integration, synthesize their 

observations, and submit a final report to the member countries.  

In simple terms, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this visit and this 

study is to find more and better ways to keep our kids in school 

and ease the transition from school to work. 

 

Saskatchewan is honoured to have two of the Canadian sites 

selected for study and for the opportunity to discuss our 

provincial policies with the OECD.  We welcome the two 

members.  We thank them for the opportunity to display our 

two innovative projects in education, and we look forward not 

just to the final report but to the beneficial consequences of this 

international study. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join 

others in welcoming our guests from the OECD who are here to 

visit the two sites in Saskatchewan. 

 

Tomorrow they will visit Princess Alexandra School in 

Saskatoon.  This school, Mr. Speaker, is an example of what 

can be done in core areas when school officials, parents, 

community representatives, and government agencies work 

together. 

 

Princess Alexandra is a school challenged by many 

characteristics associated with the urban core.  Because of that, 

it is part of the community schools program.  There are several 

activities designed for the special circumstances of Princess 

Alexandra and schools like it.  Activities that increase 

community involvement, that enhance the learning of children 

and adults, that foster racial and cultural understanding, that 

generally make the school a centre of community activity for 

the whole family as well as a school for the students. 

 

The program, Mr. Speaker, is a working example of our 

commitment to improving the lives of children at risk by 

breaking down the barriers to education.  We are all pleased at 

the international attention our programs are receiving and hope 

they contribute to Saskatchewan's reputation as a leader in 

social programs. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

20th Anniversary of School of First Nations Social Work 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House 

that the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College's school of 

first nations social work is celebrating its 20th anniversary this 

year.  It began in 1974 with 18 students, and since then it has 

produced 480 certificate and degree graduates.  It offers a 

unique opportunity for first nations peoples.  It's guided by the 

spiritual strength and wisdom of elders.  A nurturing cultural 

component is mixed with academic requirements to enable the 

students to receive an emotional and spiritual development as 

well as an academic education. 

 

The program also boasts a very high rate of employment for its 

students upon graduation.  In addition to honouring the recent 

graduates, celebrations in Saskatoon this week will also honour 

the founding elders' contributions by returning alumni, special 

guests, and many academic and political communities who 

have made contributions to the program. 

 

The graduation ceremonies will be held for the most recent 

class this week in Saskatoon.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, we 

should congratulate the SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 

College) and the school of first nations social work, and 

recognize the 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2497 

important and valuable contribution that it's making. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Aboriginal Self-government 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, our 

caucus has been very pleased with the response we have 

received during the past session to our "Mr. Premier I want to 

know . . . " initiative.  The level of response we have received 

has been a tremendous indicator of the spirit of democracy and 

public involvement in this province. 

 

This week we have a special example of how people appreciate 

this opportunity.  We have a series of questions submitted to us 

from a number of residents of the northern community of 

Green Lake who have gotten together to have their concerns 

heard. 

 

Today we would like to present this entire package of questions 

from the constituents of Green Lake.  And the question I have, 

Mr. Speaker, this question comes from a Mr. Kelvin Roy, and 

he asks: can the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Indian 

and Metis Affairs Secretariat define Metis self-government in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the Metis are an aboriginal people, 

so recognized in section 35 of the constitution.  All 

jurisdictions in Canada, Mr. Speaker -- federal, provincial and 

territorial -- have recognized the inherent right of aboriginal 

people to govern themselves; so that the answer to the 

member's question is, so far as Metis are concerned in 

Saskatchewan, they have the inherent right to govern 

themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

comes from Edward Kennedy, Sr..  Does the current 

government see governance of Metis and Indian peoples 

throughout the non-profit Act as self government for Metis and 

aboriginal people?  Further, does this also include 

co-management boards which have no real authoritative 

process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that up until now both the Indian 

and Metis in Saskatchewan have used the non-profit provisions 

of the Saskatchewan legislation in order to structure 

themselves.  This method of structuring has shortcomings 

which are not satisfactory.  From a number of perspectives, and 

in the long run, I believe self-government arrangements are 

going to have to be based on something other than that piece of 

legislation.  In fact I'm certain that that is the case. 

 

So far as co-management is concerned, there is a great deal of 

interest in co-management from a number of sources.  The 

levels of government, provincial and 

federal, are quite pleased with the way in which the process has 

worked so far.  Aboriginal groups are also participating in it 

and are pleased. 

 

A number of problems have arisen, but the federal government 

has become quite enthused about it and in fact the federal 

minister, Ron Irwin, has targeted, or has identified 

Saskatchewan as the lead province in the development of 

co-management arrangements, which are seen as an essential 

part of the move towards self-government. 

 

Funding for Metis 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my "Mr. 

Premier I want to know . . . " question is directed towards the 

Premier's designate.  It comes from Roderick Bishop of Green 

Lake. 

 

On April 29, 1994 the minister responsible for Indian and 

Metis Affairs alluded in the Star-Phoenix that if MSS (Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan) president, Gerald Morin, 

relinquished control of the organization, the organization would 

receive funding. 

 

Could the minister confirm to the Metis people that he did or 

did not issue an ultimatum to the Metis people, in that if the 

organization gets rid of its leaders, they may receive funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have never suggested any such thing, 

Mr. Speaker -- no such thing at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Green Lake Forestry Agreement 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

for the Premier also comes from Rod Bishop.  The question is 

-- our community would like you to answer in the legislature --  

Green Lake is entitled to 30,000 cubic metres of soft wood 

volume allocated to the Green Lake saw mill in the 1988 

FMLA (Forest Management Licence Agreement) agreement 

with NorSask wood products limited.  Why has it taken the past 

three years to negotiate an agreement which has not yet been 

signed with Green Lake? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, this government, 

practically since the day we took office, has been working with 

various people in the Green Lake community and other people 

who are interested in the forest, trying to work out an 

agreement.  Several times we have come to what we thought 

was an agreement, only to have it slip away from us. 

 

Those efforts continue.  As late as last week efforts were being 

made in order to resolve these questions.  So the answer to my 

old pal, Rod Bishop, is that we continue to try to work 

something out.  And if he will approach those discussions in 

the same spirit, we'll be able to arrive at an agreement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Provincial Debt Bank Account 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

comes from Raymond Moskowec of Green Lake.  And his 

question is: why is it that the government is not able to 

establish a debt account in a financial institution where people 

could pay directly towards reducing the provincial debt?  This 

way Saskatchewan people could know where the money is 

going and could receive a tax receipt or an exemption. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you 

very much for that question.  I will discuss with the member 

opposite the details of what's being proposed there. 

 

But what I would say in response to the issue raised, is that's 

the purpose of Saskatchewan savings bonds.  It allows people 

to invest in their province.  It ensures that the money that is 

paid in interest from the Saskatchewan savings bonds remains 

in the province so that the level of economic activity is 

promoted within Saskatchewan, rather than elsewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

next question is to the Minister of Labour.  On Friday, 

Minister, the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce released the 

results of its survey about the effects of your labour legislation.  

The chamber says that these Bills could put as many as 6,000 

people out of work in Saskatoon alone. 

 

Now 6,000 people thrown out of work, Mr. Minister, in a city 

where over 10 per cent of the population are already going to 

the food banks.  That's 6,000 more families that will either have 

to move out of our province, Mr. Minister, or turn to 

unemployment insurance or to welfare, just so that you can 

complete a political agenda. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much evidence do you need that this 

legislation is going to devastate our economy and hurt 

thousands of Saskatchewan people?  Or is it simply that you 

just don't care how many people you hurt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have received nothing more than 

simply the press release on this. 

 

Let me say with respect to many of these so-called surveys, 

they are questions put to people along the following lines:  if 

your worst fears are realized what will be its effect?  Well if 

their worst fears are realized, it'll be pretty bad. 

 

All I say to the members of the Saskatoon business community 

is, your worst fears aren't going to be realized.  This legislation 

will operate in a manner which will be part of an economic 

revival which is already underway. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

continues to say there's, in effect, no evidence that this 

legislation will cost jobs.  Well, Mr. Minister, even someone as 

ideologically blinded as yourself has to see the evidence that is 

coming forward on a daily basis. 

 

Just look at Saturday's Star-Phoenix, Mr. Minister.  One 

headline reads, "Labour laws risk 6,000 jobs in city . . ."  

Another says, "Legislation has . . . firm ready to relocate." 

 

How can you not see what you are doing to the working men 

and people of our province, Minister?  Will you at least 

acknowledge that your labour legislation will cost jobs so that 

we can get on with the work of making the necessary changes 

to ensure that not even one job is in fact lost in the end? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would point out to the member from 

Maple Creek, in case it escaped his attention when he read the 

press release, this was a survey done at the beginning of this 

process, before the amendments were introduced, actually, also 

. . . before the House amendments were introduced.  Also I 

think before the effect of the legislation was very well 

understood. 

 

I would say again to the member opposite, this is the comment 

which is made about every significant reform of labour 

legislation, from the repeal of the child labour laws to the 

amendment in The Trade Union Act in 1972.  The comment is: 

jobs will be lost, this will devastate the economy.  Well none of 

that happened.  It didn't happen with the repeal of the child 

labour laws in the last century; it didn't happen with the 

changes in The Trade Union Act in the early '70s. 

 

I'm not suggesting these people aren't genuinely concerned; I 

think they are.  They are genuinely concerned in part because 

members opposite are doing their level best to ensure that their 

worst fears are what they assume to be the case. 

 

And I simply say to members opposite, when the legislation is 

in effect it will be about as controversial next year as Workers' 

Compensation and Occupational Health and Safety were this 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

tonight in Saskatoon business people will be rallying to voice 

their concerns about your anti-business, anti-employment 

legislation; legislation that could cost up to 6,000 jobs in the 

city of Saskatoon alone.  And what they want to know, very 

simply, Minister: are you going to listen?  Are you going to 

listen to their concerns about the businesses that will be forced 

to lay off workers?  Are you going to listen to their concerns 

about the people you are putting out of work and the families 

that you're going to be hurting? 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2499 

Mr. Minister, will you listen?  Several members of the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) caucus will be attending tonight's 

rally, and they're going to listen to the concerns of the people 

there.  And very simply, Mr. Minister, will you do the same?  

Will you come along; will you be there to listen? 

 

And then after you've listened, will you in fact do something 

positive and act on what you've heard from the people 

themselves and do what they want in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With respect to the event this 

evening, let me say it was made clear that we were . . . that I 

personally was prepared to attend the meeting and prepared to 

discuss the legislation.  That invitation was not acted upon.  I 

assume, in fairness to the organizers of the event, they did not 

want to turn it into a political discussion, which I can see the 

members opposite are anxious to. 

 

So my response to whether or not I will be there -- we made 

known our willingness to attend to answer questions and that 

invitation was not acted upon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Creation of Crown Corporation for Casino Revenue 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  Mr. Minister, the New Democrat legacy is one of 

job creation through the expansion of the bureaucracy.  On 

Thursday, the minister of Gaming dreamt up a new Crown 

corporation and we can only assume that this was yet another 

afterthought on his part, since there is no legislation on the 

agenda to deal with that this session up to this point, and no 

mention of it in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Minister, over what period of time have the discussions of 

forming a new Crown corporation to operate casino gaming 

taken place, and is the creation of a new bureaucracy the only 

option that your government has considered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd be 

pleased to respond to the question.  There are many things that 

happen over the course of the legislature that are not outlined in 

detail in the throne speech.  The throne speech is, historically, 

an overview of government's direction in a session of the 

legislature.  So to answer the member from Greystone's 

question, let me say that accountability with respect to casino 

revenues is one of the prime and the most important aspects, 

we believe, of the development of the casinos. 

 

This Crown corporation, as the member will find out when we 

get into the discussion and the debate on the Bill that will 

establish this corporation,  she will have ample opportunity to 

see that in fact we have thought through very well the revenue 

sharing, and that we 

have thought through the way the funds will be accounted for.  

And certainly we are hopeful that the member from Greystone 

will be in full support of good accounting practices and proper 

procedures with respect to this revenue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you have 

indicated that you have a tentative partnership, but some of the 

partners that you talk about aren't quite sure of the details as of 

yet.  Given that you have now provided the latest twist to this 

in the creation of a new Crown corporation, will you in fact put 

a hold on this whole expansion of casinos until you have 

provided a detailed plan complete with job creation prospects, 

an objective economic impact study and a budget for your 

Crown corporation bureaucracy? 

 

I mean none of these things have been put forward, Mr. 

Minister, and everyone seems to be quite confused by what it is 

you're doing in the province of Saskatchewan.  Would you be 

willing to put that forward, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Greystone that it is no secret that she is confused.  

She has been confused day after day, and you can tell quite 

clearly by the line of questioning that she embarks upon on a 

daily basis. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, what is not confusing is 

government's policy.  And government's policy is that with the 

expansion of the casinos in Saskatoon and Regina we will 

ensure, through the Liquor and Gaming Authority, that there is 

very tight regulation and licensing control through that body.  

We will ensure through the new corporation that there will be a 

proper administration and a proper accounting of the funds that 

come from these casinos. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to answer in brief the member from 

Greystone, we don't expect her to believe or even bother with 

the economic analyses that are done with respect to casinos and 

their operations because she's not interested in that.  But what I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we will have a tightly 

regulated and a well-organized operation with respect to the 

development of the casinos, both in Regina and in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, at 

exactly the same news conference where you gave birth to a 

new Crown corporation, you also announced $1.75 million 

signing bonus to the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations to, and I quote:  cover the costs of developing the 

partnership.  End of quote. 

 

It appears that your new Crown corporation is spending money 

before it's even being created.  Can you explain precisely what 

the $1.75 million is supposed to cover, and whether the 

exhibition association partners as well will receive a similar 



2500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

signing bonus to cover their costs associated with developing 

their side of the partnership? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me take the 

member from Greystone back to the policy and the policy 

announcement that was annunciated in February of this year.  

We indicated to the exhibition associations that because they 

may not be directly involved in the operations of the casinos, 

that we would ensure that their revenue would be maintained 

whole.  And that was a commitment that we gave to them then; 

it's a commitment that I give to them now.  They will be in a 

position to tender through the RFP (request for proposal) 

process on the management of the new casinos or the 

construction, or both if they so desire.  And that is an option 

that's open to them as well.  But the bottom line is that we did 

commit to them to maintain their revenues whole and that 

hasn't changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member opposite, if she has 

forgotten the policy and the development of this policy, I can 

one more time send her a copy of one that's been sent to her 

before.  But if her memory doesn't serve her correctly, I'd be 

more than willing to reacquaint her with the policy that was 

outlined quite clearly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

think what you should be doing is being in contact with the 

various exhibition associations around the province because 

very few of them, sir, have heard from you.  They have no idea 

what role they play as far as a partner with you and the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations).  And they would 

like to know why it is there is being given particular monies, 

for whatever kind of reason they don't understand, up to the 

point of $1.75 million of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan's 

money.  And they do not know, sir, what it is, first of all, you 

are using that for with FSIN, nor do they know the role that 

they are playing in this partnership. 

 

So I think it only stands to reason that what you should be 

doing is putting forward your policy and exactly the role that 

all the partners are going to be playing, and why it is it appears 

one partner is being given remuneration for being in your 

partnership while others are not. 

 

Will you today table what it is the exhibition associations are 

going to get from you?  Because most of them have not heard 

one word from you and they don't know what's going on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Greystone that we have met with the exhibition 

associations in Regina, in Saskatoon, in Swift Current, in 

Prince Albert, North Battleford, Yorkton, and other areas 

throughout this province over the past months. 

 

We have been very clear in terms of what we believe their role 

to be, and that would be that they have the 

ability to tender on management and/or construction of the 

casinos in Regina, as other proponents may.  We have indicated 

to them quite clearly that we would be maintaining for them 

and assisting them to maintain their existing revenue base.  And 

that is quite clear.  We have told them that we would use a 

five-year average in terms of determining just how much 

revenue they generate from their existing casino operations. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Greystone is still 

confused, I'd be more than willing to sit down and explain to 

her in more detail exactly how the conversations have gone.  I 

can send yet another copy across in terms of the consultations 

we've had with exhibitions, with aboriginal groups, with Metis 

groups.  I can send all of that across. 

 

But I would just wish, Mr. Speaker, she would take the time to 

sit down and read the information that we've already sent to 

her. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Human Rights Commission Newsletter 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Speaker, recently all 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) received a little 

brochure entitled "SaskRights", spring edition of the 

"SaskRights" brochure -- a newspaper put out by the Human 

Rights Commission using taxpayers' money. 

 

And as I was glancing through it, Mr. Speaker, I noticed this 

newspaper went to great lengths to promote lesbianism.  Let me 

give you a couple of quotes: 

 

 Try casting doubts in people's minds about your own sexual 

orientation every once in a while.  Make it clear . . . it would 

be no insult to mistake you for a lesbian. 

 

Or: 

 

 Try to make sure . . . there are lesbians and gay men in your 

children's lives. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've indicated in this House on many occasions 

you do not support these type of promotions.  I was wondering 

if you today support the various recommendations given in this 

article and whether you believe taxpayers' money should be 

used to promote homosexuality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I don't think taxpayers' money 

should be used for any purpose related to sexuality.  I mean 

that's a matter of an individual's own choice, own preferences, 

and not something I think should be promoted by anybody. 

 

I'm not familiar with the publication that the member refers to.  

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, he'll send it across to me that I can 

have a look at it. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2501 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and to the 

minister, yes, I'd be more than happy to send this edition to 

you. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Human Rights Commission is there to 

enforce government policy, in particular the Human Rights 

Code.  However in this article they are also taking on the role 

of a taxpayer-funded lobbyist trying to change government 

policy.  And some of the changes they are lobbying for are in 

direct contradiction and open defiance of the statements you 

have made as minister. 

 

In this article people are encouraged to write the Justice 

minister and insist that homosexuals be given the same social 

and employment benefits as heterosexuals.  Mr. Minister, on 

many occasions you have spoken out against social benefits 

like adoption rights and spousal employment of benefits for 

homosexuals.  Yet in the human rights brochure, the taxpayer . 

. . taxpayers' money is being used to promote these forms of 

sexual orientation. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this an appropriate role for the Human Rights 

Commission to be playing?  And if not, what steps do you 

intend to take so the commission understands its role to enforce 

policy, not to lobby for changes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the steps I intend to 

take are the following.  I intend to sit here in my seat until the 

member sends across the publication that he's referring to; the 

second step is that I will read the publication; and the third step 

is I'll decide what action will be appropriate after I've done the 

first two steps. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I'll take a moment 

just to send this publication across to the minister.  Mr. 

Minister, as well, recently the Saskatoon City Council refused 

to proclaim a Lesbian and Gay Pride Day.  The Lesbian and 

Gay Pride Committee of Saskatoon is appealing this decision to 

the Human Rights Commission, as is their right.  But it is also 

the right of the Saskatoon City Council to expect a fair hearing, 

and it's pretty doubtful that they are going to get one given the 

obvious bias your commission has on this issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, don't you think the Human Rights Commission's 

independence and impartiality is compromised when they take 

on the role of a taxpayer-funded lobbyist?  How can the city of 

Saskatoon possibly expect to get a fair hearing on this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I think that the member draws a 

pretty long bow when he suggests that the Human Rights 

Commission is biased.  I don't think it is. 

 And I will read the material that the member has sent to me, 

but I think he draws a pretty long bow in that connection. 

 

Certainly I know all of the members of the commission and I 

don't think that any of them have a bias with respect to any of 

these matters.  People like Donna Greschner and Chief Blaine 

Flavel and Marjorie Hutchinson and people like that are people 

that don't carry around the kind of axes and the kind of biases 

that the member refers to. 

 

So I just don't accept for a moment that the Human Rights 

Commission is not capable of receiving and dealing with the 

complaint such as the member refers to in an entirely unbiased 

manner.  I don't think you can draw a connection between this 

publication and the conclusions that the member comes to as a 

result. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the minister has 

indicated that we're drawing a long bow on this matter.  It 

would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that a newspaper article 

appearing in the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, 

"SaskRights" brochure that has the headline: "Do you know a 

lesbian?" and gives a list of arguments as to why you should 

maybe refer to lesbianism and refer to those acts, is going way 

beyond what the commission should be promoting. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, as I earlier indicated, it just isn't 

right for a taxpayer-funded organization to become a lobbyist 

for an organization that is going to use its arm in whatever way 

possible.  Mr. Minister, will you give us a commitment to look 

into the use of taxpayers' dollars by the Human Rights 

Commission in this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I earlier described the 

three-step process which I think should take place in relation to 

this matter.  The first step has already taken place.  The 

member has sent across the publication to me.  The next step 

will be step number two, which is to say I will read the 

publication. 

 

The third step will be, I will then decide what, if anything, to 

do about it.  Stay tuned to this channel to be updated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Family Fishing Weekend 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say a few words 

about Family Fishing Weekend, set for Saturday and Sunday, 

June 11 and 12; a weekend during which everyone in the 

province can fish without a licence and without charge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Family Fishing Weekend is a cooperative 

program to promote recreational fishing in Saskatchewan.  The 

Family Fishing Weekend focuses on providing opportunities 

for youth to 



2502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

experience recreational fishing, learn about the environment 

and conservation techniques firsthand. 

 

The core of the program rests in the belief that fishing is for 

everyone.  In addition to the emphasis on youth, special 

programs have been incorporated to accommodate adolescents, 

the physically and mentally challenged, and senior citizens. 

 

Last year a record number of celebrations were held throughout 

the province in recognition of the Family Fishing Weekend.  

Across the province many fishing organizations will host free 

fishing days to encourage individuals to enjoy one of 

Saskatchewan's most popular outdoor leisure activities -- 

recreational fishing.  Through fishing derbies, fishing clinics, 

and a variety of other activities, hundreds of youngsters and 

adults are provided with a wonderful fishing and environmental 

experience. 

 

Since 1994 is designated as the International Year of the 

Family, we encourage you to introduce a brother, sister, 

nephew, niece, or another member of your family, to one of our 

most popular outdoor leisure activities -- recreational fishing. 

 

We encourage everyone in the province to plan to participate in 

the Family Fishing Weekend.  June 11 and 12 will be a time to 

celebrate the fun of recreational fishing.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

join with the minister in wishing everybody well on Family 

Fishing day, especially since the minister says that there is no 

charge for the licences, which is kind of a change for this 

government because they put the charge back on to seniors to 

go fishing. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, we have to be a little careful though 

when we go fishing because fishing is . . . you are four times 

more likely to have an accident while fishing than you are 

hunting.  And so I think it is very important, Mr. Speaker, that 

people be very careful when they're out there in the boat or 

along the shore and fishing.  I just wish everybody well, that 

they have fun, and remember to wear your life-jacket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I'd like to table two 

annual reports, one of the Saskatchewan . . . The 1993-94 

annual report of the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 

Commissioner. 

 

And also pursuant to section 222 of The Election Act, a report 

respecting annual fiscal returns of registered political parties 

for the fiscal year 1993. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

Federal Firearms Legislation 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

present a motion to the House dealing with firearms use in this 

province and across Canada.  And the motion reads, which I'll 

move at the end of my speech: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the provincial government and the 

Leader of the Third Party to make every effort to convince 

the federal government to reconsider its impending changes 

to firearms legislation in light of the harmful ramifications 

that these changes would have on Saskatchewan farmers, 

sportsmen, aboriginal people, and other responsible gun 

owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on April 26 during this session, we saw a rare 

show of unanimity in this Assembly, when this Assembly 

passed a resolution affirming the continued enjoyment of 

responsible firearm use in this province. 

 

This amendment was initiated in part by the responsible 

firearms owners of Saskatchewan when they approached all 

three political parties in the House and asked them to bring 

forward an amendment dealing with firearms use that would be 

then sent to the federal parliament and to the federal Liberal 

government to express our concerns about any possible 

changes. 

 

And since that point in time we have received a response from 

the responsible firearms association thanking us -- I'm sure that 

every MLA in the House received it -- thanking us for our 

cooperation and for moving this motion. 

 

I'd like to read one paragraph from a letter that they sent: 

 

 Our members are very concerned with the dispensation of the 

present gun control laws, and it is very heartening to have our 

legislative members working with and for us. 

 

This group is thanking us, Mr. Speaker, for our motion, but 

they still have some concerns -- some concerns as to how some 

of the members of this legislature think on this matter and what 

they're prepared to do on this particular issue. 

 

Further on in the letter, Mr. Speaker, it says -- and this letter 

was sent out to all the members of this association -- and I 

quote: 

 

 There are 66 elected MLAs in the Legislative Assembly.  Of 

these 66, there were 37 who voted in favour of this resolution 

which was a unanimous vote.  Following are MLAs who 

were not in the Assembly and did not vote on this resolution.  

Where were these MLAs?  How would they have voted?  

These people are your elected officials.  They represent your 

concerns to the Government of Saskatchewan.  If you feel 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2503 

you have not been represented in your best interests, write 

your MLA a letter, and find out where they stand on issues 

that affect you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they included a list of the members who did not 

vote in favour of that motion who were not present.  I won't 

read that, Mr. Speaker, but the people . . . the responsible 

firearms association has a concern of where the members that 

did not vote on this particular issue, where they stand on the 

issue and what their point of view is. 

 

Particularly in light of the fact that the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone gets a headline in the paper that says she backs 

tougher gun laws, these people feel that there is indeed a 

concern that needs to be expressed in this legislature and that 

the member from Saskatoon Greystone, the Leader of the Third 

Party, needs to hear what those concerns are, needs to respond 

to them, and clearly state where she stands on that particular 

issue. 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has chosen not to listen to 

what the people have had . . . to our motion that was in the 

Assembly here, and announced at the Liberal Party convention 

that it would bring in tougher firearms legislation this summer.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, somewheres in the background I remember 

hearing similar statements made by the previous administration 

in Ottawa.  And I opposed those changes then and I let the 

members of that parliament know about it.  I spoke out.  And 

for their moves a number of the members of that government -- 

the previous PC government in Ottawa -- lost their seats, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it would be very incumbent on the 

members of the current federal government to pay careful 

attention to what transpired in that particular case. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, the Leader of the Third Party came out 

publicly in support of the federal legislation in spite of her 

party's earlier stand on the resolution before this Assembly.  

And we would ask her to clarify that position today. 

 

The federal legislation, Mr. Speaker, is particularly offensive 

because it is being done deliberately and admittedly for pure 

political reasons.  The federal Liberal Party has made no secret 

that this legislation is meant to embarrass the Reform Party on 

crime control. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, crime is indeed a very serious concern in 

our major cities -- in Vancouver, Toronto, and Montreal.  But, 

Mr. Speaker, bringing in further firearms legislation will not 

impact on that.  It will impact on the legitimate and legal 

owners of firearms, but it will not impact on the criminal use of 

firearms.  Those who wish to use firearms for criminal purpose 

don't come up to the local firearms registrar and say: I would 

like to licence my firearm.  They don't go and take the training.  

They will not turn in any firearms, Mr. Speaker, if the 

government requests that they be registered and turned in or, as 

one of the Liberal  

embers suggested, bringing them into a central location for 

storage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the criminals; they're not going to do it.  But 

who will do that?  It's the legitimate, responsible firearms 

owners on whom this burden will be placed.  And those are not 

the people that need to be questioned, that we need to be 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker, it's the criminal element.  And 

the criminal element can only be dealt with in a manner that is 

very severe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Justice needs to contact his counterpart in 

Ottawa and talk about enforcing the firearms regulations that 

we already have in place.  That's what needs to be done, not 

adding new laws to the books that aren't going to be enforced.  

Enforce the ones that are already there, and enforce them 

whether or not there are juveniles involved.  Everyone needs to 

have these kind of laws enforced and implemented upon, Mr. 

Speaker; acted upon rather than simply adding more and more 

rules to the books -- just simply deal with the ones that are 

already there. 

 

This serious issue of crime in the country can't be reduced, Mr. 

Speaker, simply by a tactical ploy by the federal government.  

Mr. Speaker, to deal with crime it needs to be done in a most . . 

. in a direct and serious manner.  It needs to be dealt with, not 

by as I said earlier, adding simply more piles of rules and 

regulations, but to . . . if a person commits a crime involving a 

firearms -- involving any weapon, not just firearms -- firearms, 

knives, axes, two-by 

_fours . . . We've had a couple of murders in this province the 

couple of years, using two-by-fours.  Out at Kelowna last week 

there was a gentlemen there attacked with an axe. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan most homicides and 

attacks are done with knives; not with firearms, but with 

knives, Mr. Speaker.  And we need to deal with those 

problems; with the social problems; with the problems of 

poverty; with the problem of lack of employment, Mr. Speaker, 

not with firearms. 

 

The government is simply trying to take firearms as a 

scapegoat rather than dealing with the other issues that are 

much more difficult to deal with.  It's very easy to say, Mr. 

Speaker, no one in the country could have firearms.  It's easy to 

say that, and the legitimate and honest people will turn in their 

firearms.  The criminals will keep theirs, but the honest people 

will turn them in. 

 

But will that solve our problem?  No, Mr. Speaker, that'll just 

mean that the criminals are armed and nobody else is.  The 

suggestion has been made -- in fact is on the radio on a political 

forum -- that only the police and the army should have 

firearms.  And this was made by the representative of the New 

Democratic Party -- that only the police and the army should 

have firearms. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if no one has firearms in the country, why 

do the police and the army need them?  Or is it really an 

admission that the criminals will 



2504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

continue to have firearms and that the honest people will not?  

That's what it's an admission of. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who said that? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That was said by Sandra Mitchell on the 

CBC Radio, Mr. Speaker.  That's what she said, the 

representative from the NDP (New Democratic Party) Party.  

That only the police and the military should be allowed to have 

firearms and no one else.  Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

simply admits that the firearms laws will not work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the cities and their problems 

with crime, we have to ask: why are the people in the cities so 

concerned about firearms?  Well, Mr. Speaker, what are their 

access to firearms, what is their knowledge of firearms, have 

they ever had an opportunity to work with a firearm?  And in 

most cases, no. 

 

Their entire concept of a firearm, of a gun . . . which the police 

always term as a weapon because to the police a gun is a 

weapon; they have it strapped to their hip to use in case of 

assault in which they in turn will be assaulting someone else.  

They're a weapon to the police, Mr. Speaker.  But to most 

legitimate owners of guns, they are firearms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in the city, their only connection with 

firearms is what they see on TV.  They see Bonnie and Clyde 

driving down the roads robbing banks, and the police catch 

them and shoot their car so full of holes that it just sort of 

disintegrates like the one horse shay did.  Mr. Speaker, that's 

their only concept of firearms. 

 

But out in rural Saskatchewan, in the North, Mr. Speaker, we 

use firearms on a day-to-day basis as a tool as we would use a 

pair of pliers or a hammer to fix a fence.  Whatever it might be, 

Mr. Speaker, to us it's a tool.  In the city, because people have 

never had access and the opportunity to be around firearms, 

they go by what they see -- which is on TV -- and it is dreadful, 

Mr. Speaker.  If you happen to watch Detroit cable TV all the 

time, you see a lot of bad things on there in their news 

programs -- somebody being killed, somebody being shot. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we see it in this city also.  But it's not being 

shot, it's being knifed and clubbed.  Because the people who 

have firearms in our society, for the most part, are honest and 

straightforward and fair-minded people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You wonder why people in rural areas want firearms.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I was reading in an article just this past weekend 

dealing with travel, airplanes, and a doctor was writing in there 

about the various countries around the world and what you had 

to watch out for disease-wise.  And Canada, Mr. Speaker, is 

rated as having an epidemic of rabies. 

 

And we all know that, Mr. Speaker.  In Saskatchewan, my area 

of the province, south-east corner, we're always being warned 

about rabies.  And rabies, Mr. 

Speaker, is carried mainly by skunks in the area.  A farmer sees 

a skunk running down the road acting strange, he has a firearm 

with him, and he dispatches it.  And it's for the betterment of 

society, Mr. Speaker, that this happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was talking last week with the member from 

Athabasca who said that a bear came into his yard over the 

weekend and looked straight in the window at his wife, who 

was quite frightened because this was a very large bear, Mr. 

Speaker.  And, Mr. Minister, she frightened the bear off with 

the use of a firearm by firing it in the air.  Unfortunately, she 

missed and hit the window-sill also, but she did frighten off the 

bear though, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Firearms are also very important to our entire economy -- the 

tourism industry, outfitting and trapping all play an important 

part of our society, Mr. Speaker, and these are some of the 

issues that the Liberal leader in the House here needs to realize, 

Mr. Speaker, when she says that she backs tougher gun laws.  

Mr. Speaker, she's talking about the livelihood of a good many 

people in this province and across rural and northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of the economy that firearms also deal with are with gun 

shows and sales.  Every community has a gun shop of some 

form or another, every larger community, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

one of the areas where a lot of rural people do take on as a 

sideline as gunsmithing, Mr. Speaker, or as guiding people in 

their areas.  So it is a very, very major . . . has a very major 

impact on the economy of our province. 

 

We also, Mr. Speaker, have watched the Olympics this past 

winter and we saw Sylvie Daigle win the biathalon, two medals 

in the biathalon, Mr. Speaker.  That involved skiing and 

shooting, Mr. Speaker -- skiing and shooting. 

 

So we also win trophies for this, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would invite the Liberal leader to state her views and I would 

invite the provincial government to once again join with us and 

repeat our earlier protest to the federal government against this 

unbalanced approach to the firearms legislation. 

 

I would also invite the third party leader to stand up and state 

her views, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if I have the opportunity now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

read my motion.  And I move: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the provincial government and the 

Leader of the Third Party to make every effort to convince 

the federal government to reconsider its impending changes 

to firearms legislation in light of the harmful ramifications 

that these changes would have on Saskatchewan farmers, 

sportsmen, aboriginal people, and other responsible gun 

owners. 

 

Seconded by the member from Maple Creek. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2505 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

very pleased that the member from Souris-Cannington brought 

forward this motion today to provide me with an opportunity to 

speak to this issue. 

 

The last time that it was before this House, I was meeting with 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses over serious concerns that 

they had with what was transpiring in some of the nursing 

homes in Saskatchewan, and I think that they were quite 

courageous in their move the week following that meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have in fact tried to communicate my views on 

this issue with people throughout Saskatchewan, in fact wrote 

both the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Regina Leader-Post, 

put out a news release.  And interestingly enough my own news 

release was entitled "Gun control must consider provincial 

concerns"; when it appeared in the newspaper it said, 

"Haverstock: gun control must be national in nature." 

 

So I don't know why it is there seems to be this view that 

somehow I'm supposed to have joined the anti-gun lobby, but it 

is not the case, and I am very, very pleased that I was able to 

comment on this this afternoon. 

 

The use of firearms is a different issue for Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, from what it is for those people who live 

in large urban centres across Canada.  And that's not to say that 

it is an issue that should be treated lightly nor does it imply that 

Saskatchewan people do not understand the need for safe, 

controlled use of firearms. 

 

Most of us grew up in our province having ties with 

Saskatchewan agriculture, with the farm.  And in fact I don't 

know how many people would have no memory of having used 

a .22 to go out and shoot gophers, or at least the opportunity of 

being able to feast on wild fowl or venison when a family 

member returned from a hunting trip.  I was making mention to 

the member from Kindersley that when I went off to university 

with my daughter, in fact if it hadn't been for my brother 

providing us with venison, I don't know if we would have had 

much meat to have in those first few years. 

 

Few have any frame of reference for the violence involving 

firearms that is becoming very common in cities like Toronto 

and Montreal.  In fact some people have talked about how 

tragic it is that in some of our centres we now have metal 

detectors in our high schools.  So we don't want to 

underestimate how serious an issue this is for some people in 

Canada. 

 

(1430) 

 

Because the people in our province have always used firearms 

as tools rather than weapons, we've always been safety 

conscious about guns.  And we do understand that we have had 

a different reality.  If we'd gone out to shoot firearms out in the 

countryside, most 

of us who have lived on farms would come home to a home at 

night where we don't even lock the doors.  Our reality for 

safety, our reality of crime, is very different from other places 

in the nation. 

 

And we acknowledge that we are concerned about the 

accidental deaths or the violent crimes involving firearms, but 

they have indeed been very, very minimal in our province of 

Saskatchewan.  Although the number of deaths involving 

firearms has declined significantly in Canada, and I think it was 

in the paper the other day, from 292 incidents in 1975 to 218 in 

1989, our province has had only eight homicides involving 

guns in 1990 and just three in 1991. 

 

I would suggest that that's an incredible record, and in fact one 

that, although we would prefer to have that at zero, there's a lot 

to applaud in our province of Saskatchewan, especially when 

you put that in the context, Mr. Speaker, of 170 deaths 

involving vehicle accidents.  One murder at gunpoint is too 

many, but three gun-related homicides in one year is hardly 

what one would consider an alarming number. 

 

And the trend, of course, is where we want it to be; the trend is 

decreasing rather than increasing.  The current laws are 

sufficient enough to prevent all but most of the random 

incidents of violence.  Problems really appear to be that there 

are very tough laws for illegal sales, illegal possession, and in 

fact improper use of firearms, that are simply not enforced.  

And if they were enforced to their maximum, Mr. Speaker, 

there would not be the kind of proliferation of illegal weapons 

that some of the people in urban centres appear to be so 

concerned about. 

 

I have communicated with the Minister of Justice federally, and 

I will be indeed making sure that I forward today's comments 

for their consideration.  And I want to ensure that law-abiding 

owners of firearms are not further penalized, they are not 

further regulated, until the existing laws against possession of 

illicit weapons and the dangerous use of firearms are fully 

enforced.  Because it's quite obvious, when one reads the 

Criminal Code of Canada, Mr. Speaker, that the laws that exist 

are not enforced for those people who break them.  This would 

be the very best course of action, rather than trying to bring in 

further regulation and further laws. 

 

I believe that we can all agree that the increase in crime and the 

proliferation of illegal weapons are part and parcel of the same 

problem.  Licensed firearm owners, as the member from 

Souris-Cannington pointed out, are not typically the ones to be 

involved in illegal activity.  And therefore making tougher laws 

for them will do little or nothing at all to get to the root of the 

problem. 

 

Justice Minister Rock does have a problem and he's trying to 

solve a perceived fixation with rising crime rates by invoking 

tougher gun control laws, and I really do not believe nor can I 

be convinced that the two are as closely related as many people 

contend.  I contend that we should get tougher on the 

imposition of current laws to ensure that those individuals 

found 



2506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

to be irresponsibly using or illegally possessing firearms are 

dealt with very severely. 

 

And I also contend that we must focus a good deal of attention 

on what is at the root of violent behaviour.  Saskatchewan has a 

far higher incidence of violent attacks with knives rather than 

guns, as has been pointed out.  And what is of great concern to 

me is not limiting access to knives, although there must be far 

tougher enforcement as to where it is appropriate to have a 

knife in one's possession.  I mean carrying a knife while 

hunting or fishing or on a trap line is obviously acceptable; 

tucking one into one's boot when they go into a local bar is not. 

 

We must focus as well on getting to the true root of real 

problems of violent behaviour.  And I think one of the things 

that was most disconcerting to me was some two weekends ago 

a couple in Saskatoon talking about having been pulled out of 

their vehicle, violently beaten up, and two things happening 

that seem to point out that we have a very serious, fundamental 

problem with our society, and that is that first of all, innocent 

people could be attacked like that; and secondly, that people in 

our province who saw that transpiring didn't even come to their 

rescue. 

 

This indeed indicates a frustration, a lack of respect for one 

another.  The fact that no one would come to the aid of these 

people indicates a lack of empathy, and it does demonstrate an 

apathy that is of great concern to me, as we have always been, I 

think, very proud of a province that would stop to help people 

under almost any circumstance. 

 

I support the examination of gun control in our laws as long as 

it is done with respect for the traditional way of life for those 

people who rely on firearms to earn a living, those who rely on 

firearms for protection on farms and in isolated areas, and 

respecting the rights of those who abide by the current laws 

which permit the restricted use of firearms for such things as 

collection, for sports, for competitive purposes.  And I believe 

that all such examination must be done openly and with input 

from all of those affected. 

 

I would not support, Mr. Speaker, changes to gun control laws 

which further penalize those who have a record of safe and 

responsible use of firearms.  I would very much -- 

unequivocally -- support changes that would increase penalties, 

and especially increase enforcement of the laws that are already 

there for the illegal use of firearms or those found guilty of 

using guns for criminal purposes. 

 

I'm very pleased that the member from Souris-Cannington 

brought forward his motion today, and I will ensure that I send 

these remarks to Ottawa.  And hopefully they will be heard in 

the manner in which they are meant and that is to point out the 

uniqueness of Saskatchewan's situation and how important it is 

to the people of this province that their responsible use of 

firearms be recognized.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

enter the debate this afternoon in the motion as put 

forward by the member from Souris-Cannington with respect to 

gun legislation and gun controls. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone has apparently gone to 

great lengths to distance herself from the comments that were 

made about her and her party following the Liberal convention 

in Toronto or Ottawa, wherever it was, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

understanding however, Mr. Speaker -- and I'd appreciate it if 

the member from Greystone at some point would clarify this -- 

but it's my understanding that she supported the increased gun 

control legislation that Mr. Rock is planning on presenting.  At 

least that's my understanding. 

 

And I'd offer an opportunity for her at some point to address 

that issue  because I think people in Saskatchewan are 

confused, Mr. Speaker, about the Liberal leader's views on gun 

control.  It seems that while in Toronto there is one set of gun 

control legislation that she is in support of, and in 

Saskatchewan there is another kind of gun legislation that she's 

in support of, and they are two directly different views, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it is, I think, of great concern to the people who 

are avid sportsmen and sportswomen in this province, and gun 

control is that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that the opportunity be 

given to the Liberal leader to clarify that view.  I don't think 

you did clarify it enough for the people of Saskatchewan, 

because the media reports out of the convention, the Liberal 

convention, were that you were in support of tougher, 

substantially tougher, gun legislation, as is the view of the 

current federal Liberal government, Mr. Speaker.  And as I 

said, it is I think confusing to the people of Saskatchewan that 

there's two standards, Saskatchewan standard and Toronto 

standard, when it comes to this kind of legislation. 

 

In spite of the protests from this Assembly, the Saskatchewan 

Responsible Firearms Owners, and many other concerned 

people across Canada, the federal government has decided to 

push ahead with new restrictions on firearms.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it's in direct result of a number of gun-related 

incidents in major cities that nowhere near have any bearing on 

what's happening in the rural areas in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think the federal Liberal government is trying to embarrass 

the Reform Party of western Canada into playing politics with a 

very serious issue.  In my view, there's no justification for the 

new restrictions that are being talked about.  The restrictions 

brought in by the former prime minister, Kim Campbell, have 

not proven to be effective, Mr. Speaker.  As you know, I was a 

supporter of Kim Campbell in the federal leadership campaign.  

It was one area that I had some difficulty with in her campaign.  

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately she is not the prime minister 

of Canada any longer, and it's the federal Liberal government 

that is now bringing forward these new types of gun control 

legislation. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2507 

The provincial Minister of Justice said in relation to the last 

round of regulation, and I quote: as far as Saskatchewan was 

concerned, it was just a pain and very little accomplished, very 

little of any importance.  End of quote. 

 

The Auditor General of Canada himself contends that no one 

has ever done a serious assessment of firearms legislation to 

see if they're actually accomplishing what they're supposed to.  

The federal government seemed to take it on faith that more 

and more gun control is good. 

 

Current firearms legislation is more than adequate to protect 

public interests of safety.  And as the member from 

Souris-Cannington alluded to earlier, Mr. Speaker, the 

incidence of firearms-related problems are going down in 

Saskatchewan, and that's something that I think everyone is in 

favour of and is proof positive that the legislation in 

Saskatchewan is working. 

 

Even as it stands, the firearms acquisition certificate is an 

offensive document, Mr. Speaker.  We've all heard about the 

notorious question 35 on the firearms acquisition certificate 

which asks: 

 

 During the last two years have you experienced a divorce, 

separation, or relationship breakdown? Have you experienced 

failure in school, loss of job, or bankruptcy? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a real invasion of the privacy of 

people when they're asking these types of questions prior to a 

person having opportunity to gain a firearms acquisition 

certificate.  Mr. Speaker, as Larry Fillo of the Saskatchewan 

Responsible Firearms Owners characterizes this question, and I 

quote: 

 

 We are paying $50 to the police to collect files on the 

academic, financial, and sexual history of every hunter and 

trapper and rancher and farmer and rural resident in Canada 

because they have a crime problem in Toronto and Montreal. 

 

It's absurd when you think about it, Mr. Speaker, and I certainly 

agree with Mr. Fillo on that view.  The key is not more 

legislation but proper enforcement of the already existing laws.  

Firearms legislation is a very narrow view of the crime problem 

because it ignores the serious issues of abuse, poverty, and 

frustration that exist in our society.  A real crime policy would 

address these problems and not find a scapegoat such as the 

gun owners of Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

In the meantime, it is ordinary rural residents and sportsmen of 

this . . . and women of this province who pay the price.  The 

federal legislation seems directly pitting rural area residents 

against urban ones, urban residents.  The new firearms safety 

course was written by a Toronto psychologist who knew 

nothing of the realities of gun use in rural areas and wrote the 

test for someone at an advanced university level. 

 

The fee structures for firearms retailers inordinately 

penalizes small sellers such as local hardware store owners in 

small town Saskatchewan.  It also makes it impossible for 

gunsmiths to make a living or practise their craft since the 

licences to sell a few guns a year are far too steep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government seems to be trying to 

centralize gun sales in the urban areas and starve the rural 

areas, where firearms are used the most responsibly, from 

access to them.  This does not solve crime, it only makes life 

harder for responsible citizens.  It makes life harder for farmers 

and ranchers; it makes life harder for northern residents who 

require guns for protection against wildlife; it makes life harder 

for people who wish or who have to live off the land.  In other 

words, it makes life harder for many honest citizens who can 

least afford it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, none of these points are all new.  All of us in this 

Assembly have debated these very points a few weeks ago and 

then passed, unanimously passed, a resolution, Mr. Speaker.  

As we all know in rural Saskatchewan it is very commonplace 

for people to have a firearm or two or a number of them in their 

home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1445) 

 

I as well have a couple firearms at our home simply used for 

control of varmints, I guess you would call it, Mr. Speaker.  

Skunks, fox, occasionally stray through the yard.  In fact last 

spring I recall one coming through the yard appeared to be in a 

state of some concern to us, Mr. Speaker.  The fox had, oh I 

forget what you call it, mange or something it looked like.  It 

seemed disoriented; gave me reason to believe that that animal 

may have rabies or something like that. 

 

It was at that point that we decided to deal with the animal and 

that was done, Mr. Speaker.  And it was simply out of concern 

for my family and for the pets and animals that are on our farm.  

I think that's the type of action that takes place on a fairly 

regular basis on many farms and ranches in Saskatchewan, all 

across our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we saw, as my colleague from Souris-Cannington points 

out, on the . . . yesterday I believe it was, in Regina there was a 

bear strayed into the city of Regina.  Something that's probably 

almost unheard of.  And it was interesting, I was driving this 

morning, Mr. Speaker, in and I heard how the conservation 

officers dealt with that problem.  And I was interested in 

hearing that because I expected quite likely that they'd have 

been using a tranquilizer pellet on that bear as it strayed into 

the city of Regina. 

 

However, that wasn't the case, Mr. Speaker.  The bear was shot 

and killed this . . . or yesterday, I understand, by a conservation 

officer, and I guess the question is, why?  And the answer the 

media was given by the conservation officer yesterday was 

simply this: that in order for . . . Because the tranquilizer takes 

some time to react -- it's a few minutes, I understand, up to five, 

ten minutes -- there was great concern for the residents of 

Regina during that period that the bear 



2508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

would probably be very agitated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to have the opportunity at this point to enter into the 

debate and to support in principle the intent of the motion of 

the member from Souris-Cannington.  I'd like to make a few 

remarks and then I would like to move an amendment. 

 

I'm pleased as well to have the opportunity to place my position 

on the record because the last time, I believe on April 26, that 

this subject was discussed, I was present for most of the debate 

but wasn't able to be here for the vote.  So I'm pleased to say 

that I do support the spirit of the motion. 

 

And perhaps it seems like a bit of a contradiction since my 

maternal heritage is pacifist in being of the Mennonite 

persuasion.  But also my family were pioneers in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan, and indeed in Canada, and we lived the kind of 

a lifestyle where with trapping, farming, hunting for meat, that 

firearms were a part of our daily living.  And in fact I inherited 

my grandmother's 410 shotgun and have had occasion to 

discharge it many times myself in dispatching magpies, 

starlings, gophers, moles, and mink that were eating my 

chickens. 

 

The member from Kindersley mentioned his encounter with 

foxes and coyotes, and that's probably our most recent 

experience.  And I often wish that people who talk about the 

anti-fur movement and that type of animal rights could have the 

opportunity to observe what mother nature does in cases of 

overpopulation, which is currently what's happening with the 

situation in mange in coyotes and foxes.  And we often have 

had coyotes and foxes in advanced stages of that disease 

become disoriented and come into the yard.  And probably the 

kindest and quickest way to dispatch them is with a single shot. 

 

There are many other valid reasons for owning firearms, not the 

least of which is competition where Canada has had in the 

international competitive field some very outstanding successes 

in international competition. 

 

I guess it's a matter of your experience and your personal 

background.  I suppose a golf club could be considered an 

effective weapon as well, if used in a certain way.  I've never 

been interested in being a golfer, but I certainly do get a lot of 

satisfaction out of target shooting which takes a keen eye and a 

steady hand and I think that is a valid use of firearms. 

 

Of course, in the culture where I came from, where firearms 

were part of the daily life, safety and proper care and handling 

were paramount and the family . . . children growing up that 

were exposed to the presence of firearms for whatever valid 

reasons were always taught to treat every firearm as if it were 

loaded and how to handle it, how to handle it safely -- that was 

very important. 

And it continues in the present day, perhaps even in the urban 

context where people are not exposed at such a tender age, that 

the firearms safety classes and educational opportunities that 

are available have been taken up by many times more than a 

hundred thousand people in this province since their inception 

and they're currently graduating, I understand, about 5,000 

people a year who take formal training in the handling and care 

of firearms. 

 

Another point I think that's important is the current application 

form that is used and it contemplates questions like in your 

personal life and background, like recent failures of 

examinations, recent history of traumatic problems in your 

personal life like divorce and so on, and I think it is foolish to 

bring in regulations or pass laws that we're not prepared to 

pursue; because I'm wondering, if that kind of question is an 

issue on an initial application, then whether there's a 

monitoring of those people who are already in possession of a 

firearms acquisition certificate and a firearm to monitor the 

situation in their lives and see whether those situations occur 

after their acquisition. 

 

So I think that the protocol that's in place right now with 

references and so on that lead up to the acquisition of a firearm 

do not need to be strengthened.  I think what does need to be 

strengthened is the dealing of the justice system with unlawful 

and violent uses for firearms. 

 

I think on the last time that this was debated, I made that day a 

member's statement with respect to the police commission 

report for 1993 in Saskatchewan, where approximately a 

thousand peace officers discharged firearms only 13 times in 

the course of their duties during the year.  Not one person was 

injured in any of those.  The subjects of the incidents were 

usually -- I think in all cases -- animals.  And I think it's 

important that our peace officers are able to set the example 

where they can enforce the law without violence, and it sets an 

example to the rest of us as opposed to the kind of things that 

we see on American television, for example. 

 

I think what's important is to find a balance between the safe 

use of firearms for protection, sport, hunting, and competitions, 

as well as bona fide collectors of firearms, to balance those 

against the unlawful use of firearms in acts of violence. 

 

And it was interesting this morning when I was driving from 

Saskatoon to Regina, I happened to catch a segment of the 

Peter Gzowsky show on the radio where he was interviewing 

the chief of police of the city of Ottawa who was warning 

against knee-jerk reactions to some unfortunate incidents that 

have happened in our major cities involving firearms recently.  

And he was acknowledging that there are valid uses in rural 

Canada and northern Canada, and in sport, and the other areas 

that I have mentioned.  And this was the police chief that was 

saying these things, the chief of a police of one of our major 

cities where there has been an unfortunate violent incident quite 

recently. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2509 

So I would like to say that I think consultations to make sure 

that the diversity of Canadian culture is recognized are very 

important.  Which leads to the amendment that I wish to 

propose, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 to delete all the words after "provincial government" and 

substitute the following words therefor: 

 

 to continue its efforts to convince the federal government to 

thoroughly consult with all provinces before proceeding with 

changes to firearms legislation, and to consider the impact 

that these changes would have on farmers, sportsmen, 

aboriginal people, and other responsible gun owners. 

 

I so move that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure to rise 

and speak again on this very important subject.  We did have a 

very good debate on April 26 and the details of that debate are 

recorded in Hansard. 

 

Since then our Hon. Minister of Justice has met with Hon. 

Allan Rock, the federal Minister of Justice, and conveyed to the 

federal minister the concerns raised by many people in 

Saskatchewan.  And our hon. minister has also written to Mr. 

Rock on April 21, and I would like to just quote part of this 

letter to the federal minister: 

 

 Dear Mr. Rock: 

 

 Your recent comments in the media concerning further gun 

control initiatives in the wake of recent tragic events in 

Ottawa and Toronto have raised some concerns in 

Saskatchewan.  While the Government of Canada has 

legislative authority in this area, it is the provincial Justice 

departments and the police serving under provincial 

jurisdiction who must administer and enforce the programs. 

 

 Considerable difficulties were encountered with the 

implementation of Bill C-17.  Changes to the law as a result 

of Bill C-17 have generated negative public reaction from 

law-abiding people throughout Saskatchewan.  The 

Government of Saskatchewan supports the provision of an 

effective national gun control program.  However, we are 

committed to an approach that balances the need to protect 

the public with the need to avoid unreasonable interference 

with law-abiding shooters, hunters, and gun collectors. 

 

 The problems in urban central Canada have not been as 

evident in largely rural Saskatchewan.  It will be important 

that full consultations take place before we see further 

expansion of the gun control program and that in any changes 

balances the interest of all Canadians. 

Mr. Speaker, since Bill C-17, the province has worked 

cooperatively with sportsmen organizations and other groups in 

continuing to develop a very effective hunter safety education 

program. 

 

More recently, we've involved the group called SAFE, 

Saskatchewan Association of Firearms Education, and we have 

incorporated what was required by Bill C-17, and that is the 

federal laws and handguns sections of the federal legislation are 

being incorporated into the provincial hunter safety education 

program.  And it is through cooperation that we are able to 

achieve this. 

 

It is very interesting that we have a number of other provinces 

from coast to coast contacting Saskatchewan to see how we 

have done this so that they may follow in our footsteps, and 

again work cooperatively with us. 

 

(1500) 

 

Criminal acts involving firearms is a very serious offence and 

just as serious as any other crime and must be dealt with 

accordingly.  Law-abiding citizens who use guns for legitimate 

purposes such as hunting, trapping, farming, competitive 

shooting, and others should not be penalized because of the 

criminal element in society. 

 

The Saskatchewan minister has clearly conveyed to Mr. Rock 

full consultation with all provinces and territories must be 

conducted before any further changes to federal gun control 

legislation be considered.  Also, law-abiding gun owners and 

users should also be consulted widely because this segment of 

society are very knowledgeable about firearms and the use of 

these firearms, and are also very concerned about the criminal 

element of society using firearms.  And they have a lot that can 

. . . these groups have a lot to offer and should be involved in 

any further changes to federal firearm legislation. 

 

Well this government will continue to act in a very responsible 

manner with regards to gun control and looks forward to 

working with all jurisdictions including the federal government 

in designing any future gun control legislation which must take 

into consideration the needs of law-abiding gun owners while 

attempting to control the criminal use of firearms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is for these reasons that I am very pleased to 

second the amendment by the member from Saskatoon River 

Heights.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I want 

to say that I think we will certainly support this amended 

motion because it does say the proper thing.  And I have a copy 

and I've read it. 

 

I was confident that the member from Indian Head-Wolseley 

would not second the motion on this subject -- that would be 

out of order as far as we in opposition are concerned.  Although 

it does disturb 



2510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

me that they feel that they can't go with the things that we're 

doing instead of trying to play that little bit of politics of having 

it their own way and putting their own signature on everything. 

 

And to repeat, Mr. Speaker, the words of the member from 

Humboldt in our previous firearms debate: it's about time that 

some degree of logic was injected into the legislation on 

firearms.  And I think that was a very good statement that the 

member made.  We don't very often find ourselves agreeing 

with the member from Humboldt and so it was refreshing to 

find out that we at least had some common ground at least on 

one subject.  And so thank you, member. 

 

The people in the federal Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, who wish 

to crack down on firearms are largely urban dwellers who do 

not have the full picture of the role of firearms in this country.  

When they talk about storing guns in central depots they show 

that they have absolutely never been on a farm or ranch where 

a gun is needed to constantly to defend livestock against 

predators or pests or for any number of other kinds of things 

that happen in places like rural Saskatchewan. 

 

They have absolutely never walked through the northern woods 

and unexpectedly come across a bear.  Do they think, Mr. 

Speaker, that the bear is just going to freeze and stand there and 

that you can drive to Prince Albert and go to pick up your gun 

and then come back to defend yourself?  I can certainly assure 

you after this past weekend that it doesn't work that way, Mr. 

Speaker, because me and my two sons had the experience of 

bear hunting in northern Saskatchewan this past weekend.  We 

spent the weekend with Brent Mitchell and Pat Bockus, and we 

certainly enjoyed that period of time, and I would hope that 

nothing would happen in gun control legislation that would 

destroy that opportunity for my sons, myself, or for the people 

of this province and for the people of Canada.  It was certainly 

an enjoyable weekend. 

 

And it's so very important to the people that make their living, 

as the member from Kindersley has pointed out, Mr. Speaker . . 

. Federal Justice minister, Allan Rock, said that when he was in 

Saskatchewan that he would take into consideration the needs 

of legislation and responsible firearms use.  The recent 

announcement by the Prime Minister has shown that words of 

the federal officials are empty promises. 

 

A great many areas of Saskatchewan's life stand to be damaged 

by tougher legislation, Mr. Speaker.  Tourism will be damaged.  

The traditional lifestyle of aboriginal people will be damaged; 

the habits, the traditions, and needs of rural residents will be 

encumbered; and furthermore, increased gun legislation will 

continue an attack on the human rights to privacy of 

responsible gun owners. 

 

Why does a farmer who has a shotgun or a .22 for shooting 

skunks need to have a dossier at an RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) headquarters that is more detailed than the 

kind that you might expect for political dissidents in a 

totalitarian state?  Firearms 

legislation has gone so far in this country that the country has 

run out of abusers and criminals to pursue.  In order to keep the 

firearms legislation bogyman going, they have to find more and 

more areas of gun legislation to regulate. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, I think most people in 

Saskatchewan realize that we're already regulated to death in 

this country and we really don't need any more of it, especially 

in the area of gun control. 

 

This situation is clearly absurd and has nothing to do with 

preventing crime.  Most violent crime is done with knives, and 

yet no one proposes that we restrict the access to knives or have 

a steak-knife acquisition certificate.  The absurdity of this 

situation was further underlined by the words of the member 

from Regina North West, who said in this Assembly on April 

26, and I will quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 We have very strict and wide-reaching rules about what 

people can and cannot do in a motor vehicle in order to 

protect public safety. 

 

 In spite of those rules, 170 people were killed in traffic 

accidents in Saskatchewan in 1991.  Some of those accidents 

are simply unpreventable, but many result from a conscious 

decision on the part of (the) motor vehicle operators to break 

the laws set out for their protection.  I suppose we could 

consider the abolition of motor vehicles but would the 

detriments outweigh the benefits? 

 

 Of course the concept of abolishing the rights to own or 

operate motor vehicles is (considered) absurd by virtue of the 

fact that the number of people killed or injured by vehicles is 

minute when one considers the number of trips taken. 

 

That's the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker.  And the member 

from Regina North West went on to note that in spite of the fact 

that 35 per cent of Saskatchewan householders have guns, that 

there were only three deliberate anti-personnel shootings in this 

province in 1991. 

 

There is a great deal of sense to the arguments made by the 

member from Regina North West, and I hope that the member 

will stick to her guns.  If she does not, we can only assume that 

she no longer wishes to speak for the people that elected her, 

but only for her Liberal bosses in Ottawa. 

 

The member correctly pointed out that the main problem with 

firearms is not making new laws, but enforcing the ones that 

we have.  An interesting example of the public misconception 

of this issue was a study done by, or at, Concordia University 

which showed that the majority of students polled thought that 

the gun laws should be tougher; however a majority of students 

also admitted to being unaware of what the current laws were.  

When asked for suggestions for gun legislation, their ideas for 

tougher gun laws were actually looser than the current gun 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2511 

laws that we have. 

 

Gun owners are an easy target for public frustration with crime 

problems in urban areas.  This does not, however, make it good 

government policy to go after this particular group. 

 

The federal government knows well that the causes of crime go 

much deeper than access to weapons.  There are many weapons 

that will always be easy to come by, as was demonstrated 

recently when someone smuggled a crossbow into a dinner 

where the Prime Minister was about to speak. 

 

The federal government is ignoring the real roots of crime -- 

the poverty, the social problems of abuse, alcoholism, drug 

abuse, and gambling -- that lead people to desperate measures.  

Instead they choose to play cheap politics against law-abiding 

citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The provincial Liberals and their leader seem to be content to 

play along with this cynical game.  So much for the new style 

of politics that they were talking about.  The Leader of the 

Third Party should be speaking for the people of Saskatchewan 

to the federal Liberal Party, not parroting the party line to the 

citizens who elected her and her caucus colleagues. 

 

I hope that in spite of the recent statements of the Leader of the 

Third Party, that members of the third party will once again 

support us in this motion, and at least support the amendment, 

if the rest of the Assembly chooses to go that way. 

 

This issue brought a rare consensus in this House on a previous 

occasion and I sincerely hope that we can do that and see that 

happen again.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to join in this debate for a few minutes -- I used to be able to 

see the clock -- for about 5 minutes, till it ends, and put my 

voice alongside others who are supporting a rational method of 

dealing with gun control. 

 

I want to say at the beginning though, I'll have to research and 

read Hansard tomorrow because I think the Leader of the 

Liberal Party came very close to promoting poaching there, 

when she was talking about the venison that she was fed in 

early days.  I'll review that and report back to you later. 

 

The problem we have here, Mr. Speaker, is that, as some 

members said, what we're doing is using gun control as a 

political football -- a very serious issue -- playing political 

games with it.  And I want to illustrate that.  Now the Liberal 

leader says that in this House, well that's not what I said about 

gun control.  What I really mean is this. 

 

But then if you read the press articles that come forward, you'll 

have to question that.  You'll have to question it because . . . the 

front page of the . . . I'm not sure what paper it is, but the 

headline is: tough gun 

laws coming, PM promises Liberals.  And I want to quote from 

this article, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Prime Minister Jean Chrtien strongly backed stricter gun 

control on Sunday, promising a tough new law by fall. 

 

This was at the Liberal convention just the other day. 

 

 "There shouldn't be any more weapons in our streets or in our 

playgrounds," Chrtien told cheering delegates at the end of a 

four-day Liberal (planning) . . . policy convention. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 And Chrtien challenged Reform Leader Preston Manning . . 

. 

 

And there it tells you very clearly that this is a political 

football.  We're trying to gain political points on the backs of 

those honest people who are law-abiding gun owners. 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

 ". . . What Canadians want, and what we must provide, is 

tough action." 

 

And in Saskatchewan I don't think we're calling out loudly for 

tough action, but yet the Prime Minister says what Canadians 

want is tough action. 

 

Then it goes on to say, and here's the point I want to make, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 Earlier, Liberal delegates unanimously approved a resolution 

demanding: 

 

 Severe restrictions on private handgun ownership. 

 

Now let's do that again.  Unanimously approved a resolution.  

And the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan was at this convention.  

Now maybe she was absent at this time, but unanimously 

severely restricting private handgun ownership, and that's the 

thin edge of the wedge on the issue; denying people to have 

guns for targets, for trading, for historical purposes or handing 

it down from generation to generation. 

 

So I ask the people of Saskatchewan to question very closely 

and critically if . . . ask if the Liberal leader in Saskatchewan 

really says what she means.  Because if she was at a convention 

that unanimously supported this, and she comes back to this 

House and says well, no, this is my position, which is different 

than this, then there's some obvious questions that come 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the political problem with this issue is that we're 

seeing government playing central Canada off against the west.  

I understand the Liberals have more votes in central Canada 

and maybe that's the way the world works, but I don't think 

using it as a political football in such a serious issue is the right 



2512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

thing to do as far as the Prime Minister of the country is 

concerned. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, knives control . . . knives 

contribute to more death and injury than guns.  We have to be 

reasonable, rational about it. 

 

One of my colleagues read the letter than our Minister of 

Justice sent to the federal minister.  And that is the type of 

approach that we want to see taken.  We don't want to see the 

Prime Minister challenging the Reform Party to get ahead of 

him on the issue or keep up to him on the issue.  We don't want 

to see the Liberal leader taking one position in Ottawa, another 

position in Saskatchewan.  We need, as the letter from our 

Minister of Justice said, consultation from all provinces, all 

provinces, on this issue. 

 

And the fear that I have, Mr. Speaker, is that if we open up this 

Bill, if we open it up, the conscientious law-abiding gun 

owners will lose.  Because there are a lot of what I would call 

people who are on the fringe, or the wing-nut fringe on the 

issue, who just close their eyes and say, guns kill people so we 

shouldn't have guns.  Cars kill people so maybe we shouldn't 

have cars, if you use that logic.  And in Saskatchewan, I'd say 

knives are far more dangerous than guns. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we've seen many organizations 

come to the fore, organizing rallies to stop the Allan Rocks of 

the world from destroying the common sense approach that's 

being taken to gun owners and gun control.  Common sense 

approach that has included associations, firearm associations, 

collectors, hunters, native people, and others, who come around 

and sit down and talk about the problems that some people 

have with guns, people who like to go around and murder other 

people.  But then how the effect on that . . . the question is 

whether it's a policing problem or whether it's a gun control 

legislation problem. 

 

I think, for the most part, most of us think it's a policing 

problem.  The police have a very tough job to do when it comes 

to handling criminals with guns, there's no doubt about that.  

But is the solution to take away all the guns?  Well I'll tell you, 

you can try to take away all the guns if you want, but I'll 

guarantee you, the criminals will still have guns.  I'll guarantee 

you, you'll still be able to get a gun if you want it.  And that's 

the problem.  So what we should be working on is the 

enforcement of the legislation, as all the fair-minded, 

conscientious people have done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to be able to support the 

amendment, and I think the amendment's important because it 

puts in words what many of us have been saying here.  And I 

would like to support the amendment and the rational 

discussion of gun control legislation.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The total time of 65 minutes . . . no, 

has not quite elapsed.  But we now have, according to our rules, 

up to a 10-minute comment and question period for those who 

participated in the debate -- comments and questions may be 

directed to them.  So we will do that at this particular time.  I'll 

recognize any questioners or those who wish to make 

comments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would direct 

my question to the member from Saskatoon Greystone.  In the 

quote in the paper it says that the Liberal leader says she 

supports tougher laws to prevent gun ownership from 

becoming a way of life in Canada. 

 

Madam Member, since this was what the paper reported and 

you give a different line in the House here today, what exactly 

is your stance?  And if you support the motion that we brought 

forward today, why did you not speak out in the same vein 

when you were at the convention in Ottawa? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to answer your question, Mr. Member. 

 

I did not speak in Ottawa.  I did not speak at the convention on 

this issue, and I was not interviewed about this in Ottawa.  I 

was interviewed about this particular issue upon my return to 

Saskatchewan.  And that interview, as has been acknowledged 

by the individual who interviewed me, did not contain all of the 

information that we had had in what I considered to be a 

substantial discussion, and I appreciated his coming to me and 

being willing to actually have that discussion. 

 

My view on gun control in Saskatchewan has been 

unequivocal.  It has not changed from what I stated today, and 

it is precisely what I sent out last week.  It is precisely what I 

have indicated to anyone who has called and asked my position 

on this issue, and that is that I think Saskatchewan has a very 

specific and unique way of dealing with firearms in our 

province and that people who are legitimate firearms owners, 

whether they be hunters, whether they be people who are in 

competition, whether they be collectors, that they indeed 

should not be punished by stricter gun laws.  All we need to do 

is to ensure that the laws that are already present through the 

Criminal Code of Canada are applied. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask the member from 

Greystone if she was at the debate to its conclusion on the gun 

control issue at their meeting in Ottawa. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I appreciate the 

question from the member from Humboldt.  The answer is no.  

I was unable to attend that.  I was meeting with two different 

ministers at the time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- It was very similar to many of the 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2513 

votes in this House that you miss, Liberal leader. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows he's out of 

order when he makes that kind of a comment. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just 

make a statement further to the discussion.  We in this House 

now have voted twice basically on almost the same resolution 

talking about gun control.  The Minister of Justice from the 

province of Saskatchewan has sent a letter to Mr. Allan Rock 

stating that we have to have long communications put in all 

provinces before we make a decision on future restrictions or 

changes to the Act. 

 

Despite the words of the Leader of the Liberal Party, I would 

challenge her to put her words in writing to the Prime Minister 

and to the Minister of Justice, the federal minister, declaring 

her intentions on the issue and also stating whether or not she 

will follow federal party lines on this issue, which has 

unanimously -- as I read from the newspaper -- unanimously 

voted for severe restrictions on private handguns.  And of 

course that flows over to all other weapons. 

 

So that's the challenge I offer.  And we've done on this side, 

Mr. Speaker . . . the government has taken a clear stand on this.  

And I think because it's such a serious issue and I just . . . it 

bothers me to see the Prime Minister and the Leader of the 

Liberal Party playing political football with a serious issue.  I 

think they should be clearly on the written record. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question 

for the member from Humboldt, and that is I'm curious as to 

why it is he's made the assumption that I have not written the 

Minister of Justice federally on this issue.  And I'm also 

wondering why it is he's under the assumption that Liberals 

must behave like New Democrats, and if in fact there's a 

resolution that comes forward at a convention, that each and 

every person is assumed that they have been in absolute favour 

with that. 

 

We have every intention of being able to stand up for what it is 

that we believe as Saskatchewan Liberals and individual 

members of our party.  So I would like to pose the question 

again: you are under the assumption that there was no letter 

sent by me; I'm wondering where it is you got that assumption. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, as I just finished saying, we've 

been around this issue twice in this House, with the Liberal 

leader present making no statement that she's sent a letter to the 

minister.  So I mean I'm sorry if I assumed that you didn't, but 

you had ample opportunity to declare your position on it, in 

writing, and you didn't. 

 

And also when we're talking about the . . . when I was talking 

about the Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, rally, or the Liberal policy 

session, it said: candidates, Liberal delegates unanimously 

approved.  And I just assumed 

-- yes, I maybe wrongly assumed -- that the Liberal leader went 

down there to attend the convention.  But obviously there again 

she says she wasn't at the vote.  So then I'm still assuming that I 

don't know what the Liberal leader's position is, as I don't know 

what it is on gaming, as I don't know what it is on social 

services, and as I don't know what it is on many, many other 

issues in this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have one more 

question for the member from Humboldt.  Did the member 

from Humboldt, or any member of the government side, make 

any comment at any time on the motion regarding gaming that 

was put forward in this House one week ago? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, would the Liberal leader clarify 

what motion she refers to? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, I will indeed.  The member from 

Humboldt has made mention that there has been no part taken 

by me to make my position clear.  In fact the member from 

Regina North West did speak to the motion on the afternoon 

that gun control was discussed, firearms were discussed in this 

House, and placed on record the view of our caucus. 

 

And indeed, private members' day where there was a full 

discussion by myself on the casino gaming and gaming overall 

in the province of Saskatchewan, not one member of the 

government side chose to even comment on private members' 

day.  And the official opposition in fact were the people who 

carried the ball that day besides ourselves.  There was very, 

very little discussion.  Out of 53 people, I'd like to know how 

many out of 53 members of the government side, put their 

position forward on gaming. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of Gaming 

speaks for the government on the issue.  Mr. Speaker, I'll tell 

you what happened there.  A number of members in the House 

thought we were winding down the session.  And so normally 

at the end of session a lot of times we go from private 

members' business on a Tuesday, which is private members' 

day, to government business. 

 

The official opposition and the government met and didn't even 

put a resolution in because that's sort of what happens in the 

tradition of this House.  But for some reason, despite the fact 

that there has been many times in this legislature that the 

Leader of the Liberal Party chose not to speak on an issue or 

grace . . . no, I can't say that.  Anyway I think you know what 

I'm meaning. 

 

Then she puts forward a motion to filibuster the House.  Why?  

Why does she want to spend the taxpayers' dollar in here when 

basically the session is over?  I don't know why.  But I mean 

you can talk about not making a statement on the issue.  You 

asked many questions on . . . and your advisers, many of them 

who organized casinos in Moose Jaw; yourself, who was big 

into the horse-racing industry, or into the 



2514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

horse-racing industry, I mean that's . . . And then you say you're 

opposed to gambling.  Well you can't have it both ways. 

 

The Speaker: -- This debate is getting wide-ranging.  It's 

certainly not on the topic any longer.  And I wish members in 

the future would direct their comments through the Chair rather 

than to individual members in the House.  Direct them through 

the Chair and I think we can avoid these personal attacks on 

one another. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce a group 

of, it says here 20 grade 9 students from Arcola, but I counted 

them and I can only get 18.  So I'm assuming that there's two of 

them didn't show up today. 

 

We'd like to welcome them here today.  Their teachers are 

Terry Fellner, and chaperon is Terry Johnston.  I'm not sure 

what happened to the bus driver; perhaps one of them is driving 

the bus. 

 

But I'd like to welcome them here today.  I hope they enjoy the 

proceedings, and I hope to get together with them for a few 

minutes.  I'd like to ask the Assembly to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Health Districts Act 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to 

speak on The Health Districts Act.  We believe, the opposition, 

the official opposition in this House, that this is a very 

important piece of legislation, particularly in light of the 

government's inaction in dealing with The Health Districts Act 

and the opportunity to allow people in the province of 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to have a vote on health district 

formation in the province. 

 

As the government has promised right from the very outset, 

Mr. Speaker -- of health boards in this province -- they 

committed to and promised the people of Saskatchewan as a 

carrot to try and get some degree of support for the formations 

of the new health districts, they promised the opportunity for 

people to 

have direct input -- electoral input -- into the formation of these 

districts, and now it's becoming increasingly obvious, Mr. 

Speaker, that that isn't what their plans are at all; that they feel 

that unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan, they feel, don't 

understand the issue and therefore shouldn't be given the 

opportunity to vote at this time, Mr. Speaker, in direct contrast 

to the promises made at the time of the changes in the health 

districts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's time that this government listened to the people of this 

province, and therefore it's time for a Bill like Bill 53 to be 

given the proper hearing that it should have been given earlier 

on and passed in this legislature, and we're hopeful, Mr. 

Speaker, that this afternoon that that will indeed happen. 

 

Rural and urban people are demanding health board elections 

be held this fall.  Health board elections are backed by the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Mr. Speaker, are just a few to 

mention of people who are supportive of health board elections 

being held this fall. 

 

And just a few short weeks ago, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) issued a joint release on 

this matter, Mr. Speaker, and at that time they were 

unequivocal in their support for health board elections this fall.  

Sinclair Harrison, the SARM president stated at that time, and I 

quote: 

 

 Elected district health boards were promised to the people of 

this province when health reforms began nearly two years 

ago.  The provincial government promised local authority and 

accountability in health care services.  It's time for the 

provincial government to live up to those commitments and 

to keep its promises. 

 

And I agree with Mr. Harrison completely.  The government 

has been dithering on this issue for two years now, Mr. 

Speaker, approximately since the introduction of health care 

reforms in this province.  They've had ample opportunity to 

form the health districts.  They've had ample opportunity to 

deal with this issue and to form the wards that were . . . 

however they're going to be dealing with that situation to 

outline the various districts and opportunities for people to have 

a vote. 

 

At the recent annual convention SARM and SUMA delegates 

passed resolutions demanding the health elections be held this 

year.  Both associations have repeatedly asked the minister to 

announce the elections will be held in October with local 

government elections.  To date, Mr. Speaker, their requests 

have been ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can only ask the government members and 

government minister responsible for Health: why are they 

delaying this so long, Mr. Speaker?  It's becoming obvious I 

think to everyone in 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2515 

Saskatchewan they simply do not want these elections this fall.  

I think the health board issue they feel is too hot a topic still for 

the government to be dealing with.  I think they don't want the 

open sores of health care reform to be investigated once again, 

Mr. Speaker, to be looked at once again.  They feel that this is 

an issue that given time will heal up. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I don't think that's going to be the 

case.  I think it's going to be a festering sore that the 

government is going to be dealing with for a long time into the 

future.  And delaying them is only going to make it that much 

worse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The only action we have witnessed is in regard to the 

appointment of Garf Stevenson as a one-man commission to 

investigate whether elections will be held this fall.  Whenever 

this government gets backed into a corner they set up a 

commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're going to just talk about this one-man 

commission of Garf Stevenson going to be heading around the 

province shortly holding meetings all over the place.  And even 

before the very first one, Mr. Speaker, before the very first one, 

Mr. Stevenson, as being interviewed by CBC Radio, suggested 

to the interviewer that day that it was unlikely that they had 

time now to have the elections this fall.  Well, well, well. 

 

Costing us $200,000 and already the most important question 

has already been answered -- the question that's been called for 

by SUMA and SARM and other groups, and the official 

opposition.  And this Bill speaks to that.  Right from the very 

beginning, Mr. Speaker, there was no way this government was 

going to allow health board elections this fall, and Mr. Garf 

Stevenson confirmed that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we asked the minister responsible for Health one day in 

the legislature and in question period I asked the question of the 

minister that if at those meetings that Mr. Stevenson is going to 

be holding upcoming, if the people demanded at that time that 

the people of Saskatchewan wanted an opportunity and 

demanded at that time for health district board elections to be 

held this fall, whether the government would go along with 

those recommendations.  And the minister stood up and just 

wavered all over the map on that because they know very well 

that they don't want them held this fall and they know that 

people across this province do. 

 

The government has had no intention of holding these elections 

this fall right from the outset.  So why, Mr. Speaker, are they so 

intent on spending $200,000 on Garf Stevenson's study, Mr. 

Speaker?  Surely, Mr. Speaker, that isn't necessary.  Why 

doesn't the government want to hold democratically elected 

people to hold those positions on district health boards?  Why 

does the minister think her appointed NDP friends can do a 

better job?  Are elections being held off so the government 

won't be criticized by health boards, Mr. Speaker?  I think that 

is exactly the case, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, $200,000 is being spent on a commission study 

with Mr. Garf Stevenson heading it up and the most important 

questions have already been answered.  Surely the people that 

are already on those boards, Mr. Speaker, can deal with the 

issues of the wards and all of the timing and all those kinds of 

issues without having to spend an additional $200,000 on a 

commission that's already had the most important question 

answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would rather 

see $200,000 being spent on the delivery of health care services 

rather than on a study that's no more needed in this province at 

all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decisions made by health boards will change 

the delivery of health care in this province for ever.  These 

decisions should be made by elected individual, not by 

appointed people.  Appointed members can only carry out the 

will of the government, Mr. Speaker.  The people have no faith 

left in this government with respect to health board elections. 

 

If health board elections are integrated this fall, the cost will be 

minimal, and SUMA and SARM believe that to be the case.  

They say that held in conjunction with municipal elections this 

fall, the cost would be a very, very minimal cost to the taxpayer 

of Saskatchewan.  If elections are held outside of that 

framework, Mr. Speaker, they'll cost the residents of 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan taxpayers, about $500,000 just to 

have the elections in Saskatoon and in Regina, Mr. Speaker.  

And that's a horrendous cost for something that could have 

been dealt with in the municipal structure. 

 

If health boards are not added to the ballot, expect the cost to 

be similar to a year down the road, Mr. Speaker.  About a 

million dollars is what's being estimated right now.  And I think 

we're about $500,000 for holding it outside municipal, 

$200,000 for Mr. Stevenson's study, and an additional 

$300,000 for having them outside of Regina and Saskatoon.  

The cost will be about a million dollars to hold them across the 

province if they're held outside of the municipal elections this 

fall. 

 

The Health minister must wonder who is keeping the books for 

our cities, towns, and villages.  Because she obviously doesn't 

believe SUMA and SARM when they approximate the cost of 

the elections.  In fact, she said, separate health board elections 

may not automatically be more costly -- May 21, '94, the 

minister said that. And just what figures did the Health minister 

base that false statement on, Mr. Speaker?  One can only 

wonder. 

 

When health reform was first initiated by this government, it 

was promoted as a cost-saving mechanism.  But it seems the 

only money saved is from closed hospitals, fired nurses and 

other health care related personnel, and fewer doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan.  That's where the savings have been made up.  

Less service to the people of the province of 



2516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

Saskatchewan and still an ongoing and increasing 

administrative costs to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to 

operate the health care system in this province. 

 

The government has all the money in the world to spend on its 

appointed board members, commissions, and councils, but little 

for health services to rural people.  Who knows how many 

people are employed by the Saskatoon and Regina health 

boards, let alone all of the other boards and their new offices, 

etc? 

 

We've had calls from nurses and other health care professionals 

that are disgusted by the amount of people being hired for 

public relations and what not else for the boards.  During the 

recent cut-backs announced in Saskatoon, a mere handful of 

administrative staff positions were cut while nurses were laid 

off by the hundred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is actions such as these that have people wanting elections to 

be held as soon as possible and wanting investigations of these 

kinds of actions.  They want people they trust to be on health 

boards, Mr. Speaker.  If the appointed members are well-liked, 

trusted, and capable, they'll be re-elected, Mr. Speaker, and 

that's the way the democratic process works.  If these people 

are doing a good job on health district boards, they'll be 

re-elected.  If they aren't, they will not be returned, Mr. 

Speaker, and there'll be other people put into those positions of 

responsibility. 

 

It is time to allow the people to elect their representatives just 

as the government promised.  Day after day we see letters to 

the editor on this issue and our office receives calls and letters. 

 

A fax that was received this morning, Mr. Speaker, from the 

mayor of Macklin, Saskatchewan, over on the west side of the 

province, and it was entitled, "Saskatchewan voter 

disenfranchised", Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it goes on to say, it states: 

 

 Are Saskatchewan residents losing their right to vote?  Are 

we losing our right to chart our own destiny and that of our 

children?  As I understand it, western democracy operates on 

the principle of universal suffrage -- one person, one vote, 

with a majority winner representing and acting on behalf of 

the electors. 

 

 What has happened to this right with regards to 

Saskatchewan district health boards?  Members to the district 

health boards were appointed, many of them contrary to the 

wishes of the people in the areas they represent,  certainly not 

respecting the wishes of the population at large nor the 

majority of people.  Adding to the erosion of public right, 

these appointed board members are now being asked whether 

health board elections should proceed as promised by the 

government in the fall of 1994. 

 

 Nowhere does the public at large have any say in this matter.  

The Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, whose members are duly elected by the 

population across this province, have made strong 

representation to the provincial government with regards to 

health board elections and have met a deaf ear. 

 

 If there is to be any credibility at all, if there is to be any 

semblance of fair representation, if there is to be a vague 

semblance of local autonomy, the least that should happen is 

that fair elections should be undertaken.  Major, long-lasting 

decisions are being made by appointed people at the board 

level and administrative positions, who really are not 

accountable to the electorate. 

 

 How far can the electorate be removed before it is really 

ineffective or becomes totally annihilated?  There is a major 

error here; please correct it. 

 

(1545) 

 

I say the mayor has made some very solid points, and if 

members opposite are interested in keeping their chairs, I 

would think they had better listen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately it appears the government is not listening on this 

issue at all.  Saturday's Leader-Post says, and I quote: 

 

 The NDP government may decide it doesn't want health 

board elections at the same time as this fall's municipal 

elections . . . 

 

That was in May 21 edition, 1994. 

 

And that should be no surprise, Mr. Speaker, to anyone in this 

province, because the minister responsible for Health has been 

wavering on this issue right from the outset, Mr. Speaker.  And 

it's very, very unfortunate.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, it was 

incumbent upon the official opposition to bring a motion . . . 

pardon me, a Bill, forward with respect to health districts. 

 

Because we feel it is so critically important that the government 

act on this issue.  It is something that they promised right from 

the outset.  And we, the official opposition, are here to hold the 

government accountable and hold them to their promises.  And 

that's why this Bill was presented, Mr. Speaker.  It's time for 

the NDP to stop wasting taxpayers' dollars on frivolous studies 

and reviews and start owning up to their own responsibilities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is now, and we would want and ask the government to 

support this Bill and give it opportunity for the elections to be 

held this fall, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why this Bill is before us 

and we would like the government to debate this issue and, as 

well, to vote on this issue this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2517 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I'd appreciate being able to make a few 

comments on this, Mr. Speaker.  In the city of Prince Albert we 

had one of the first and earliest health boards that was 

established.  And if there was any board that was ready to go 

for elections it probably would be the Prince Albert Health 

Board, and the city of Prince Albert is probably prepared as 

much as is anybody in terms of an election, in going for an 

election. 

 

And before I go any farther about this I might mention that we 

are looking at something quite historical here.  We are looking 

at actually electing members to the health board, those people 

who run our health institutions, for the first time in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  This is historical, and you have to set up an 

entire electoral system.  So when you're thinking of doing . . . 

setting up a new electoral system you're not altogether in a 

much different situation than South Africa was when they were 

setting up an electoral system there.  Perhaps not nearly as 

profound, not nearly as profound, but think of the decisions that 

you have to make. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, we have to put in place and make 

decisions as to who is going to comprise the electorate.  These 

decisions have yet to be made.  Who is going to draw up the 

ward boundaries, and how should they be drawn up?  And that 

issue, particularly in a case like us, like ours, needs a bit of 

debate and needs some thought. 

 

If we did it on a straight per capita basis, on a one-person, 

one-vote basis, and set up the wards so we take the entire 

population and divide it by eight, that would result in a much 

different make-up of the board than if we set aside certain 

wards for rural areas and certain wards for city areas.  That 

needs a bit of thought and a consensus should come from 

within the district on that. 

 

The fact of just of the type of timing that you should use 

between elections.  Should these people be elected on an annual 

basis, for a two-year period, for a three-year period, or for a 

four-year period?  That question needs to be answered.  We 

need to answer the question of should the people all be elected 

at the same time?  Should we have all eight up for re-election at 

the same time or should we be setting up a system which is 

going to stagger this electoral process?  Perhaps elect people 

say for six years but every three years.  Those are questions 

which are yet unanswered. 

 

Should we be making use of some type of electronic voting 

system rather than using the traditional system, or do we need a 

new kind of enumeration system?  All of these questions need 

to be answered.  Then once we have those questions in place, 

we can say that we've got an electoral system which people in 

the community have had an opportunity to comment on; have 

had some consensus on; will debate it here probably -- I hope 

we'll have a chance to debate it if we get some 

recommendations coming from Mr. Stevenson; and when we 

get those, we'll be able to 

debate them and set up a system that's going to work. 

 

You know, to go helter-skelter into an election and just say, 

let's have an election.  And then what?  Then who is going to 

set it all up?  So it requires a bit of advance planning and we 

need to do it properly because this is going to be something that 

has to last. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when it came to the situation in Prince Albert, 

where personally I felt that yes, we were, in that area, as ready 

as anybody for an election, and we could have put two or three 

things . . . or several of these things into place.  I look to my 

neighbours and I say: what's happening in the Nipawin area or 

what's happening in the Battleford area or the Biggar area?  Or 

I look at areas in the South, and I see that in those cases many 

of the boards had just finished hiring their CEOs (chief 

executive officer).  They have hardly even got their studies 

done, their needs studies done, let alone implementing some of 

these studies. 

 

So they'd be putting themselves into a situation.  If we 

demanded an election -- Prince Albert -- and if I, as an MLA, 

demand an election there, then those people would not have the 

privilege of being able to implement their wellness system, and 

getting their community together on it and moving in the 

direction as fast as the cities have been able to, because they 

will be bogged down into electioneering.  And that would take 

six months to do; probably another six months in order to get 

new board members -- those that would be newly put into place 

-- trained in operation of boards and used to the direction and 

trying to set up the direction from the board.  So it'll become 

rather awkward. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we will find it very advantageous to 

get some good advice from the commission which Mr. 

Stevenson has agreed to work on; take his advice; amend it, if 

necessary; make it where we see that there may be particular 

cases that we feel is necessary; and then take the whole concept 

and put an election in place right across the province, one that 

we know will be historic and that will work. 

 

There may be other comments I might want to make or other 

members might want to make on this, but I do believe we have 

agreement at this stage, Mr. Speaker, to go on to some other 

business. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate on 

this motion. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:54 p.m. until 4:01 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Van Mulligen Hagel 

Wiens Bradley 

Tchorzewski Pringle 

Lingenfelter Lautermilch 

Shillington Calvert 

Johnson Murray 

Goulet Trew 

Atkinson Sonntag 



2518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

 

Kowalsky Cline 

Mitchell Scott 

MacKinnon Kujawa 

Penner Kluz 

Cunningham Jess 

-- 26 

Nays 

 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

Toth Bergman 

-- 6 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act respecting the Superannuation of 

Teachers and Disability Benefits for Teachers 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Education, Training and 

Employment to introduce her officials to the members of the 

committee. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you.  To my right is Arleen 

Hynd, deputy minister of Education, Training and 

Employment.  To my left is John McLaughlin, the executive 

director of the Teachers' Superannuation Commission, and 

behind Ms. Hynd is Michael Littlewood, an official with the 

Department of Education, Training and Employment. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  

Madam Minister, I'd like to welcome you and your officials 

here today.  I wonder if you could give us a brief run-down of 

the purpose for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The purpose of the legislation is to have 

the Bill comply with the federal Income Tax Act.  That's one 

purpose. 

 

The second purpose is to amend the Act to meet the 

requirements of the collective agreement that was arrived at 

with the provincial government and trustees bargaining 

committee and the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would 

you explain the required annual contributions to the teachers' 

pension plan by all the parties involved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The requirements are this: 7.85 per cent 

times the yearly basic exemption of Canada Pension Plan plus 

6.05 per cent times the yearly maximum pensionable earnings 

minus the yearly basic exemption of the Canada Pension Plan, 

plus 7.85 per cent times earnings beyond the year's maximum 

pensionable earnings as set by the Canada Pension Plan, and 

they're matched by the teacher. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Does this 

cover the entire amount required to build up the pension plan 

for a teacher over the long term? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- At present there is a $1.878 billion 

deficit in the plan.  And these additional contributions have to 

be made up by ongoing provincial governments.  And this is 

the unfunded pension plan; it is not the money purchase plan 

which was changed in 1980. 

 

So any teachers that got into teaching after 1980 are in the 

money purchase plan -- we'll call it that for public 

consumption.  Those people prior to 1980 are in this plan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So a 

teacher who's contributing today -- say they started this year -- 

into the pension plan, when they retire the monies that they 

have contributed, along with the government portion, will 

provide for their entire pension contribution.  It won't require 

any further inputs by the provincial government at some point 

down the road -- is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- For teachers who started teaching after 

1980, what you've said is true.  For teachers who started 

teaching before 1980, that is not true.  There will have to be 

additional revenues put into the plan in order to meet the 

requirements of the plan.  That's the unfunded liability. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As I 

understand it, when the teachers' pension plan was initially put 

into place sometime in the mid-1930s, it was unfunded.  And 

from that time until the change -- you say 1980 -- that that 

accumulation is now $1.8-plus billion.  Does that amount 

continue to grow?  Does it cost the province more money to put 

in to make up for the teachers that are retiring?  Or is there a 

fixed amount of money that goes into that plan at present time 

and that isn't growing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The present shortfall in the plan will 

probably continue to grow.  There have been changes made in 

the past collective agreement, which is recognized in this Act, 

that says that interest has to remain in the fund.  Governments 

cannot take the interest out of the fund any longer.  That goes 

against the collective agreement.  It goes against this piece of 

legislation. 

 

As you will probably know, the previous government was 

being sued by the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) for 

taking interest out of the fund and putting it into general 

revenues.  What we have done is stopped that.  The money has 

to stay in the plan. 

 

And I also want to make this point: that we acknowledge that 

this unfunded liability will continue to grow, but it will not 

grow as readily because we've stopped the reaching in and 

grabbing interest by various administrations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That leads 

me to two other points then.  It's my understanding that the way 

that the teachers' pension fund works, that it used to work, was 

as follows:  the total pension pay-out, plus 

government-matched 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

contributions, less monies freed up by retiring teachers, plus 

interest, earned above 7 per cent. 

 

Now during most of the 1980s, budgetary estimates of 

requirements were actually higher than actual requirements.  

Excess monies were allowed to remain in the fund, which 

resulted in a surplus beyond the minimum amount required, the 

minimum fund balance.  The surplus was allowed to remain in 

the fund, in recognition of the fund's large unfunded liability. 

 

I understand the auditor questioned the government's authority 

to leave the surplus in the fund and in the following years the 

surplus was reduced because budget allocations were not 

sufficient to meet pension requirements.  However, it is my 

understanding that the surplus, a surplus of almost $100 

million, remained beyond the minimum requirements. 

 

The government was challenged by the STF because the 

surplus had been reduced.  Could you please give us an 

overview of the outcome of that challenge, and what has 

happened to that $100 million surplus? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Of the 100 million that you talk of, 45 

million is still in the fund and 55 million is being . . . has been 

drawn down in the last three years, I understand, because the 

actual appropriation was less than what was anticipated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I think I need a 

little more explanation on it rather than just the document. 

 

You were saying earlier that it was wrong that previous 

administrations had drawn down the surplus that had been built 

up, because of interest rates.  Now you're saying that you drew 

down $55 million from the surplus because it was above the 

requirements, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The technical surplus is an argument 

that doesn't make a lot of sense, but there was money that was 

drawn out of the fund.  There still is a deficit of $l.878 billion.  

There are tables that have estimates and actuals, and I can send 

those to you in order to expedite the proceedings. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, if you would 

please. 

 

I think where we're running into a problem here is, while there's 

only one teachers' pension plan, there's actually two portions to 

it, or maybe three portions to it, well two portions.  That is the 

portion before 1980 which is unfunded, and the portion after 

1980 which is now a funded program -- a money purchase 

program -- in which interest can accrue because the money is 

actually sitting there.  And hopefully it's in there at a good rate 

of return so that it will build up faster then what inflation will 

eat away at it. 

 

Madam Minister, in your Bill -- and this deals with the same 

particular issue here -- you have in here a formula for the 

removal of the surplus funds.  And this, 

according to the formula, would take until the year 2030 for the 

complete withdrawal of the surplus.  I wonder, in the light of 

your previous comments that it was wrong for governments to 

draw down on that surplus, how you explain this formula and 

what it's in there for. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I understand it from the officials, the 

$45 million is not attributable to teachers, so it's a question of 

who owns the fund and that wasn't clear in the previous 

legislation.  And so what we're doing is following the 

legislation -- the new Act -- in order to attribute that money to 

someone, and that's why it's being allowed to be drawn down 

over a period of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  Then 

if STF went to court for determination to gain control of the 

hundred million dollars that was in surplus and now you're 

saying that the $45 million remaining in that fund has no clear 

ownership, what were the results of the court case and how 

could STF try to gain control of it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- There was no court case because we 

were able to resolve this issue at the collective bargaining table; 

so there was no court case.  And I want to make something 

perfectly clear when I say there was withdrawals of funds: it 

wasn't just your administration that withdrew funds and I said 

that, so I'm not attributing anything to you that I'm not 

attributing to others. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister, for making 

that clear.  Perhaps I need a clarification then on where it says:  

teachers' superannuation fund to the General Revenue Fund -- 

you mean the General Revenue Fund of the teachers' 

superannuation and not the government's Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We're talking about the General 

Revenue Fund of government; there is no fund of teachers.  So 

when we talk about the General Revenue Fund, that is like the 

Consolidated Fund -- it's the new name, I understand.  Because 

of the $45 million and technically who owned it was in some 

question, we couldn't allow that fund to grow on forever.  So it 

had to be apportioned some place and that's why there's a time 

line.  We did not want the fund to come out all at once and 

that's why it's coming out over a period of time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, how do the 

teachers then gain control of this fund if you're pulling it out of 

a specified account, a specified area, and placing it into the 

Consolidated Fund?  The Consolidated Fund is used for the 

government's general purposes.  How do the teachers in the end 

gain access and control of this $45 million if it's going in with 

the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The Act is very specific now.  The Act 

clearly states what can be drawn out of the 



2520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

fund.  What was at question was money being drawn out of the 

fund when there was interest in excess of 7 per cent.  So now 

the Act is very clear under what circumstances funds can be 

withdrawn from the fund.  I think the other thing I'd like to say 

is there is a distinction between the new plan and the old plan.  

The legislation we're dealing with now is the old plan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  One 

of the sections of this Bill deals with a quorum, and I went 

through it I believe with the Minister of Finance and the Crown 

foundations corporation when that was set up dealing with a 

quorum.  And out of the seven members who would be 

represented on the board of the Teachers' superannuation fund, 

three will come from nominees from the STF, three from 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, and hopefully those six will 

choose a chairman; and I say hopefully because there is 

provision in the legislation to allow someone to be appointed 

by the Educational Relations Board. 

 

I wonder if you could explain for us who the Educational 

Relations Board is? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The Educational Relations Board 

consists of five people, two chosen by the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association, two chosen by the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation, and then they jointly agree on a chair.  

And the role of the Educational Relations Board is to act as the 

Labour Relations Board for matters that are in dispute, and 

that's why there's a reference.  If they can't agree on a chair, 

they would then go to the Educational Relations Board.  There 

are two chosen by the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association and two by the STF, and they jointly choose a 

chair. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Madam Minister.  I 

thought that might be the case, that the SSTA (Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association) would have some representation 

on that board. 

 

Does that cause any concern for you or for the STF, that the 

SSTA could have some input into the person chosen to be the 

chairman of the teachers' superannuation fund? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- No, it causes me no concern. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As I 

brought up with The Crown Foundations Act, I would have 

liked to have seen the quorum state that one of the members of 

the quorum would have to be a representative of the STF.  I 

would hope that you would give consideration to that, 

instituting that in the future. 

 

The minister responsible for The Crown Foundations Act did 

give me a letter with that intent, not in legislation, but that they 

would practice that, that one of the members of quorum would 

have to be a member, in this particular case, representing the 

university involved. 

 

And I would hope that you would give some 

consideration to that, because I can see a possibility at some 

point in time where the board could be split.  A decision is 

coming down; the chairman may not have been chosen with 

agreement of the STF side, that it could have been chosen by 

the Educational Relations Board, and you would have to look 

there and see what the quorum was for a meeting of that group. 

 

So I can see that . . . it may be remote, but there is potential for 

conflict here, and if quorum were to say one member chosen 

from the STF nominees, I think it would help matters 

somewhat. 

 

I have to assume that the STF is in favour of this, Madam 

Minister, for when we contacted them they had no concerns 

about this particular Bill.  Therefore, Madam Minister, we're 

prepared to allow this Bill to proceed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I 

would like to thank the minister and her officials for coming in 

today and assisting us. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'd like to thank the critic for his 

thoughtful questions.  They were very well researched and 

done.  Thank you. 

 

(1630) 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Act, 1980 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the minister responsible for SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) to introduce his official 

to the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have with me on 

my left here, Randy Heise, the vice-president of finance for 

SGI. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  

Welcome, Mr. Minister, and Randy Heise.  I shouldn't ask this 

question in here, but are you related to Rod Heise perhaps?  

Okay. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this Bill I believe is a result of the 

fact that SGI at one time had a number of subsidiaries that were 

owned by SGI but not reported as such or not clearly identified 

as such, and that the Provincial Auditor said that SGI did not 

have the legal authority by which to own subsidiaries.  Is that 

correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- No, that's not correct.  It's for a different 

purpose.  Basically this Act is an Act that is corresponding with 

a federal Act that was passed in 1992, the Insurance Companies 

Act, in Canada.  And it replaced the old Act of 1983, the 

Canadian and 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

British Insurance Companies Act and the department of 

Finance Act. 

 

And some of the changes in this Act in regards to investment 

could have been done back in 1988 when the Investment 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was created.  At that time on the 

auto fund side, we were able to go ahead and have the 

investment done by the corporation on the auto fund side.  And 

in this particular case therefore, when we wanted to do some 

investment, we had to go through the Investment Corporation 

of Saskatchewan; and what this new Act does is that it deletes 

the approval to go to the investment board. 

 

And so what we're doing is basically having, you know, the 

ability to go ahead and do the investment and dispose of any 

investment and as well as the power to make regulations.  So 

it's basically, overall, a housekeeping amendment which is 

keeping up with the federal changes in the Act and also 

corresponding to The Crown Corporations Act, you know, as 

well.  So that's the reason for the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What 

investments were being made through the Investment 

Corporation of Saskatchewan that will now be made through 

some other vehicle through SGI? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We've been acting with Investment 

Corporation, as I previously said, since 1988.  We could have . 

. . the government of the day could have made those changes in 

regards to the insurance Act at that point in time, but I guess 

when it was done, you know, for the auto fund, it wasn't done 

for the insurance side. 

 

So in regards to investment, we have always gone through the 

Investment Corporation and this now just provides us what was 

provided for in the auto fund.  And so, you know, SGI is able 

to then make investments through its insurance Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What types of 

things would you be investing in?  What are you investing 

these funds in that you have up until now been going through 

the Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Primarily we go with both private, 

corporate, and governmental bonds, and as well we go to a 

short-term paper as well as equity investments.  And we also go 

with mortgages. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So basically 

this is just money management is what it is.  Rather than 

owning actual physical properties or corporations, it's buying 

liquid assets, liquid money assets, is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, that's generally correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Was any of 

this investment done since 1988 outside of the Saskatchewan 

Investment Corporation? 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- All of the investments have been through 

the Investment Corporation except, you know, when we did the 

SGI CANADA Insurance Limited when we went out of 

province.  And that was the only other investment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So SGI CANADA was done outside of 

the Saskatchewan Investment Corporation vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When I was replying to your question, 

you asked whether it was done outside the Investment 

Corporation, and yes, that was the only one that was done 

outside the Investment Corporation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I don't 

have any other questions to deal with this particular matter so 

we're prepared to allow it to proceed.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to acknowledge his 

officials . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I would like to acknowledge Randy 

Heise for his help, as well as the member from across who 

asked very concise questions.  Thanks very much. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

thank the minister and his official for coming in today.  The 

official's brother and I hung around a bit together at the lake 

and his brother was the RM (rural municipality) secretary in 

my home town.  So thank you. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the minister responsible for Municipal 

Government to introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have to 

my right, Ron Davis, who is director of financial services, 

assistant deputy minister; behind me I have Paul Raths and 

Grete Nybraten, the people from our department, from financial 

services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

since 1991 my numbers show that the funding to municipalities 

has been cut from 66.7 million to 45.3 million.  That's very 

close to a 35 per cent cut. 

 

Now that the infrastructure program is in place, can you give 

assurances that that particular program will not be used to make 

even further cuts to municipal funding?  Are the proper 

controls in place to make sure 



2522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

that we don't see more reductions taking place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well that's an easy assurance to give.  

The Minister of Finance has said this year during our budget 

debate that there would be no further cuts to third-party 

funding.  And it's not contingent upon infrastructure program, it 

is simply our commitment to third parties that following this 

last cut there would be no further cuts to their transfers. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm sure people will be glad to hear that, 

Madam Minister. 

 

I wonder if you could just very quickly . . . regarding the 

infrastructure program, could you give me a brief overview of 

what the ongoing consultation process is like as this develops?  

Can you give me an idea of sort of, on a daily or weekly basis, 

what exactly happens with you and your department as far as 

the allocation of these funds? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, thank you.  As you know, the 

municipalities have had their list ready and prepared for some 

time and those applications now are coming in to the provincial 

municipal screening committee.  We set up a municipal 

provincial project screening committee early this spring.  They 

are the people who screen the projects and approve them and 

forward them then to the federal-provincial committee.  And it 

is our commitment that as a province that we will forward those 

projects as quickly as we can to the federal government.  This 

committee works every second week, and we are anticipating 

making announcements as quickly as we get approval back 

from the federal government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you, at the beginning of this 

process, indicated that there would only be 50 per cent of the 

infrastructure program would go to municipalities, even though 

a lot of them felt that the way the program was presented last 

fall that they should have gotten 100 per cent of that. 

 

Do you see that 50 per cent number being hard and fast, or are 

there some allowances if your committee comes forward with 

some recommendations that would take the share over 50 per 

cent?  Is that feasible or are you simply staying hard 

_pressed on that 50 per cent number? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- When we made the allocations under the 

federal program, the infrastructure program, we made it clear 

that it would be divided into two pools, one dedicated strictly to 

municipal infrastructure and provided on a per capita basis of 

$37 per capita -- that is for the urban governments, $28 million.  

That $28 million pool is made up of 18 from the federal funds 

and 10 from provincial funds.  There is also on top of that a $4 

million intermunicipal pool and then the $10 million allocated 

to RMs. 

 

So that pool of money has been agreed upon by our partners 

and we are allocating project approval based on, for urban 

governments, the $37 per capita. 

What happens next year . . . there will be a review of the entire 

program next year.  And it would be, I think, premature to talk 

about making any changes in the allocation at this point in 

time.  The pool that is under the direction of the provincial and 

federal government, which is the remaining $24 million or $25 

million, will be going to help municipalities as well, but it'll 

take on a different form.  Like, for instance, the project that was 

announced in Cumberland House last week which does not fall 

under the municipal provincial infrastructure program, so it 

does not have a per capita allocation to it. 

 

So there are many forms it does take.  A lot of municipalities 

will be gaining by both approaches -- both the provincial pool 

and the municipal pool as well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Is there any sort of cross-checking or criteria, 

Madam Minister, because communities are allowed to access 

both pools of money?  And there obviously were a number that 

won't receive any just given the way the process works.  If your 

name comes up once, are you sort of put to the back of the list? 

 

The concern out there is that a lot of communities are voicing 

to us, is that we simply are not going to be able to get in on the 

process because our plans either weren't formulated quick 

enough, or we didn't have a ready-made project, or because of 

the various cut-backs that we've gone through, we simply 

haven't had the opportunity to allocate any of our own funds 

there. 

 

Can you give us some assurance that they will have an 

opportunity to at least be viewed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well certainly.  This is a two-year 

process and they're under no obligation to make their 

application this year.  If they want to sit back and review their 

priorities, then I highly recommend that they take their time 

and do it so that the project that they do, finally get funding for, 

is one the community needs. 

 

If they have some concerns about the process, if they write to 

us, we certainly would go out and talk to them -- send our 

officials out -- and let them understand how their projects may 

be approved and the time lines that are involved.  And we 

would work with them to help develop their budgets as well. 

 

So we'll provide whatever support we can, and whatever 

communication they need we'd be more than willing to go out 

and talk to them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm sure they would appreciate that, 

Madam Minister, because one of the things that is evidently 

clear is that their property tax base which, when you look at 

this year with Education having another decrease of 4 per cent, 

with some added environmental rules and regulations, they're 

all wondering about the two new labour Bills. 



May 24, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

Certainly the public sector is a big area of wage and 

employment in this province and all of these things thrown in 

on their property tax base -- the ability to raise funds for next 

year even, given what they may have to do as far as mill rate 

increases -- is quite substantial.  And I guess they're really 

concerned that their portion that's going to be necessary to be 

raised, which they can only get from one place if they don't 

have significant reserves, is from the property tax base, is under 

a lot of stress. 

 

And that's why I ask the question if there was some flexibility 

here because everybody's naturally hoping that next year will 

be better.  And your assurance that there won't be any more 

cuts, I think, will be taken to heart.  It's what happens in so 

many of these other areas that they find very bothersome.  And 

perhaps some public statement from yourself and your 

department to once again reinforce the fact that they will have 

an opportunity a year from now maybe after their house is in 

better order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

has of course brought to the House some of the concerns that 

are out there and the pressure that the municipal government 

budgets are under, and we're very sensitive to that. 

 

Again I want to say that the mill rates this year are not going up 

dramatically.  There has been, as we have made the changes in 

health care and in the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency), there has been a benefit of about four 

and a half million dollars to the municipalities, to their budget.  

So not every municipality is experiencing a crisis situation with 

their budget.  Some of them are and some of them aren't. 

 

There are however . . . if you look at the funded reserves that 

municipalities have, they do have a fair amount of funds placed 

in reserves and the financial health of most municipalities is 

fairly good; not to say that they're not, of course, experiencing 

some stress as they go through their own internal analysis of 

programs and service delivery and some impacts that have 

occurred in the last couple of years.  But municipalities are 

coping fairly well.  They've had a benefit of about four and a 

half million dollars because of the health care changes that we 

made and the health care funding. 

 

And what we have seen so far in regard to the pressure on 

municipal budgets, some of the mill rates have been going up, 

but some of them have actually been going down.  I know the 

city of Melfort reduced their mill rate by 2, and they are able to 

do that because of the change in health care funding, taking 

into account the change in the SAMA requisition at the same 

time. 

 

So I know you are expressing concerns, but I think you have to 

not generalize; there are some specific areas where there are 

some problems, but there is also some municipalities that are 

coping very well. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well they are real concerns, Madam Minister.  

I use the example in Moose Jaw.  Our police 

force I believe has decreased from about 70 officers and their 

superiors down to in the low 50's -- 54 currently  

_- and there's talk of it reducing even two more. 

 

People from the police association have expressed to me grave 

concern because they don't have the manpower, they feel now, 

to adequately to protect the community. 

 

They raised the point that they currently have a three-time 

convicted child sex offender walking the streets of our city and 

simply don't have the manpower to watch, and they're really 

concerned that that individual may offend again.  Policing, and 

you and I both know, is becoming a real touchy point with a lot 

of people in our society.  Most jurisdictions are cutting back on 

their manpower in order to cope with their budgetary 

requirements.  And at some point in time you can only cut 

policing so far and then citizens . . . well they start doing things 

that we would probably not like them to do. 

 

I am told that there are contemplated cuts in policing across the 

province.  Now well my own city is a good example of what 

they've gone through there to cut back.  If that's the case, I 

think that we really need to look at the priorities here and the 

whole question surrounding early parole.  There are all sorts of 

issues there that involve public safety.  Cutting our municipal 

monies is having a direct impact on that. 

 

And I wonder if you could provide me with some type of an 

answer back to Saskatchewan, particularly urban municipalities 

and those that rely on RCMP policing, about what your view is 

with the cut-backs that have occurred as far as policing costs 

and the safety of the public in the next year or two. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well as you know, there are standards 

from the Department of Justice where you have a specific 

number of officers per 750 people; I think one officer for every 

750 people.  So there are those standards that have been in 

place for a number of years.  You are right in saying that the 

costs are going up and they're becoming a greater concern. 

 

As a department, though, we have to let municipal governments 

manage those affairs.  Those are internal to their own decision 

making, and they have to set their own priorities and manage 

their own budgets.  And we are providing them with the 

amount of transfers that we can, under our limited ability to do 

so, realizing that we have a BBB credit rating and a debt that 

we have to pay, and we're providing them with the amount of 

support that we can. 

 

Again we have in Saskatchewan . . . I don't think we have a 

crisis in property tax.  Saskatoon has the third-lowest 

residential property tax in the country, and Regina has the 

eighth-lowest property tax in Canada.  And so I think it is 

unfair to characterize what's going on as a crisis across all of 

our communities. 

 

Property tax definitely is creeping up, and it's a 



2524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 1994 

concern for everybody, but when we look at what's going on 

across Canada, I think we fare fairly well in comparison to 

other jurisdictions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, you said there was a net 

benefit under the hospital revenue tax back to Saskatchewan 

communities.  I haven't detected any lessening of the 

commitment by communities to have this thing removed.  And 

once again I ask you: the commitment made by your Premier in 

1993 to eliminate that tax, is there any movement yet beyond 

the short-term plan which you've put in place to actually take 

that off of the rolls and move onto something else? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well again, we made a commitment to 

reduce health care funding on property tax, and we did that 

when we reduced it from the union hospital requisition to a 2 

mill levy.  And so that was a commitment that we made and 

that we delivered on. We reduced the health care on property 

tax . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, the 

Committee of the Whole will stand recessed until 7 o'clock 

p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


