




















































Hansard: April 18, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1639 

 April 18, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I 

welcome you this evening, Madam Minister, and all of your 

officials.  Would you please explain what your vision is for your 

particular department, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the department has been asked to 

implement health reform, and I assume you're talking in terms of 

the vision with respect to new health care services as opposed to 

a vision for my department.  No?  What do you see my 

department doing?  Do you want to clarify the question? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm most specifically interested in your 

overall vision for your department, not specifically with having 

been mandated with health care reform, but to speak in a much 

broader way of where you see your department in a visionary 

sense. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all the mandate of the 

department is to provide leadership for the health system in 

order to protect and improve the health of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The department works in a variety of partnerships with health 

care stakeholders throughout the province, and it sets standards.  

It provides services.  It monitors and evaluates.  It provides 

leadership and policy planning for health care purposes in 

Saskatchewan.  So the department also provides a supportive 

function for health care stakeholders and district boards 

throughout the province and for other health-related 

organizations. 

 

We're moving health care, as you know, from a focus on health 

care to a focus on health.  We're moving, and the department is 

involved in the policy development in this area very extensively, 

from a focus on individual treatment to a larger focus on 

population health.  We're moving from focus on epidemic 

diseases to a focus on the increase in chronic diseases. We have 

to deal with that as a department. 

 

There's a change from the focus on providers in the health care 

system to a focus on patients.  As in the past, as you know, the 

focus has largely been on providers in the health care system as 

opposed to focusing on patients and what is the appropriate care 

for patients.  We are shifting the health care system, or the 

department is working in that direction, a shift from prescriptive 

health care services to more independence and choice in the 

health care system.  There's a focus changing from sickness and 

accident care to more health promotion and disease prevention. 

And there's a whole other range -- for example, shifts from 

institutional focus to a more community-based focus, shifts from 

independent health sectors with ill-defined roles to 

interdependent facilities with clearly defined roles; where there's 

a change to more cooperative and collaborative planning, a 

change to more managed costs in resource use as opposed to 

costs that are not controlled and resource utilization that's not 

controlled. 

 

There's much more of an emphasis on accountability and 

effectiveness and more interventions based on research.  So 

there is . . . and the department of course is working very 

extensively in the whole area of leading and providing support, 

and providing standards and goals in the whole area of moving 

us from those earlier focuses I mentioned about to the new 

focus, for example, from individual treatment to population 

health. 

 

Now that is not the vision or that is part of the vision on health 

reform but you seem to be distinguishing the two, between the 

department and health reform.  I mean I can go on much further 

as to all of the goals of health reform and the general direction 

we're moving, but it seems as though you are zeroing in 

specifically on the Department of Health. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I actually, 

just for clarification sake, will be starting at the broadest and 

becoming more specific, and this is really why I asked for your 

statement on a vision.  It would be like a mission statement, if 

you will. 

 

As well as, you mentioned goals, I'll go in more specifically to 

objectives and then the people for whom those will be 

responsible for making sure those objectives are met, the kind of 

time lines involved, the measurability, and so forth.  So if you're 

wondering where I'm going, that might be more helpful.  Just so 

that we're on the same wavelength. 

 

What are the specific public policy objectives then, that drive 

your department?  And I would like as well, just to . . . if you'd 

like to start with that one and I'll go to the next, but you may 

wish to consider at the same time, who has established these 

particular objectives?  The public policy objectives of your 

department, how are they reviewed and revised?  And what 

means do you use to communicate them to your employees as 

well as to the clients you serve? 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask permission to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you.  We have in your gallery, a group 

of 19 young people from Westminster Cubs, Westminster 

United Church, who have come down to watch the proceedings 

this evening, see how we spend our evenings.  They're 

accompanied by their 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

teacher, Tim Bleiler, I believe, and I'll be happy to meet with 

them later at 7:40 in room 255, and I'd like you to join me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  Well as the 

member opposite is aware, the Government of Saskatchewan has 

redefined health in Saskatchewan along the lines of the World 

Health Organization definition of 1984, which is that health is a 

state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and 

not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.  It is the extent to 

which an individual or group is able, on the one hand, to realize 

aspirations and satisfy needs, and on the other hand, to change or 

cope with the environment.  So that generally is where we are 

moving and striving to achieve. 

 

A number of the goals to foster then -- healthy people and 

healthy communities -- have been established by the government 

when we released the vision, A Saskatchewan Vision For 

Health: A Framework For Change, in August of 1992. 

 

How did we arrive at that?  Well as the member opposite is 

aware, there have been numerous studies done on where health 

reform should be going over a period of decades in this 

province.  That research and those studies were all reviewed 

extensively by the Department of Health.  They then consulted 

broadly with people and organizations and groups in 

Saskatchewan, and as a result of that, the vision for health in 

Saskatchewan was prepared and tabled in the legislature.  We 

are continuing that process through the Provincial Health 

Council. 

 

The Provincial Health Council has been discussing health care 

goals and are presently consulting with people in communities to 

see how those goals might be realized in those communities.  

They are specifically being asked to look beyond traditional 

health care services at the broad determinants of health, because 

we know that our health is impacted far more through other 

things than health care services in particular. 

 

We know that if we can deal with environmental issues, for 

example, and some other problems that face us in a society, that 

we'll do far more to improve the health of Saskatchewan people 

than if we pour more money into institutions and traditional 

health care services. 

 

It's important to maintain a very strong health care . . . acute care 

sector, but we must remember that by pouring money into high 

tech and many of the very expensive services, in an unlimited 

and uncontrolled fashion, we don't generate better health for 

Saskatchewan people.  So we work from the premiss that we 

must take a look at what the broad determinants of health are, 

how we might in some way be able to influence them so that we 

live healthier and happier lives.  In that regard we've asked the 

Provincial Health Council to consult broadly. 

 

And if I might just go through the goals to foster healthy people 

and healthy communities, they are:  to ensure health is a priority 

and a responsibility of all sectors of our province; that's to try 

and encourage.  This isn't going to happen overnight but we are 

working to encourage a more intersectoral response to health 

issues.  That's why we have umbrella boards in the province so 

that we don't have one board in one institution or one board in 

one program.  We have an umbrella board that coordinates all 

services within that and can also look beyond and is mandated to 

look beyond traditional health care services, because those other 

services may be far more determining of our health than a 

hospital or a physician in a particular community. 

 

So we have to refocus our thinking.  Not to say that those other 

services aren't important, because they are, but we must refocus 

our thinking as to what is going to improve our health.  We want 

to ensure effective and affordable service delivery and empower 

Saskatchewan people, communities, and health professionals to 

take a more active role.  And this is very important, I think, 

going into the 21st century.  And we just heard a presentation 

tonight by Dr. Mustard, who clearly points out that we must 

move to more civic communities, communities that have more 

input; communities who participate with people in developing 

policy for future health care services or other programing. 

 

We have to work with communities as much as we possibly can 

and empower communities more fully.  There again, that does 

not happen overnight.  That's a process that we've put in place 

and yes, it is fledgling, it is new, but we have defined the need to 

do that.  And as best we can, we're working in that direction, and 

I believe it will establish a prototype for future processes in the 

province of Saskatchewan and in other provinces in Canada. 

 

We must strengthen family and community-based support and 

prevention approaches.  We believe that's important.  We must 

enhance health promotion and disease prevention.  Absolutely 

we must maintain essential and appropriate services, develop 

alternative approaches, reduce health inequities, and that is very 

important in this province, particularly with the aboriginal 

population and northern situation that we have.  And so we have 

established that as a goal, and we will work towards trying to 

reduce inequities, but there again, it won't happen overnight.  

We must enhance health research and evaluation. 

 

And those are nine goals that have been established for healthy 

people and healthy communities.  And as I indicated earlier, the 

Provincial Health Council is trying to determine how that might 

be achieved in each community.  And the Department of Health 

is 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

monitoring on an ongoing basis what district boards are doing to 

try and achieve these goals, but as I pointed out earlier, it is very 

much in a developmental stage at this point. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If I may just 

have some further clarification, when I was asking about the 

specific public policy objectives, I think some of the goals that 

you have laid out are very laudatory, worthwhile, and important. 

 

I'm just wondering how is it actually broken down in terms of 

who determines what the objectives are?  Is it the department?  

Is it the umbrella board to which you referred?  I'm wanting to 

know where the responsibility lies. 

 

(1915) 

 

And then I would like, please, to know how the process is 

established for actual review as well as revision, perhaps, of 

objectives as one goes along because, as you most rightly 

pointed out, much of what is transpiring is different. It hasn't 

been done before.  Some of it is highly innovative, and it is like 

testing the waters.  I'm just wondering where the responsibility 

lies as far as establishing the actual objectives and then who 

would and how they would be determined to be revised and 

perhaps reviewed as time goes on. 

 

One of the things that may be useful is if you would just take 

one example.  Choose whichever you'd like. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  First of all, with 

respect to the development of the goals, the goals were set by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, but they were set in consultation 

with stakeholders and the public.  There were massive 

consultations that took place.  In fact we had stakeholders sitting 

around a round table developing the health care goals for the 

future.  These are also being examined by the Provincial Health 

Council and they came forward with their discussion paper on 

goals which are essentially the goals that I have outlined. 

 

They are now going to the public to get further input and may 

revise those goals after they have had that sort of input.  So from 

a macro point of view that is how the goals are being set and 

revised.  However, within the context of those goals, district 

health boards can break them down, because they are very 

general in nature, and establish how they want to achieve those 

goals.  So the district boards also have . . . there's local input 

through needs assessments that are being done. 

 

Right now throughout the province, district boards are doing 

needs assessments as to what they believe their real health care 

needs are and this will help them to flesh out the goals.  It will 

allow them to give input to the Provincial Health Council in 

establishing goals and it will allow them to develop programing 

for example, with respect to a particular goal.  So it's very 

important throughout this entire process of establishing goals 

and determining how we move to implement them that 

communities are empowered 

and people are consulted.  And that's what we have been 

attempting to do. 

 

We also have the Utilization and Research Commission which is 

analysing appropriate services, health care services, and whether 

or not they are appropriate or effective.  They are taking a look 

at costs.  They've made a number of recommendations to us as to 

how we could improve and we have moved on a number of 

those recommendations.  They will be monitoring the delivery of 

health care services and their appropriateness and that will also 

help us to monitor and evaluate goals as we move through health 

reform. 

 

I've talked at length already about the Provincial Health Council 

and what it will be doing in terms of moving us in the direction 

stated by the World Health Organization, in a direction of more 

community involvement, more community-based services, and 

much more attention to the broad determinants of health care. 

 

We are in the process of developing a new information system in 

Saskatchewan.  I think you're familiar with it.  It's absolutely 

necessary, if we are going to be able to achieve the sort of health 

reform that we want and to be successful in reaching our goals, 

that we are able to provide district boards with the kind of data 

that's important to make some of the decisions they have to 

make as to what appropriate services are, and what their needs 

are, and how the health status of their citizens are affected by the 

programing that they put in place. 

 

So the districts are working with this information system.  They 

are consulting broadly as they work with it, and we are 

consulting with districts and health care people as we set up the 

information system. 

 

We will also be looking at outcome measures.  As the member 

opposite knows, there is very little in the form of outcome 

measures in Canada, North America, or the world as a matter of 

fact. 

 

So as we develop outcome measures, or if another jurisdiction 

develops outcome measures, we will incorporate it into the 

system and test it and monitor it and see how it works.  While all 

of this is taking place, of course, we will be maintaining a strong 

acute care sector and maintaining the services that people have 

enjoyed in the past. 

 

The information system that is being developed by the 

Department of Health is being monitored by other countries at 

this time and other jurisdictions in Canada because one of the 

. . . I was at a conference in Victoria where there were several 

countries represented.  One of them was the United Kingdom.  

When I talked about the umbrella boards we were putting in 

place, they said that they were very excited about that concept. 

They hadn't moved to an umbrella board.  They'd only done 

institutions in that particular jurisdiction because they had 

certain concerns, and they were interested in hearing how we 

had dealt with that. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

But then they went on to say that however, if you have an 

umbrella board of that nature, you must have a data system that 

follows people throughout the entire health care system.  And of 

course I was pleased to be able to say yes; that is semi-operating, 

and it will be fully operating very soon.  It's unique.  I don't 

think there's anywhere else in the world where they can follow 

people through an entire health care system.  So in future years 

. . . and future generations should be able to benefit from this 

system.  But we can be assured that this system will be 

monitored fully by people here in Saskatchewan and even other 

jurisdictions who are interested in it. 

 

I don't want to ramble on, other than to say that there are a 

number of mechanisms being put in place to measure the success 

and the appropriateness of services that are being delivered in 

Saskatchewan and to determine the impact of health reform. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, 

I'm just going to run through very, very quickly some of what 

you said, so I can have some understanding because I want to 

have one question for clarification. 

 

You indicated that in fact these public policy objectives are set 

by the Government of Saskatchewan through the Department of 

Health, that in fact you were assisted by different stakeholders 

including those -- I would imagine -- who are not only service 

providers but others related to the health care field and perhaps 

even those who receive health care services. 

 

You also receive assistance as far as establishing the objectives, 

clarifying further what the objectives are for the Provincial 

Health Council.  That in fact this then goes to the district health 

boards as far as inclusion in being able to refine some of those 

objectives, or perhaps more likely to participate in the 

implementation of those objectives, and you've utilized the 

utilization review commission and their role. 

 

One of the things I'm most interested in is communication.  

What means do you use to communicate these public policy 

objectives to your own employees within the Department of 

Health, all of these related groups, if in fact some of the 

objectives are under review and perhaps require revision as time 

goes on.  And further more, how is this communicated to your 

clients overall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  Well let me say 

first off, I wish we could do a lot more in terms of 

communications, but we are doing a lot.  With respect to 

employees, my deputy informs me that there have been a 

number of workshops that have taken place in the department.  

There have been internal publications that go to departmental 

staff that update them on health reform.  There have been video 

messages, where this is affordable, that have been offered to 

departmental staff to inform them on health reform and goals 

and where we're heading. 

In a state of change of this nature, communication is sometimes 

difficult because people tend to be threatened by change, and 

therefore communication becomes very, very difficult. 

 

However, having said that, we have set up union-management 

consultation groups for the purposes of informing people about 

health reform goals and where we're heading.  District boards 

meet with myself, and on other occasions, with their association.  

They are being provided with all sorts of educational workshops 

and the ability to go out and communicate with their residents.  

So they then turn around and communicate with the people in 

the district. 

 

As well, the Associate Minister of Health and myself and the 

deputy minister and the associate deputies have done as much as 

they possibly can in terms of face-to-face speaking 

engagements.  So we have done numerous speaking 

engagements throughout the province and we talk to people as 

often as we can about health reform, what it means, what the 

goals are, and where we're heading.  We have some 40 to 50 

staff people in the field every day who are communicating with 

as many people as they can and working with people at the grass 

roots level.  There have been press conferences held. 

 

(1930) 

 

I try and get out to the media, the secondary media outlets and 

then other media outlets throughout the province as often as 

possible in order to give them an update on where we're going 

and give them a chance to ask me any questions.  We have met 

with consumer groups on numerous occasions to inform them.  

We have put out health reform update for district boards and 

people working in the health care area to inform them as to what 

is happening because we believe it's crucial that from district to 

district there is communication so people can learn from things 

they're doing from district to district. 

 

There were a whole series of post-budget meetings that took 

place -- and my deputy's just provided me with a list of these.  

I'm not sure how many, but one, two, three, four, five and a half 

pages.  And I think there was some 600 meetings that took place 

just last year alone by departmental staff and ministers. 

 

So we had done a lot in terms of communications but we can do 

more.  And I'm always looking for other possibilities to try and 

tell people what the goals are and get some input from them as 

to how they think we can achieve these goals.  And I just simply 

want to make the comment that in a time of change, and a state 

of change of this nature, communications is often difficult and 

imperfect, and so we recognize that.  But having said that, I also 

want to say that the department has done a tremendous amount 

in terms of trying to get out and talk to people and get their 

input. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, Madam 

Minister.  You've enumerated a number of 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

what you term goals, and I call objectives, and I'm wondering if 

you could tell me the criteria that you use to ensure that the 

objectives are being achieved. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There are a number of criteria that can be 

considered when we're determining the success of achieving the 

health goals.  The most important, of course, is the health status 

of the population.  The goal of health reform is to achieve a 

healthier population, and so health status of the population will 

be a very important indicator. 

 

Now this will be measured through mortality and morbidity 

rates, accident deaths, causes of deaths, for example.  However, 

because a number of the determinants of health are broad in 

nature and are preventive or non-treatment oriented, if you like, 

non-traditional, we also have to look at it from a very long-term 

point of view. 

 

And so the Provincial Health Council has been mandated to do a 

longitudinal study of health impacts and health status in 

Saskatchewan.  It's my understanding they will probably use the 

Health Services Utilization and Research Commission to set up 

and follow through on that study over a long period of time.  But 

they will be launching and putting that longitudinal study into 

place. 

 

There are some short-term indicators that we will be looking at 

that I think are important, and they include things such as 

implementation of healthy public policies through the Provincial 

Health Council or the legislation.  We brought forward The 

Public Health Act, and the Provincial Health Council will be 

making other recommendations to us about healthy public 

policies.  The implementation of those policies will be sort of a 

short-term indicator of whether or not we are moving to achieve 

our goals. 

 

I think the enhancement or growth of community-based 

programs is something that is short term.  We can take a look at 

that and say yes, we want to move to more community-based 

services.  Are we doing it?  Has there been a growth in this kind 

of programing? 

 

A decrease in inappropriate utilization is another short-term 

indicator that I think is important.  The Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission has already pointed out 

some inappropriate utilization and if we can demonstrate a 

decrease in inappropriate utilization through policies that district 

boards and governments implement, then I think that's a 

short-term indicator. 

 

One of the suggestions, for example, from the utilization 

commission in terms of . . . this isn't necessarily inappropriate 

utilization but it has to do with utilization -- was the fact that in 

long-term care the people who were in greater need of long-term 

care were sometimes less likely to be admitted to institutions.  

That comment was made by the Health Services Utilization 

Commission as a result of that and the utilization commission 

communicating with district boards. 

And they sent out a pamphlet that talked at length about their 

long-term care analysis.  We have already seen some boards 

move in to create a single point of entry for long-term care 

patients so that those who are in greatest need of care are placed 

first, and it's not being done institution by institution now.  So 

these kind of things, I think, are short-term indicators of whether 

or not we are successful in moving towards some of the goals 

that have been stated. 

 

I think another short-term indicator would be evidence that 

district boards are taking increased responsibility for their 

residents' health and for health services.  And I am witnessing 

that right now in Saskatchewan by some district boards who 

have done needs assessment and have actually determined that 

farm safety is their greatest health care need in their area and 

that mental health services that aren't traditional but are of a 

broader nature and that early childhood development is much 

more of a health need than a hospital in their particular 

community. 

 

And so district boards are already accepting that responsibility 

for their residents' health and are putting forward this need as a 

need that should be funded by the government, and we are 

taking those needs into consideration as we determine what 

global funding is. 

 

So that is some of the indicators as to whether or not health 

reform is being successful. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Madam Minister.  I 

wouldn't for a moment want to imply that that's an easy task.  

The measurability part is going to be quite an overwhelming 

task.  I think what's really very important, however, is being 

very specific about the criteria and then, of course, coming up 

with however that is going to attempt to be measured. 

 

Looking at some responsibilities now, would you describe the 

senior management structure of your department, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  First of all, we have the 

deputy minister, Mr. Duane Adams.  And then we have three 

associate deputy ministers, one in charge of strategic services 

such as northern health services, health planning and policy 

development, wellness and health promotion, corporate 

information and technology, and so on, and communications . . . 

epidemiologists, sorry, is in that strategic services area. 

 

Then there's the associate minister of insured services division; 

that's medical care insurance, prescription drug, provincial lab, 

and vital statistics. 

 

And then there's the associate deputy minister of integrated 

health services division.  That is your district support.  The 

programs, director of programs, management support, and 

capital and special operating policy unit is in the integrated 

health services division. 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

So we have three associate deputies in charge of strategic 

services, insured services, and integrated health services.  There 

is another branch which is human resources, and another area 

which is finance and administration, and that's it.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  What structures are in place 

then in the department to ensure that the objectives are achieved 

and that as well that when adjustments are being made that the 

necessary adjustments can actually take place? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, all of the associate 

deputies are tied to a direction by the deputy minister.  And in 

the context of policy development, there is a health planning and 

policy development unit in strategic directions, and a wellness 

and health promotion unit, so that policies and goals are being 

developed and monitored on an ongoing basis. 

 

The deputy minister then establishes certain directions as he's 

advised by people within his department who have expertise in 

determining how policy is being implemented and whether it's 

being implemented appropriately. 

 

And there are, of course, management committees established in 

the Department of Health to review these things and to instruct 

the managers on the policy direction that the deputy minister 

determines in consultation with his professional people. 

 

The whole issue of financing to the Department of Health, of 

course, is tied into whether or not strategic directions are 

appropriate, what they should be, and whether or not they're 

achieving the goal of health reform.  So it's all tied in in that 

fashion. 

 

(1945) 

 

There's another important element and that is that there are a 

number of external advisory committees.  I know the member is 

aware that we were just in her city and announced the 

establishment of a mental health advisory committee which will 

be working very closely with government, but will also be at 

some arm's length of government and will have non-government 

people on the committee, who will not only have the 

responsibility for providing government with recommendations 

as to future directions with respect to mental health, but will also 

have the mandate of monitoring and evaluating the services that 

are being delivered. 

 

There has been provision made for representation from the 

district level, and so the provincial advisory committee is not 

just centralized.  It also has input from the district level and then 

there will be input flowing the other way so that the programing 

that is developed is coming from the grass roots up and also 

from the provincial council to the district boards.  There'll be a 

two-way street. 

 

These kind of advisory committees -- there is another one in 

alcohol and drug addiction -- that are being established are being 

established for three reasons, I 

think.  First of all, to provide us with advisory bodies as we 

move through health reform and make sure that their voice is 

being heard at the district level and at the central level.  Also to 

make sure that we have non-governmental, more community 

input as we develop policies.  And thirdly, to give more power to 

non-governmental people to monitor, and evaluate, and 

participate in the whole development of health reform at the 

district level. 

 

That's important because we believe, in government, that we 

must move toward more community involvement, more 

community input, that that is the direction that people want to 

move, it's the direction we must move in society generally, and 

we're doing it in health in a fairly major fashion.  But as I said 

earlier, it still is developmental. 

 

But these advisory committees will perform an external check 

on the Department of Health as to whether or not we're 

achieving goals.  They will perform an external advice and 

policy development capacity, monitoring and evaluating 

capacity.  And I think through their input we will have a much 

better health care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Madam 

Minister, I am very interested in the advisory committees to 

which you've just made reference.  Could you tell me how many 

there are to date and how they are funded?  I'm interested in who 

comprises them, from where they actually come, the decisions 

that . . . and you can illustrate with the Mental Health Advisory 

Committee, if you wish.  That perhaps might be the one that 

would be closest to what I would understand best. 

 

And I'm particularly interested in how you receive information 

from them.  To whom do they communicate?  And you're saying 

that they will have some capacity to evaluate success of what is 

really happening as far as health reform is concerned.  So what I 

would like is just to have you clarify for me how they would be 

making that kind of evaluation, like based on what? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have some 20 to 30 advisory groups in 

the Department of Health.  Some of them are very high-level 

policy-making bodies, such as the Mental Health Advisory 

Committee, and others may be very specific, for example, the 

Saskatchewan Transplant Program Advisory Committee or the 

Medical Technology Advisory Committee.  There are some very 

specific ones and then some very broad policy . . . yes, I will 

provide you with all this information. 

 

Some of them aren't paid at all; some are paid, depending on 

what sort of work that they're doing.  And some of them are 

professional people; if it demands professional people, then they 

would be staffed by professional people.  Some may be from 

society at large or may be university academic individuals.  It 

really depends on what the need is. 

 

With respect to the Mental Health Advisory 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

Committee . . . each of the names of the mental health here . . . 

The new members were, for example, from the northern 

addictions program for La Ronge; another individual who is a 

native elder from Duck Lake; another person who is a life skills 

instructor and outreach employment counsellor from Indian 

Head; another person, psychiatrist at the regional psychiatric 

centre; another person a retired farmer; another person a senior 

citizen who farms; and then there was a former president of the 

Saskatoon self-help group for persons with mental illness; a 

social worker from Regina; a principal at a collegiate; and a 

social worker from Regina and past president of the 

schizophrenia society. 

 

So the people who are chosen to that particular committee were 

either family of people who were consumers or may even have 

been consumers themselves, and professional people working in 

the area, and we made sure there was an aboriginal component 

to the committee.  They were chosen then very much from 

interested people at large.  And that is how this sort of high-level 

policy committee would generally be chosen. 

 

There are a number of other committees here, however, that are 

very specific.  There's the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Advisory 

Council that was announced by the Associate Minister of Health, 

not that long ago.  And its mandate is to recommend policies and 

to generally . . . very general policies and also policies to address 

the needs of specific target groups, to recommend strategies to 

achieve these policies and to evaluate.  And the composition of 

that group, for example, was . . . it's not laid out the way that one 

is but I can get you that information.  But there again it was . . . 

well I don't have the full details on that so I will look for that 

information and I can get you the details on that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You may not 

have this with you this evening either but I am quite interested 

since you say that there will be . . . part of their mandate will be 

an evaluative one.  I am interested in knowing how they will go 

about making those evaluations based on specific criteria.  What 

will they use as far as measuring success or the need for change, 

that kind of thing?  I'm very interested in that. 

 

As well, I don't know if you have this available but when you 

send the information if you could differentiate between -- and 

you don't have to be really specific but it would be nice to know 

-- those people who are receiving some form of remuneration 

versus those who are not.  And I was quite struck by one thing 

you said, particularly with regard to the Mental Health Advisory 

Committee, and you can correct me if I'm wrong.  Did I 

understand you to say that there was someone who had actually 

been on the receiving end of mental health services who was 

part of that group?  You indicated that there was a consumer, I 

hope. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have a consumer on it but we can't get 

more specific than that. 

The other question you had asked is whether or not we could 

differentiate between receiving some form of remuneration and 

those who are not, and I think we can do that. 

 

The other question you had asked is how do we evaluate with 

respect to Mental Health Advisory.  The Mental Health 

Advisory Committee will be involved in establishing with the 

Department of Health how they will be able to evaluate and 

what sort of monitoring ability they'll have but that hasn't been 

worked out yet. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I've found this most 

interesting. 

 

I'm sure you more than anyone will acknowledge that there's 

been considerable change in the Department of Health 

experienced by the staff in particular, not only because of 

mandate, but I'm sure that we can say that this would have 

resulted . . . created, perhaps, some tensions and some stress, and 

possibly at times even reduced productivity. 

 

What have your officials done to address that kind of concern 

within your own department?  And I would like you to actually 

characterize the morale of the department now, let's say relative 

to where it was a year ago. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- You're quite right.  There has been a lot of 

tension in the Department of Health and amongst all health care 

people throughout the province because we are through a 

massive change and it causes tension and stress. 

 

I think that as the department has just explained to me, the 

morale this year is probably better than it was last year because a 

lot of the change has already occurred.  If there are Health 

department people who are anxious at this time it will be those 

who are facing devolution of services to the district board. 

 

And what the department is doing to deal with that is having 

information-sharing sessions; they're urging the workers who 

will be devolved to talk to the district board so they can 

determine where they're going to fit and how it's going to work 

out.  They're being urged to talk to them as quickly as possible 

in order to alleviate their anxieties. 

 

I understand that SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' 

Union) is helping the department out in this regard and they are 

working together on that.  There has been a tremendous amount 

of information sharing that has taken place over several months 

now with departmental staff. 

 

The department itself has been reorganized and most of that is 

complete at this time.  And therefore people are a little more 

certain, for the most part, as to where they fit in the reform 

process that has taken place, not just in the department, but also 

in society at large. 

 

(2000) 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

The district boards are moving to get their amalgamations, and 

everything is as complete, and their transfer merger agreements 

as complete as possible in order to settle the matters so that 

employees are able to fit into a certain place and know where it 

is going to be moving in the future. 

 

I would not say that there has been reduced productivity in the 

Department of Health.  I have seen an incredible amount of work 

being done by people in the Department of Health and I know 

that they are working very, very, very hard to do as much as they 

possibly can and to meet the demands that are being imposed 

upon them from external sources as well as from the Minister of 

Health. 

 

And I must say I think they've done a very admirable job.  I 

could not categorize anything that they've achieved in the last 

two years as reduced productivity because I think they've moved 

health reform along so quickly and have done it very 

competently.  In spite of everything that we have heard, we are 

getting recognition from other provinces and other international 

jurisdictions as to how health reform is being implemented in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And a great deal of that credit goes to the departmental officials, 

the administrative staff, and the 40 to 50 that are out there in the 

field.  And an enormous amount of credit goes to the hundreds 

of people in Saskatchewan in every community that is doing 

something to further health reform and is partaking in the 

process because it could never have happened without them, and 

there are literally hundreds out there involved in the process. 

 

And it hasn't been perfect, and it's been far from perfect, but 

there's been a tremendous amount of community 

pulling-together which is the process we were attempting to 

encourage.  But it has been much more effective than what I 

thought it would be.  And we do now see many, many people 

throughout the province getting involved in the needs 

assessment, and it's a real civic community working towards the 

final health care goals which is what we have established. 

 

So I can't underestimate how much the people have done at the 

grass roots and how much the health care stakeholders have 

done because it has been a cooperative effort with doctors and 

nurses and other health care professionals.  So it's my hat's off to 

to the department and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this committee report progress. 

 

The Chair: -- The minister has moved the committee report 

progress.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.  Carried. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I just would like to thank 

the Minister of Health this evening and her officials for coming 

in and answering my questions.  Thank you. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  I have with me tonight the president of 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation to my left, 

Brian Woodcock; and behind me I have John Law, the senior 

vice-president of finance and accommodation; beside him is Rob 

Isbister, director of financial planning; and to his left is Al 

Moffat, the vice-president of commercial services. 

 

The Chair: -- I'm tempted to recognize the other members who 

are standing, but I know that they have no business before the 

committee; but would ask them to take their seats and conduct 

your business in such a way that it doesn't transgress on the 

business of the committee. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well good 

evening, Minister, and welcome to your officials.  I guess there 

might be a reason why some people are called lucky and other 

people aren't, but regardless of those things, here we are, you 

and me, and we have some questions to ask and hopefully we 

can get some answers. 

 

I'm new in this critic area so you will bear with me if I ask 

questions that seem a little simplistic perhaps at times, but the 

way I look at it, being new at this, probably I know about as 

much about it as most of the Saskatchewan people, at least the 

majority of them, so the questions I ask would be the kind of 

things they wouldn't know about either, so maybe we can help 

everybody by taking it on from a new perspective. 

 

Now I noticed when I was preparing my notes, Minister, that we 

had in our records in the file, a news release that came out 

December 13, 1993.  It's got your name first, Minister, it says: 

 

 . . . responsible for Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, today announced the start of an ambitious 

program to relocate key departments and to cut costs of 

government. 

 

 Earlier this fall, SPMC held a proposal call to renew or replace 

140,000 square-feet of space.  While primarily geared to 

Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation and 

Saskatchewan Municipal Government, as well as SPMC, 

related moves during 1994 to 1996 will involve other 

departments in a more comprehensive space plan. 

 

I think I'm going to refer to this in a few different questions.  

And so in order for me not to be asking a whole bunch of 

questions in a series here and then have you try to pick up on 

which ones you can remember, I think I'll stop there and allow 

you to comment on the related moves that you're talking about in 

1994 and what you're talking about to go to 1996 and what is 

involved in these departmental moves. 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, I guess in 

order to answer the question, what we set out to achieve when 

we embarked upon the Regina space proposal call was to see if 

we couldn't achieve a cost-effective group of properties that we 

would be leasing on behalf of the government and different 

government departments that would be cost effective but then on 

the other hand that wouldn't be destroying the business 

community in terms of driving the market to below what it 

would cost to operate and to maintain a building. 

 

We looked at other jurisdictions in Calgary and Winnipeg, and 

quite clearly there was a glut of property on the market in those 

areas as there was here in Regina.  And it became quite clear 

that, as a government and a large player in downtown 

commercial property, if we were to embark upon a wholesale cut 

and forcing the lowest common denominator, that we could 

really create some problems. 

 

So what we were looking for was fair market value for the 

property, given today's economy and today's realities.  And what 

we were able to do by our proposal call was to save the taxpayer 

of Saskatchewan over $3 million in the next three years. 

 

I want to say that with the reorganization, we'll be consolidating 

some of the different department branches.  Some as examples 

were in more than one property and were not running as 

efficiently as was felt they could.  So by the consolidation and 

by the proposal call, we were able to, we believe, have more 

efficient government operations and at the same time be more 

cost effective on behalf of the taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  Now we're going to 

definitely have to take a look at this in a little more detail in 

order for me to understand what's going on.  Now you 

announced . . . your announcement -- rather -- that departments 

would be calling for new leasing proposals.  You indicated that 

you were going to save this $3 million in costs for office space 

and we're going to have to pursue that a little more to see if there 

actually can be those savings involved.  So I guess my next 

question is how much government office space was subject to 

this proposal call; and why was this specific group of offices 

under review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  You have asked a 

question of which there can be and are many details.  I'm going 

to attempt to give you a breakdown of how the $3 million works. 

 

For the year '94-95 there will be a small savings in terms of the 

numbers of dollars.  The '95-96 fiscal year increases and then 

'96-97 increases yet more.  In '96-7 the actual saving would be in 

the neighbourhood of 1.6 million.  In '95-96 the cost saving 

would be in the neighbourhood of 1.3 million.  And in '94-95 I 

believe the figure is . . . it's a little less than 100,000, but we've 

also factored in the costs of moving and consolidating the 

different departments.  The departments that were 

affected in the moves were Municipal Government, Social 

Services, Environment and Resource Management, and the 

Liquor and Gaming Commission. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I'm certainly going to 

have at least one colleague interested in the Liquor and Gaming 

Commission aspect of this whole process.  So I'm not going to 

go into that right away because we want to get into this line of 

questioning a little further before we go into the other ones. 

 

Just of interest, are ministerial phones included in Saskatchewan 

Property Management?  Ministerial telephones -- ministerial 

phones, telephones, cell phones, that kind of stuff?  Are they 

included in Saskatchewan Property Management? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, I am told by my officials that 

cellular phones and the telephone bills, expenses of that nature, 

would come out of the ministerial budget, which is part and 

parcel of Property Management Corporation's overall budget. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How many would that be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To my knowledge, we have a bank of 

phones in the ministers' offices.  There are extensions at each of 

the secretaries' desks, each of the MAs' (ministerial assistant) 

desks, and at my desk as well.  And we have one cell phone, to 

my knowledge. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you tell us if anyone has more then one 

cell phone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No, in total there are six people 

working in my office, plus myself, and we have one cellular 

phone. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That's between the six, right?  That's between 

the six of you you just have the one, and you pass it around.  

Okay.  I should let you get that on the record if you want with 

the next question, so just put that in your memory bank. 

 

Back to this leasing thing.  You put out a call for proposals.  Can 

you tell us the total number of proposals that were submitted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by the officials there were 12 

to 15 proposals that were put forth. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Could you tell us, Minister, what the criteria by 

which these proposals were assessed?  Were they assessed only 

on the basis of lowest lease rates or were there other factors 

considered in this process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I think quite clearly we were 

looking at the quality of space, I guess the accessibility for the 

client groups.  We were looking at packages that would fit the 

amount of square feet that would be required by the different 

departments, as 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

well as cost. 

 

Quite clearly it takes more to satisfy the needs of a department 

that would be using this space than just cost.  There would be 

renovation costs.  I guess we would be looking at, as I've 

indicated, accessibility and the quality of space as well.  All of 

these are important in terms of putting together a package for 

our clients.  And through these proposals we indicated the 

parcels we would be requiring and based on that we chose what 

we felt to be the most economical and the most suitable space. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, could you tell us how many previous 

leases were renewed after this process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I am told by the officials, it was 

. . . and it was quite a bit of a complicated move because we had 

some leases change because departments would be moving from 

one existing lease to a different lease, and that would mean a 

new lease. 

 

We are basically in the same buildings that we were but in 

different configurations.  And some of them are with new leases 

as I understand it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, with all due respect, 

complicated is why we're here because this is supposed to be the 

place where we get the details, even the little, minute details.  

We're supposed to be able to find this out for the taxpayers. And 

so we're going to challenge you to tell us what exactly is going 

on here and what happened. 

 

So you can't tell us how many previous leases were renewed, so 

maybe you'd like to try it from a different direction.  How many 

of these previous leases were not renewed?  How many 

departments actually did move and what were the criteria used in 

deciding to move these departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I'm going to read in then, I 

guess, the specific moves.  Education is at London Life Building 

-- was at London Life Building.  The new location is in London 

Life, the Walter Scott, and the Alford Floors Building. 

 

The Department of Highways was in London Life and it remains 

in London Life.  Municipal Government was in the Palliser 

Building, the North Canadian Oils Building, Saskatchewan 

Place, the Health Building, and the London Life Building.  It is 

now consolidated, instead of the five locations, into the London 

Life Building. 

 

CSMA (Central Survey and Mapping Agency) purchasing was 

in South Broad Plaza.  It remains in South Broad Plaza.  The 

back-fill strategy, the Liquor and Gaming Authority was in Park 

Street, 1660 Park Street and the Toronto-Dominion Bank 

Building.  It will be moving to the North Canadian Oils 

Building. 

 

The Department of Highways was in the Western Building and it 

will be located at 1660 Park Street. 

SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) 

was in the Walter Scott and the Health Building and it will be 

consolidated to the Health Building. 

 

IMAS (Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) was in 

Saskatchewan Place and it will be moving to the Palliser 

Building.  And I don't know if you need more detail than that in 

terms of square footage or square metres. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, perhaps you wouldn't mind 

sending us a copy of that particular material, or tabling it or 

whatever process works, so that we can have it.  Yes we'd like 

the details of the square footage and all the rest.  Would you like 

to just table that or would you like to read it into the Hansard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The copy that I quoted from, I have 

some marks on, but I certainly will send you a copy of this 

document.  Have we got a clean copy here?  Yes, we have a 

clean copy, and we'll send that over. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Your marks wouldn't 

have bothered us at all. 

 

So if I've got this right -- and maybe I haven't -- but why is it 

that so many of these leases which went out under the proposed 

call were for buildings which the government already was 

leasing, or am I wrong? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I think part of it was some of 

the leases were due to . . . they were close to the end of their 

term, and we needed to renew the leases.  We had an idea of 

what we required in terms of square footage if we were to put, as 

an example, Municipal Government together.  I think quite 

clearly it would make sense if you're looking at five different 

locations with one government department, if there was a way 

with respect to a proposal that might come from a developer or 

from an existing building that we could accommodate Municipal 

Government in one location, that it would make sense to do that. 

 

And so we put the proposal calls out based on what our 

requirements were.  We were, as I indicated before, looking for 

the quality of space, some cost effectiveness.  And I indicated 

before that it's quite clear that market conditions had changed 

since some of these leases were in fact signed by the previous 

administration.  And we felt that we could generate some cost 

effectiveness and some efficiency within government to save $3 

million for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan over a period of three 

years by renewing and put a proposal call out.  And renewing 

these leases I think is frankly no small feat, and I think it's 

something that the people of Saskatchewan were looking for 

from us when we were elected and given our mandate in 

October of 1991 to run as cost-effective government as we 

could. 

 

So by that, we decided to use the proposal call as opposed to 

arbitrarily selecting, as was the case in the past.  We decided to 

put it out for tender and to have all 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

of the business and all of the developers have a fair chance at 

offering to supply space to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

We went through the request-for-proposal process.  We looked 

at the proposals that came to us.  And based on the content and 

all of the criteria that we talked about before -- the quality of 

equipment, the amount it would cost to retrofit them, and the 

price -- we made our decision.  And as I said, the net result of 

that was a cost saving to the people of Saskatchewan of some $3 

million over a three-year period.  And I think that's good 

government and I think frankly, it makes good business sense. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, certainly it will be that good 

business sense if in fact it turns out that we will save the 3 

million.  I've had some folks suggest it, and perhaps that's not 

going to be the case if we research this properly. 

 

So let's go through the process and prove what we've said one 

way or the other.  Now in the past, I take it from your comments, 

that leases were renegotiated and when that happened of course, 

you simply went through the process of considering if that was 

fair or not fair, and then leased or not. 

 

So I guess one of my questions is: why would you put the 

landlords through the extra red tape of submitting proposals if in 

fact a lot of the properties that you were talking about leasing 

were ones that you had previously leased anyway?  You really 

didn't bring in many new players, I guess is what we're saying 

here. 

 

If you did, how many new players are involved?  And you know, 

just how much need was there for all of this extra work and extra 

proposal and extra red tape that people went through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I guess if I am to condense my 

answer, what I would put . . . the proposition I would put to you 

is this: that there are a number of business people who have 

properties in the inner city of Regina who wanted access to 

government business.  And we met with the stakeholders, with 

the property owners, and what became very clear to us is that 

they were willing to engage themselves in, and wanted us to put 

forth, a competitive acquisition solution to our downtown space 

problems. 

 

I guess simply put: they all wanted a crack at government 

business.  So we threw the request-for-proposal option, offered 

them that, and I think the end result was, in fact, that we have 

saved the people of Saskatchewan $3 million over a three-year 

period, and I think that's no small potatoes, as I've indicated 

before. 

 

We have allowed the business people fair access to government 

tenders, which is a novelty, frankly, given some of the past 

performances of the previous administration.  But I don't want to 

get into that.  I would rather look at what we might do in the 

future and how we may continue to allow business people 

access to government business and at the same time generate a 

cost-effective relationship with the business community. 

 

So having said that, really that's why we did it: to allow access 

by all the business people which is what they were asking for.  

But secondly, we felt that it would be more cost effective than 

any other method we could have chosen. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  I appreciate your 

observation that you were getting somewhat political.  And I 

think you're wise in your decision not to go that course just this 

early in the evening because obviously I can turn my colleagues 

loose on you in a political manner, and we can have an 

insult-trading session for the rest of the evening, if that's what 

you prefer.  I certainly think that they're up to it even if I'm 

perhaps not. 

 

You allude to $3 million worth of savings, so now we're going to 

give you your chance to prove that you have saved $3 million by 

asking you to justify these claims. 

 

Now how much will the government be paying over the course 

of the leases as proposed . . . or as opposed, rather, to the 

previous leases?  In other words, the old leases you had, we'd 

like to know what they were worth.  How much was involved? 

 

And you've got new leases.  We'd like to see how many of these 

new leases you've got, at what dollar rate you're paying for the 

new leases.  And we want to be able to compare them and see 

that there's a $3 million less.  We want the figures for the entire 

lease period though, not just for a year or two, because leases are 

sometimes prorated at different rates per year.  There's all kinds 

of factors like that.  So we want the whole bag of potatoes here, 

Mr. Minister, if you don't mind and not just half the load.  We 

want to see all of the figures that you've got to prove your point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Because of the nature of 

the contracts with the businesses that we're involved in, and I 

think you can understand that we're not at liberty to disclose in 

detail and by individual building, and I would certainly rather 

not do that at the request of the people who we have entered into 

these lease arrangements with. 

 

What I would like to do and what I would rather do is give you 

the aggregate amounts per year that we will be saving from the 

total of the moves that we have made.  In 1994-95 we will be 

saving about $400,000.  We will be costing the government 

390,000 roughly, in terms of renovations and moving costs.  So 

there will be a net savings of around, as I understand it, around 

$10,000. 

 

In '95-96 the total annual savings on the aggregate of the leases 

is 1.45 million.  The total costs in that fiscal year will be 208,000 

and we will realize an annual net saving of 1.242 million for that 

fiscal year. 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

In the year '96-97 the total savings will be one point -- well just 

roughly one and a half million and the -- I'm not sure what this is 

here -- I guess the figure for '96-97 then is about one and a half 

million dollars. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I have a lot of trouble 

understanding how you can claim confidentiality in this matter 

and use that as a "trust me" approach.  You almost sounded like 

a used car salesman there for a few minutes the way I was 

starting to have to trust you.  But reminding myself, of course, 

that you're not a used car salesman and that your nickname is 

Lucky, I think we'll have to delve into this just a little bit further. 

 

Minister, explain to me how it is that if you as the government 

are leasing most of the rental property for office space in the city 

-- there's hardly anybody else in competition for that space -- 

how could that possibly be a confidentiality problem?  Who are 

you competing with that you have to keep this information 

confidential?  Explain that to me.  I'd like to understand this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well first of all, let me say that this 

proposal call is only 6 per cent of Regina's market space so quite 

clearly there are other players. 

 

And I would want to remind the member that SPMC's 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) existing 

policy, with respect to information that is available and 

information that is not available, has been in existence since 

1976.  Now if I add up the number of years and the number of 

years estimates have been done and the number of contracts and 

requests for proposal that have been let over -- I guess -- now an 

18-year period, quite clearly the government's policy with 

respect to disclosure hasn't changed over a period of 18 years. 

 

Now that must be for one particular reason or the other.  My 

guess would be that it is a reasonable policy, or the former Tory 

administration would have had some 10 years of estimates to 

change it.  Now if the policy remains in place over the period of 

time when the former administration is in place . . . it was there 

prior to their election in 1982.  It's been there since their defeat 

in October of 1991.  It would, to me, make some kind of sense 

that there would be some information that landlords would 

rather not have disclosed.  We've broken down in terms of the 

years, the three fiscal years, the number of dollars in savings 

would add up to the $3 million figure that we announced, and 

we think it's reasonable. 

 

We think it's also reasonable that we protect the people that we 

do business with.  I would think that you could understand that it 

wouldn't be a normal course of business to be publishing a 

business arrangement in the Leader-Post between two 

businesses in downtown Regina any more than it would be to 

publish those kinds of details in Hansard where that kind of 

information could do damage to some businesses.  So I say to 

the member, the policy has been long-standing.  And the fact 

that it's been there for 18 years should come as no shock to 

members opposite.  We think it makes business sense, 

good business sense, and it's part of the agreement that we make 

with those we sign our agreement with. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I have an uncle who, when somebody told him 

something he didn't quite believe, would say that that's the 

bunkum.  I think that was as polite as he could get in terms of 

words that we can use in the parliamentary forum.  So I'm going 

to say to you that I think this is a bunch of bunkum because I 

think that you're spending taxpayers' dollars on leases and I don't 

believe that there's a conflict of interest here or any 

confidentiality that needs to be protected.  I quite honestly don't 

think you're saving the $3 million; I think probably that there are 

riders in these leases that we don't know about, that's going to 

end up costing a lot of money as we go that we'll never find out 

about. 

 

I don't, quite frankly, trust you as a lease expert or a used car 

salesman and I'll substantiate my claim as to why not by 

referring to the fact that in your initial announcement you stated 

that there were savings of 20 to 30 per cent was achieved in 

some cases.  You then clarified that you meant that the saving 

was 20 to 30 per cent on average.  So we say at that point, which 

is it?  What was the real average saving per office achieved 

through this initiative? 

 

You can answer that, as well as to answer us more clearly why 

you think we should believe the kind of bunkum that you've 

been giving us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member 

opposite, you may not believe me and I mean that's fine; I can 

live with that and I want to assure you that I'll go home and 

sleep this evening irrespective of whether or not you would 

believe our figures or my figures specifically. 

 

But I want to say to you that the president of the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation met with the individuals who 

submitted bids and they specifically asked that the amounts not 

be disclosed.  And we will respect that. 

 

I will say to the member opposite, I think he knows and 

understands business well enough to know that it could have a 

major impact on market conditions and may be potentially 

damaging to third parties and I think he knows that.  But what I 

say to the member from Maple Creek, if he doesn't trust me, he 

should ask the former premier or one of his other colleagues to 

go out into the members' lounge and phone downtown and 

phone a few of the business folks who may have been involved, 

or some of the large corporations who may have been involved, 

and ask them if disclosure of this information was not, in fact, 

asked to be held. 

 

And I guess I can't assure him any more today other than what I 

already have by suggesting that he ask some of the folks that are 

involved.  And I don't ask him to believe me, but what he should 

do is watch very closely as these cost savings are passed on to 

the different departments -- to Municipal Government, and to 

Social Services, and Environment and 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

Resource Management, and the Liquor and Gaming 

Commission.  And he should watch in estimates over the next 

two and three years as the proof of the reduction in the costs of 

this lease space is in fact evidenced in the amount that's entered 

into the blue book. 

 

So it's not a shell game.  I want to say to the member from 

Maple Creek, this isn't the shell game that we have here. We 

have legitimately saved in the neighbourhood of $3 million.  We 

believe that these are the types of things that we need to do in 

order to balance the budget in this province, and we're going to 

continue to do some hard negotiating on behalf of the taxpayers, 

the people of this province. 

 

And so I just say to you, watch in estimates as you see the actual 

reductions in costs to these different departments, and you will 

see the $3 million savings evidenced quite clearly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, suppose we take you at your 

word for a minute here, and you're going to save $3 million.  

And so then what you're saying is that your average of 20 to 30 

per cent savings is accurate.  How do you explain that these 

same landlords -- because most of these leases were renewed 

with the very same landlords you had before -- how do you 

explain that all of a sudden these people could afford to take 20 

to 30 per cent less money for their rentals?  Did their property 

taxes go down by 20 to 30 per cent, or did their power rates go 

down by 20 or 30 per cent?  Or did they suddenly win a lottery, 

perhaps? 

 

How do you explain that these people can afford to take these 

kind of significant drops in lease rates in the city of Regina? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well, you know, I think if the 

member is in tune and aware of the conditions and the market 

conditions in downtown Regina, he will know that there's a 20 

per cent vacancy, as there are in some of the other major cities 

across western Canada -- in Winnipeg and in Calgary.  And he 

will know that when you have that amount of vacant office 

space, that owners, building owners, and building managers will 

be looking to lease what they have in terms of vacant space, 

which in fact has on this occasion driven the market costs down, 

which has resulted in a saving for the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the member may not feel this to be good business sense.  

And it may be in fact a bit of a hardship on some of the owners 

of some of these properties, and we recognize that.  But I want 

to say that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have also had some 

hardships placed upon them by virtue of the fact that they're 

paying $850 million in interest every year, each and every year, 

on a debt that they would rather not have been put in place on 

their behalf by the previous administration.  And I think they 

recognize that we need to do, as a government, everything we 

can to cut the internal costs so we can afford to be paying this 

$850 million in annual interest payments. 

Now no one wants this kind of money to leave our province and 

the stark reality is that by virtue of the fact that there is a 

massive debt been incurred in this province, we are required to 

pay this interest.  And what that means is that we have to go out 

shopping for cheaper office space because frankly -- I say to the 

member from Maple Creek -- we can't afford to be spending the 

kinds of dollars as a government as was the past practice. 

 

And that's why we have cut the cost of operating this 

government by proposal calls, such as we have done in 

downtown Regina, because the people of the province simply 

don't want to be paying any more than the market will demand.  

And quite clearly, with the request for proposal, and the 

involvement of all of the business community in downtown 

Regina, we have in fact secured leases based on what the market 

demand is.  And as I've indicated to you, a 20 per cent vacancy 

rate will have some downward pressure on market rates. 

 

So I say to you, the consolidation, and the increased efficiencies 

that we're going to be able to generate, and the fact that we're 

going to save $3 million over the next three years is no small 

measure . . . in no small measure what the people of 

Saskatchewan have been asking for and the kind of leadership 

that they're looking for from their government. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm glad you got back on track at the end there, 

Minister.  Now would you agree with me that the provincial 

government is probably the largest single user of office space in 

Regina? Even though you're not nearly taking up all of the office 

space, you probably would be the biggest customer as an 

individual?  Do you not think then that your actions will 

significantly drive down the market price for office space in 

Regina? 

 

And with a view to answering that question, perhaps you could 

consider the lease prices that you've achieved, you've claimed 

that they are in the market range, I think would be a good term, 

in the city of Regina.  Now in your department's estimations, are 

you in the high end of the market range or the low end of the 

market range?  Could you give us a bit of an indication where 

you are on that scale of high to low along with the effect you are 

going to have on the market?  And would you mind giving us a 

list of the landlords that you leased from so that I can phone 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Let me say to the member from 

Maple Creek that the officials tell me that we are right in about 

the middle of what the market range is and has been.  But I want 

to say to the member from Maple Creek that we have used a 

different approach and we have tried to find a middle ground. 

 

We didn't want to drive the cost of very expensive and prime 

space down to $7 a foot, but I can tell you that that hasn't been 

the experience in some of the other major cities.  And let me 

refer specifically to Winnipeg, where a Conservative 

government, I 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

assume, is a fairly major player.  I am told, and my officials tell 

me, that it's commonplace to see $7 and $8 square-foot prime 

space in the centre of Winnipeg.  But we attempted not to do that 

because we knew the impact that it would have on this 

community. 

 

And I want to say to the member opposite that he asked as to 

whether or not we're one of the major players.  I would assume 

that the province would be the single largest player followed 

closely, or maybe very close to equal, the federal government.  

And I want to indicate as well when the markets are stronger -- 

and they inevitably will be -- when those rates increase, we'll 

pay higher rates as well when that happens.  So I say yes, we're a 

fairly major player.  We have in fact found about middle of the 

market range, and we think that's a reasonable approach, and we 

know that the taxpayers of the province will be satisfied with the 

savings that we've incurred. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm going to repeat my request 

for the list of the names of the people that you think I should 

phone because I really would like to telephone them up 

tomorrow and follow this up.  I don't like to, you know, make 

idle bluffs or indications.  And I definitely want to phone those 

people, so I'd appreciate it if you give me a list of those names of 

the landlords involved so that we can phone them and ask them 

their opinion. 

 

And you've alluded to the effects that your actions will have on 

the investment property in the city of Regina.  And given the 

depressed economy then . . . of the depressed economy, I guess 

this is going to have a very negative effect probably on rental 

property in Saskatchewan.  Do you believe that considering that 

you've sort of come into this leasing at a time when the economy 

is depressed, where vacancy rates are high, do you not feel that 

maybe you took a little bit of advantage of the people who own 

the properties, in that you have perhaps unfairly driven the 

market down already without, as you said earlier, not wanting to.  

Perhaps you've already done that. 

 

So do you believe that you have bargained in good faith with the 

landlords of this city, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well first of all let me say that in 

terms of a list of whom you may want to contact, we will send 

across a list of people who the president of Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation met with to discuss the 

proposal call and the direction that we were taking.  So that list 

we will send across to you.  Let me say as well, about the same 

time this proposal call was let, there was a private deal reached 

that was in the same price range as what we reached with this 

proposal call. 

 

I will as well send across an executive summary of an impact 

assessment that we the corporation had done by a private firm 

out of Ottawa, I believe, to confirm that we in fact were 

concerned, first of all, about the impact that this proposal call 

would have on the downtown business community; and secondly 

to confirm that -- as was our assessment -- there would not be 

any major impact in terms of letting this 

proposal call, as we did.  And we will send that across to you as 

well so you too can be satisfied as we are. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister, I appreciate that.  

I'm going to look that over very carefully and after we study it, 

we definitely are going to take the matter up with you a little 

further. 

 

Where is the Saskatchewan Property Management equipment 

stored in the city of Regina?  Do you have warehouses where the 

excess chairs, and tables, and things like that are stored?  Are 

there locations in the city like that?  And after you've answered 

that, I think I'll let my colleague from Kindersley ask you a few 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The main warehouse for that kind of 

furniture is at 110 Henderson Drive.  It's called the Gemini 

Building.  We also have storage in our on-site and in our 

buildings throughout the city.  So it's not located just in one 

particular spot.  There's stock in other areas as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, I was 

wanting to ask a number of questions about your department's 

and SPMC's plans for the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) office equipment.  I wonder if you could bring us up 

to date on what the plans are for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm assuming you're referring to 

office equipment that we would be putting into the MLA's 

offices in the constituencies.  Do I have that right? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And existing equipment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The existing equipment would come 

back when a member ceases to become a member.  If we can 

transfer it, as was the case in the equipment from the member 

from Regina North West where the member who preceded her, 

his equipment was passed on to her.  If that might be able to be 

arranged in some cases, we'd be certainly more than willing to 

entertain that. 

 

I want to say that we haven't developed a firm policy as there is 

no immediate need.  But what we would see is a list of 

equipment: desk, typewriter, computer, paper shredder if 

necessary.  Those types of things would be . . . the offices would 

be furnished in the same fashion as we do the different levels of 

government officials.  An ML (management level) 1, for an 

example, would have this quality of furniture and the amounts 

would be specified.  And we intend to work with the members, 

with your members of the Board of Internal Economy and the 

Leader of the Third Party in developing a list and a set of 

equipment that will in fact serve the needs of the members in the 

constituencies. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, it's my 

understanding in speaking with some of the folks in financial 

services that they have been requesting some sort of direction 

from the SPMC with respect to the existing equipment and so far 

your 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

department hasn't responded.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The president indicates that he is not 

aware of any requests, but I certainly, as the minister 

responsible, understand that we need to have this in place.  If 

there is a request that has been put, we certainly aren't aware of 

it. 

 

But I guess there are two things that could happen with the 

existing equipment.  If it's non-usable equipment, it would be 

disposed of through sales and salvage, the same as other 

obsolete equipment of government is.  If it's usable, quite clearly 

we would encourage members to use the equipment.  I don't 

think there's any major secret to this kind of a system.  The 

federal government has used it for years and years and I think 

it's something that could be workable. 

 

But I think the main thing is to ensure that we have a proper 

inventory and that proper track of the equipment is kept and that 

it transfers from member to member.  If a member ceases to be a 

member -- is defeated or retires -- that a newly elected member 

would be able to walk in and take over and be ensured that there 

would be a reasonably equipped office. 

 

But I can see only two options.  If there is surplus equipment, 

it'll be sold the same as any other surplus piece of government 

equipment.  And on the other hand, if there's a need for new 

equipment in the MLAs' offices, it would be provided through 

Property Management Corporation, which is a system that your 

members of the Board of Internal Economy agreed to as well 

when we put that motion forth that members would no longer 

own the equipment in their constituency offices, but that it 

would revert to being property of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  And I believe, if you search the records, you'll 

find that your representatives to the Board of Internal Economy 

supported the government on this initiative. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, that's indeed correct, Mr. Minister.  I'm just 

wanting to get some detail about that. 

 

I recall a number of MLAs on our side receiving letters from -- I 

believe it was from the Speaker, I'm just not sure -- with respect 

to office furniture and asking whether or not you had any 

financial liability . . . individual members that had financial . . . 

for example, a loan to buy the equipment out.  Has that been 

done?  Have a number of MLAs actually fit into that situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I'm told by Mr. Woodcock that he is 

working actively with the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly to 

develop a policy with respect to those outstanding loans so that 

the liability for government-owned property would no longer 

exist and be held by individual members, but that the 

outstanding loans would be assumed by Property Management 

Corporation and that a payback period would be worked 

through.  And the policy is being worked on with Property 

Management Corporation and the Clerk. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Have any of those arrangements taken 

place so far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- No. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Why not, Mr. Minister?  It's been some time now.  

What's the hold-up? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- What we can do is undertake to get 

for you a status report, and I give you my commitment that if 

there are any members that you are aware of that are 

experiencing difficulties because this policy hasn't been I guess 

definitively put forth, that we would be more than willing to 

have a look at that.  But my guess is that we can have this 

effectively dealt with by the end of the month. 

 

Part of the difficulty is to try and determine how the payback 

period works.  There are some varied discrepancies with respect 

to the aggregate amounts of these outstanding loans, and our 

attempt is to ensure that they can be paid back on a fair basis, 

but that members who have outstanding loans don't benefit over 

what other members would receive because of the amounts that 

would be required to pay back . . . we don't want them to be 

either too high or too low; we want them to be fair.  But if you're 

aware of any particular problems in this area I'd certainly be 

more than willing to meet with you after estimates tonight or 

tomorrow, but hopefully we could have the policy in place and 

effectively working by the end of the month. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, it seems to 

me that you're going to wind up with 66 separate situations.  

There's MLAs that obviously have a difficulty with this because 

they've been long-term MLAs.  There's MLAs that have still not 

been paid out on equipment that they have purchased, and there's 

new MLAs that have bought equipment and some took out 

loans.  Some paid for it themselves directly and then are sort of 

on the hook.  I mean we're kind of in a period of time here, as 

you appreciate I'm sure, where at one point it appeared that the 

MLAs were going to be left with the equipment and then there 

was a change in . . . And we agreed to the change -- no problem 

with that  

_- but there are a number of people out there that have either a 

loan or have essentially bought the equipment themselves and 

have given the government a loan.  And it seems to me that the 

sooner you deal with this problem, I think the better everyone 

would feel about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well I can only agree with the 

member from Kindersley.  We're in a fairly dramatic transition 

here in that the former directive allowed for the process, as you 

describe it, to take place. 

 

When the directive was changed . . . and I think it was a very 

positive change that we made.  The people of Saskatchewan, I 

think, felt that there was some unfairness irrespective of what 

quality of equipment might be in members' offices -- and I know 

some of them are fairly shabby and are not very elaborate 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

operations -- but felt that it was unfair for members of the 

legislature to be able to gain personally.  I think that was a 

feeling certainly of government caucus members, that none of us 

wanted to gain personally by ownership to the equipment. 

 

So we're in a bit of a transition period, but I give you the 

commitment tonight that we'll undertake to finalize that policy 

and get those issues dealt with as soon as is possible.  And I'm 

assuming that we should be able to have this process completed 

by the end of the month. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's the closest 

assurance I think we've been given in a long time with respect to 

this.  It's been two years and something now that this situation 

has been in . . . well essentially two years.  I mean it's been two 

years past that since the election took place when a lot of people 

took out these kinds of loans.  Shortly after the election was 

over, there were people making arrangements for furniture, and 

paying it out of their own pockets and that sort of thing. 

 

It's been some time since the decision was made to transfer it all 

to SPMC.  No question it hasn't been near that long. But, Mr. 

Minister, I certainly take you at your word and appreciate the 

fact that you're going to be dealing with this as quickly as 

possible.  And we'll be holding you to it, quite frankly, because 

there are a number of members that I'm aware of that have 

brought it to my attention that they find themselves in 

circumstances they aren't very happy with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I don't know if you're looking for a 

response, but let me just respond quickly.  I'm not sure of the 

date that the directive in terms of this change of ownership was 

made. 

 

I can say this.  When you purchased your equipment you knew 

what the guidelines were.  All members knew what the 

guidelines were.  And if they assumed a personal liability, they 

were well aware that they were taking on that encumbrance.  

That's how the directive stood and I'm sure he will know that. 

 

If you were borrowing to a constituency office, any private 

member, personal dollars to buy equipment, at that time I'm sure 

you knew what the directives were.  I'm sure all members would 

have known what the directive is, but I don't want to debate that. 

 

I want to say that the decision was made just recently, though, 

for Property Management Corporation to assume liability of the 

outstanding dollars that were assumed prior to this policy, and 

we will undertake to have this cleared up as quickly as we can. 

 

And I want to say that this is certainly not a partisan issue in that 

there are outstanding loans by all members on all sides of this 

Assembly, government side and opposition side, and we 

certainly understand the inconvenience that it's causing them and 

we'll do everything we can to get this out of the way. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So you're going to deal with it both in 

terms of personal loans -- essentially MLAs buying the 

equipment and using it in the office, and now they're finding that 

at the end of the day that the equipment isn't going to be theirs 

any more -- and you're also going to deal with it in terms of 

anyone that has a bank loan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well yes.  If you, as a private 

member, had borrowed the money, that will be dealt with.  If it's 

a bank loan, that will be dealt with, and SPMC will be assuming 

that.  And I'm sure the member from Rosthern, who sits on the 

Board of Internal Economy, would be . . . oh, wait a minute, 

there's been a little change.  But I'm sure your member on the 

Board of Internal Economy, the Leader of the Opposition, would 

be more than willing to share the details of this process with 

you, as it was discussed at the board.  And I apologize to the 

member from Rosthern.  We did chair a few meetings at the 

board together though. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- A few months ago, Mr. Minister, we received a 

letter from the Speaker suggesting that they wanted a copy of 

any invoices that MLAs had for equipment they either paid for 

or took out a loan for, so it's been some time.  And also, like I 

said, speaking with the people in financial services, they tell me 

that they have sent a letter to SPMC requesting direction on this 

and have received nothing back.  In fact they sent a follow-up 

letter, I was told, to find out what the situation is and what the 

hold-up is with all of this. 

 

So I appreciate your looking into this, and we can hopefully deal 

with this as quickly as possible.  And I would just want you to 

check with your department officials to find out where those 

discussions are at this point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well quite clearly, the Property 

Management Corporation officials will cooperate.  As I've 

indicated, the Board of Internal Economy didn't ask them or 

hadn't made a request up until a month ago, so clearly they 

couldn't act until they'd had the request.  They've got the request 

now and they're working on it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Any 

time I hear my name being bandied about in here, I tend to jump 

to my feet.  Actually I was going to get up anyway. 

 

Mr. Minister, if I could just piggyback a little bit on the 

discussion that you and the member from Kindersley were 

having.  I understand, according to the Estimates booklet here, 

that the mandate of the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation is to provide a full range of accommodation, 

commercial, and custodial services to departments, agencies, and 

Crown corporations. 

 

Now if that is the extent of the mandate, could you describe for 

me and the listeners perhaps how you, as minister in charge of 

SPMC, are now handling this extra responsibility of MLA 

offices, because to me it does not seem as if it fits directly into 

that mandate, and obviously maybe that is a shortened version of 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

what the mandate is.  But could you describe for me the 

mechanisms and the machinations that we have to go through to 

bring it to your attention? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- I want to say to the member from 

Rosthern, it is consistent with the legislation and the role of 

Property Management Corporation in that we supply furniture 

and space for government branches and other entities of 

government, Crown corporations.  So it seemed to us to make 

some kind of sense that because we have a furniture branch and 

because we deal with this and other arms of government, that it 

would just make sense, if government of one area or another 

were going to be required to supply for 58 MLAs -- since we've 

cut the numbers of members of the legislature -- that it would be 

responsibility of some branch. 

 

Now it wouldn't make sense to turn this over, for an example, to 

the Department of Highways because they don't deal in office 

furniture.  We purchase office furniture and photocopiers and 

things of that nature for other departments, so it would make 

sense that SPMC would serve the members of the legislature in 

that fashion as well.  So basically that's why the decision was 

made for this branch of government to deal with that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- From whom was this request received to accept 

this new responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- From the Board of Internal 

Economy. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So there was written communication between 

the Board of Internal Economy and the president of SPMC; is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- The board requested of the Clerk to 

contact the president of Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation.  And I understand that that process now, with 

respect to developing that policy, will in fact take place. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm not questioning whether it's . . . On a rare 

occasion, I agree with you and I do believe that you are right, 

that it makes sense to do this.  But I want to make sure that I 

understand the process that we're going through in order to 

accomplish the objective that we all have in mind and that we do 

it right.  And that is my concern at this time. 

 

To go on to some other issues, Mr. Minister, I understand . . . or 

could you perhaps explain to me how The Purchasing Act 

applies to SPMC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well to the member from Rosthern, 

under the Act, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

is mandated to serve in this capacity, and I guess so we do. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I don't follow that answer at all.  I'm 

asking you, how does The Purchasing Act affect SPMC?  What 

does it do to you, what does it make you do?  Surely there's an 

Act that requires SPMC to do certain things.  And that's what I'm 

asking you, what 

they are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Okay, I guess that would probably 

require a pretty simple and straightforward answer.  The 

Purchasing Act in effect mandates Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation to act in the area of supplying some of 

the things that you and I have discussed -- office equipment or 

furniture or things of that nature, and to purchase on behalf of 

other agencies of government the things that they need in order 

to function on a day-to-day basis. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let me help you out.  The 

Purchasing Act, specifically section 5(1) of the Act, requires 

public agencies to buy their supplies through SPMC.  Is that not 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I'm glad to have been able to be of some 

assistance then this afternoon.  So now that we understand the 

public agencies are, in other words, by The Purchasing Act, 

required to buy their supplies through SPMC, is this done?  Is 

this done in all instances?  And what mechanisms do you have in 

place as a corporation to ensure that all public agencies follow 

that Act? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- In answer to the member's question, 

it is in fact the legal interpretation that we in fact are required to 

purchase on behalf, but as well, the director of purchasing has 

the authority to allow agencies to purchase whatever they, the 

Director of Purchasing, would agree with a particular 

department to allow them to purchase on their own.  As an 

example, and I'm trying to think of an example -- maybe forest 

fire suppression, just as an example -- there may be an 

emergency situation where SERM would want, because of the 

immediate nature of the problem, to purchase on their own and 

that certainly wouldn't mean that it would have to go through a 

process within Property Management Corporation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're telling me, Mr. Minister, is then 

it's all right for public agencies to go ahead on their own and buy 

willy-nilly without tender, without any kind of control on them, 

if it's an emergency.  Is that correct, only in emergencies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- There are two things that they 

require.  They have to have authority under their particular 

legislation to embark on a purchase on their own and/or 

authority from the director of purchasing of Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, back a year or so ago, it was the 

auditor that said The Purchasing Act makes it mandatory for 

every public agency to buy through the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, and he was concerned that this was 

not always the case.  The auditor was concerned that there were 

not controls in place to ensure that The Purchasing Act was 

being followed.  And now you're getting up here and telling the 

Legislative Assembly that if any agency 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

wants to buy on their own, they can do it within their own 

portfolio or that of the director.  So that does not seem to me to 

be quite compatible.  Could you explain that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Yes, to the member from Rosthern, I 

want to say, as I've said before, some pieces of legislation allow 

other arms of government under that legislation to purchase on 

their own.  And there are some questions with respect to whether 

the purchasing supersedes legislation that was put in place to 

deal with those entities of government or whether in fact they do 

not.  The Provincial Auditor has taken the position that The 

Purchasing Act supersedes all other legislation, as I understand 

it. 

 

And what we are doing is working to develop a list of those 

entities that have authority under their legislation and those that 

don't, and those that are acting in contravention of The 

Purchasing Act in order to determine a solution. 

 

I don't think it's either black or white because to make the 

argument that The Purchasing Act supersedes all other pieces of 

legislation with regard to direct procurement is simply not 

agreed to in all cases.  So we're working to sort this through.  

But the first thing we want to do is make an inventory and have 

a look at the different pieces of legislation that are affected 

under this. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, it seems that you're the second 

minister today that I've run up against that is having an argument 

with the auditor, the Provincial Auditor.  I was discussing just 

prior to 5 o'clock with the Minister of Health in the fact that the 

auditor was not able to perform his functions and his mandate 

under The Provincial Auditor Act because you folks in treasury 

bench, in cabinet, were not supplying him with sufficient funds 

so that in fact he could audit all the books that he was expected 

to audit. 

 

Now here you are, you as the minister of SPMC, also appears to 

be in conflict with the opinion of the auditor.  And it never 

ceases to amaze me that when confrontations like this occur, the 

Provincial Auditor is always on the losing end.  And obviously 

from what you have just stated now, Minister, you are not 

prepared to take the auditor's word because, as you say, you 

have a different interpretation. 

 

Now I believe, if I'm correct -- and you can correct me if I am 

wrong -- that this issue goes back at least to 1991. And what the 

auditor tells us is that . . . and he says, and I quote: SPMC told 

us (that's the auditing office) it is creating a list of public 

agencies subject to the Act.  In other words, I interpret that as 

meaning that you are creating a list of agencies that are directly 

responsible to The Purchasing Act. 

 

And then conversely I suppose, we could assume that that would 

leave us a list of those that are immune or removed from The 

Purchasing Act.  And since you've been working on that list for 

so long and you deal with these agencies on a daily basis, I 

would assume that you would now be able to provide us with 

that 

information, those two lists.  And I would ask you for them at 

this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- To the member from Rosthern, we're 

still looking at putting that list together.  I guess, just to try and 

help to explain, there are some arguments with respect to the 

definition of what in fact a public agency is.  The Department of 

Justice in some cases has, as I understand it, had three different 

legal opinions, different legal opinions as to some entities as to 

whether they're public entities or whether they're not. 

 

And so I want to make it clear that there is no conflict between 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and the 

Provincial Auditor.  We're working through with the Department 

of Justice and the Department of Finance to ensure that agencies 

that fall under the definition of the Act are in fact using the 

services of Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation as 

we have been mandated by The Purchasing Act. 

 

So firstly, there is no conflict with Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, but there is some difficulty in trying 

to determine some agencies who may or may not fall under the 

Act.  And I'm sure you've been around this legislature many 

years longer than I have, and I'm sure you will understand that 

there are different legal opinions on many different issues, and 

what we're trying to do is to help define this, work to the best of 

our ability with the Provincial Auditor, with the Department of 

Justice, and the Department of Finance to determine which 

entities are legally responsible to purchase under this Purchasing 

Act, hence through Property Management Corporation, and that 

process is ongoing. 

 

And I can assure the member from Rosthern that when we have 

a definitive list we most certainly will pass that on to the 

members of the opposition, but that list at this point has not been 

finalized. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well let me just, Mr. Chairman, say to the hon. 

minister that I don't believe I've been here much longer than you 

have.  I know for a lot of members it may seem that long, but I 

think we arrived here on the same day and my constituents are 

still telling me it's not long enough yet, so hang around. 

 

Mr. Minister, furthermore, could you explain to me why it takes 

three lawyers for three different opinions and the Department of 

Justice and the department or the agency . . . the corporation of 

Saskatchewan Property Management to interpret a relatively -- 

what it would seem to me as a layman -- a very relatively simple 

aspect of it.  Either you are mandated under that Act, or you are 

not.  What's the difficulty in this interpretation?  Where's the 

hang-up?  Which clause is so difficult to interpret? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well let me say to the member from 

Rosthern, I guess as a layman I don't always understand the 

workings of the lawyers and how they make some of their 

decisions.  And I guess I'll just have to understand that I don't 

understand, 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

because that system hasn't changed for many years as I 

understand it, and I don't suppose it's going to change tomorrow, 

and perhaps you and I won't understand for a long while. 

 

But I want to say that The Purchasing Act has been in place 

since 1976.  And as an example, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology) because of it's . . . it is a 

newer Act and because of the nature of the Act they have an 

awful lot of autonomy, and it is unclear as to whether or whether 

not they are legally a public agency. 

 

Now some lawyers will say that upon looking at the Act that 

allows SIAST to exist, that in fact they should be under the 

purchasing agency.  And there are other lawyers who will give 

an interpretation of that particular piece of legislation to say that 

in fact it may not be under The Purchasing Act which means 

Property Management Corporation wouldn't be dealing with it.  

And there may be a legal interpretation that would suggest the 

Act is unclear and doesn't indicate whether in fact it is a public 

agency as is required under The Purchasing Act. 

 

So you may have in fact three opinions on this.  And this is not 

something and not an issue . . . that will be sorted out.  It may 

mean amendments to the Act that governs SIAST, and there may 

in fact be some changes that may have to happen under The 

Purchasing Act. 

 

So to say that we all understand all of these pieces of legislation 

and can be definitive on each and every arm of government is a 

little difficult because legal interpretations, as you know, will 

change. 

 

And what we are doing is trying to work through and sort these 

out with all of these different particular areas so it will become 

clear who in fact is governed under The Purchasing Act and who 

is not.  And in the areas where there is a grey area as I've 

indicated SIAST may be, we're attempting to clear that up and 

we will do so as quickly as we can to satisfy the concerns of the 

auditor, and frankly to satisfy the concerns of Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation who are mandated under this 

Act to carry out that duty. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Minister, for illustrating so 

eloquently that you really don't understand how this thing works 

either.  It just seems to me that when we have these many 

different kinds of opinions as you are suggesting, that the 

simplest and easiest thing would be to take the word of the 

gentleman that has been mandated by this Legislative Assembly 

to in his best ability, hold the government responsible for the 

expenditure of sums voted by this Assembly.  And that is none 

other than the Provincial Auditor. 

 

And he says this is his interpretation.  He's not a lawyer but he's 

got lawyers on his staff and he is the trained accountant that is 

going to pursue the books and investigate the expenditures of 

this government.  And I think that gives him an inside track on 

this matter.  Because we are also willing and ready to take this 

book, which is called the Report of the Provincial Auditor and 

that almost becomes the Bible in here, except when it doesn't 

suit our particular purposes at the time. 

 

So I'm just saying to you, Minister, that it would seem to me that 

if the Provincial Auditor says, this in my professional opinion is 

what should be done, then the government should take note.  

And the government should take heed and say, well yes, maybe 

he has a good and valid point. 

 

What significance . . . what's going through my mind now is, 

there's got to be a reason why you're making it so difficult for 

yourself in complying with what the auditor is asking you to do.  

In my layman's perspective, it would be such a simple matter for 

you to say, all right if that's what the Provincial Auditor wants, 

then we'll do it.  Because you're just saying right now, you've got 

three lawyers and you've got four opinions.  So why not take the 

lawyers' opinions from the Provincial Auditor and follow that.  

Then at least you will be following the officer of this Assembly.  

He is an officer of this Assembly, the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Or what is so difficult or what's so magical, what's so impossible 

for you to do in terms of following what the auditor is requesting 

you to do?  What are some of the implications that I'm not 

seeing here?  That's why little red flags are going up right away 

and I'm saying to myself: okay, what's SPMC worried about?  

Where are some of the pitfalls?  What's the political agenda 

perhaps?  Do you want to elaborate on that? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Look, let me say to the member from 

Rosthern, if he has or if the Provincial Auditor had provided for 

us a list of entities to which he was concerned in respect to the 

purchasing, we would have been more than happy to comply 

with either looking at legislation or doing what we can as a 

government entity to comply with The Purchasing Act. 

 

And if you have a list of some of those entities, if you would be 

kind enough to send it across, we would be more than willing to 

look at that.  We quite clearly want to follow the guidelines of 

The Purchasing Act that's been in place for a number of years.  

And I want to say that there is no conflict with the Provincial 

Auditor.  That's not what I'm saying.  What I have indicated to 

you is there is some ambiguity in some areas in terms of whether 

or not some entities are legally, as the law is drafted, a public 

agency.  And I use SIAST as an example. 

 

Now I want to say to the member from Rosthern that if he is 

concerned about the integrity in government, concerned with the 

treatment of one of the officers of this Assembly, namely the 

public auditor, I ask him to turn his mind back to 1990 when the 

Special Report of the Provincial Auditor was tabled in this 

House, and the then Justice minister, a member of the 

Conservative government, embarked upon the most 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 1994 

vicious attack that any officer of this legislature has ever seen.  

And I want to say that I want you to remember that it was in fact 

a disgrace to all members of this House, the actions that your 

government, the Conservative government, took in 1990 on the 

attack of that auditor. 

 

But I want to put that to the side and I want to ensure the 

member from Rosthern that in fact we are working to comply 

with the auditor's report.  I say to him one more time that there is 

some ambiguity in some areas as to what constitutes a public 

agency that would fall under The Purchasing Act.  We are 

attempting to compile a list so that we may be able to straighten 

out, through legislation if necessary, some of the areas where 

there is ambiguity and we intend to deal with it in that fashion. 

 

But the bottom line is there is no dispute between Property 

Management Corporation and the Provincial Auditor.  We are 

willing to work with him and we are willing to work with you.  

And if you have a list of agencies that concern you, please send 

them across and we'll deal with them in an appropriate fashion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let me remind you what we're talking about 

here, Minister.  It says on page 247, chapter 28 under 

"Purchasing Agent": 

 

 .05 SPMC did not have a system to ensure public agencies buy 

their supplies through SPMC. 

 

It's as simple as that.  The Provincial Auditor says you do not 

have a system. 

 

 .06 SPMC administers The Purchasing Act.  Section 5(1) of 

the Act requires public agencies to buy their supplies through 

SPMC. 

 

 .07 SPMC should establish rules and procedures to ensure 

public agencies buy their supplies through SPMC as required 

by The Purchasing Act. 

 

 .08 SPMC told us it is creating a list of public agencies subject 

to the Act.  In addition, SPMC is developing procedures to 

ensure these agencies buy their supplies through SPMC. 

 

That's what we're talking about, Mr. Minister.  The auditor has 

not been satisfied.  You tell me that it's a matter of interpretation 

as what is a public agency, but it's a compound problem.  What 

about the regulations that you are going to be putting in place to 

ensure that indeed and in fact those agencies that have been 

identified as falling under The Purchasing Act does have a 

system in place to screen and to make sure that they follow that 

Act?  So we have a compound situation.  What are some of those 

mechanisms that you have come up with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member from 

Rosthern, I want to take him to the auditor's report, and under 

.07 it says that: 

SPMC should establish rules and procedures to ensure public 

agencies buy their supplies through SPMC as required by The 

Purchasing Act. 

 

And I've indicated to him that other entities, other than there are 

some Treasury Board Crowns, that have the authority to 

purchase wherever they want, wherever they so choose under 

their legislation.  So you have The Purchasing Act which 

indicates that Property Management Corporation should be the 

agent to purchase, and you have some other pieces of legislation 

will give Treasury Board Crowns the authority to purchase 

under their legislation.  So you have two pieces of legislation 

that contradict each other.  And what we are doing is trying to 

put together -- and I think the member is certainly overplaying 

the issue  

_- what we're trying to do is put together a list, and an action is 

being developed to deal with the agencies that we feel and the 

auditor has suggested are in contravention of The Purchasing 

Act. 

 

Now that may in fact require changes to the legislation, as I have 

said, in legislation that may govern a Treasury Board Crown. 

 

But you know, I want to say to the member from Rosthern, you 

know what is really most important, not even so much as 

whether a Treasury Board Crown, other than Property 

Management Corporation, has the authority to purchase?  Do 

you know what is really important, Mr. Member?  What's 

important is that it's done in a fair system, and that it's done 

above board, and the people of Saskatchewan get quality for 

their dollar spent. 

 

And I want to say to the member from Rosthern, what's 

important is that we have a true accounting of public 

government . . . or public tax dollars.  That's really what's 

important.  And what's important: that some of the Treasury 

Board Crowns who operate, operate in an above-board fashion 

and that we don't see the kind of . . . and in an above-board 

fashion so that we don't see the kind of waste and 

mismanagement as has been evidenced in this province in past 

years not so long ago.  That's what's important. 

 

And for the member to stand up and suggest that this 

government is operating otherwise is simply not the truth.  And 

to try and create an image that there is some dispute between the 

Provincial Auditor and Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation is also untrue, and he knows that. 

 

We tried to explain that there are conflicting pieces of 

legislation.  There are pieces of legislation that are on the books 

that are in contravention of The Purchasing Act and he knows 

that as well.  The auditor has asked that we look at this and 

develop a plan to deal with that.  And we have said -- and I say 

to him again -- that we are dealing with those issues, and we will 

come to a fair resolve. 

 

But I say to the member from Rosthern -- just one more time -- 

what is most important here is public 



April 18, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

accountability.  And what is most important is that there is 

honesty in spending taxpayers' dollars.  That's what's the bottom 

line, and that's what's the most important issue in this.  And I tell 

you, member from Rosthern, that $16,000 worth of liquor that 

went to cabinet ministers' offices from a Treasury Board Crown 

without authority . . . the chief executive officer or whatever his 

title was, who now is a supporter of the Leader of the Third 

Party, and who she introduces in the legislature here as part of 

her new election team, tells people clearly that there's a 

difference between the old administration of the '80s and this 

administration, but not a difference between the Conservative 

Party and the Liberal Party because it's one and the same. 

 

And as they leave your ship because of the practices of the 

1980s, they join hers and she tightly tethers them to the mast so 

they don't get blown away. 

 

But I say to you, Mr. Member, don't try and create an illusion of 

something that is not.  We are attempting to comply with the 

concerns of the Provincial Auditor, as we have done since we've 

been elected in October of 1991, and that will continue.  I've told 

you this evening that we are currently putting in place and 

developing a plan to deal with the concerns and agencies that are 

in contravention of The Purchasing Act. 

 

And I just say to you finally, if that means that we have to 

amend some legislation, that deals with perhaps SIAST, then 

we're willing to look at that.  But don't attempt to create an 

illusion of something, Mr. Member, that is not. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't know if I'm even going to try to resist 

the temptation to rebut some of those outrageous statements 

made by the member from Prince Albert there.  If the Liberals 

want to pick up our discards, Mr. Member, that's their privilege 

and that's their prerogative.  I have no objection to that at all. 

 

But let me just also say to you that if your concern is to get the 

best bang for the public buck -- in other words, quality of 

material purchased by the taxpayers' dollars -- if, as you say, true 

accounting is something that you're really after, then why are we 

having this problem where about a fifth of the expenditures of 

your government is not accountable at all?  It is not accountable 

to this Assembly, Mr. Member. 

 

We have $857 million being given to the health boards and yet I 

can't ask the Minister of Health any questions about it because 

she refuses to answer because that is the responsibility of the 

health boards.  Oh yes, the health boards are going to be audited.  

Private auditors will do the job and they'll probably do a good 

job.  But the Provincial Auditor tells us that that's not good 

enough for him.  He cannot rely upon the work of private 

auditors.  And you, Mr. Member, and I have sat in the Public 

Accounts long enough that we've both heard him say that on 

repeated occasions, both when we were full of sin when we were 

in government doing those same things.  I don't think for one 

moment that that would matter which 

government is in power.  You're still going to have run-ins with 

the auditor.  That's the name of the game, it seems. 

 

So if you're talking about true accountability, you're sitting on 

that same board, the Board of Internal Economy, where I sat 

when we were arguing for sufficient funds for the auditor to 

fulfil his mandate.  And you were in there when he said, you are 

not giving me enough money to fulfil my mandate.  I will not be 

able to audit the books that I'm required to audit. 

 

You know that; you were there.  You heard him say that.  In 

fact, Mr. Member, I think you were the one that made the 

motion that said that it's going to remain the same as it was the 

year before.  And I don't pretend for one moment that we gave 

him enough money, but you guys were elected on the premiss 

that you would be doing things differently.  That once you were 

in power, all of these kinds of problems would be solved. 

 

So I do not think for one moment that this true accounting 

procedure that you're talking about is all that glossy, as you're 

making it out to be, because the Provincial Auditor disagrees 

with you -- $857 million he cannot account for and he has to 

take somebody else's word for. 

 

That's what we're doing here now, Mr. Member. And yes, we're 

talking about a relatively small issue and I did not expect that 

this relatively small issue would take up half an hour of our 

time.  And I'm amazed at that myself. 

 

But here we are arguing about what lawyers do best, and we're 

arguing lawyer talk here as to the interpretation of these things.  

It just seems so simple to me that if you're an agent of the 

Crown, you abide by the rules. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, that finishes basically this line of questions.  

I've got three more sets of questions in three different areas that I 

want to get into but we'll save them for a different time. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:46 p.m. 

 

 


