




















































Hansard: April 21, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1727 

 April 21, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again I have 

the honour of presenting petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

citizens.  Mr. Speaker, I'll just read out the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to put aside any consideration of 

forcing small-business owners to pay 100 per cent of the costs 

involved with digging up underground storage tanks and 

replacing them; and instead offer alternatives through 

abandoning regulations calling for digging up underground 

tanks, with the exception of those tanks which have been 

proven to be leaking, cost sharing or another alternative agreed 

upon by all parties. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have citizens from the communities of 

Stockholm; Saltcoats, Saskatchewan; Yorkton, Saskatchewan.  

The community of Bangor, the community of MacNutt, 

Bredenbury, Langenburg, Esterhazy, Neudorf -- lots of people 

down in the east side of the province, Mr. Speaker, who would 

like this situation rectified.  And I do present them on their 

behalf today. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too have 

petitioners who are here petitioning today on behalf of 

themselves in regard to underground tanks and their removal.  

They come from Eastend, Climax, Shaunavon, Ceylon, Frontier, 

Dollard, different areas in the south-west.  And I want to, on 

their behalf, provide these to the Assembly here today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have petitions 

on the same subject that I will lay on the Table on behalf of the 

citizens of this province, and these particular individuals happen 

to come mostly from Yorkton, Saltcoats, Bredenbury, 

Langenburg, Churchbridge, and Esterhazy and basically the 

south-east part of the province, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me 

pleasure to lay these on the Table at this time.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

names of these petitioners to lay on the Table concerning the 

underground storage tanks in the province of Saskatchewan.  

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from Kamsack, Togo, 

Veregin on this page.  This next page is mostly Yorkton, 

Kamsack, Togo, Saskatchewan; yes, Mr. Speaker, that's mostly 

Veregin and Kamsack.  And also the next page is all Kamsack, 

Veregin, Togo.  And now on this page here is mostly Grenfell.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have today several 

pages of a petition also referring to the problems expressed 

about the storage tanks that my colleagues have already read the 

prayer for.  These petitions come from Saskatoon, Veregin, 

Kamsack, and mostly from Grenfell.  And I'm happy to present 

them and lay them on the Table today on behalf of these people. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to present today dealing with the underground storage 

tank issue.  These petitions come from the areas of 

Churchbridge, Bredenbury, Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, Atwater, 

along the eastern border of Manitoba.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

I'd like to present these now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

have been receiving petitions from all across the province on the 

same issue, that is the underground storage tanks issue.  And as 

the prayer has been read, I won't read the prayer. 

 

These come from pretty well across the province -- Calder -- and 

we even have one from Stornoway, Mr. Speaker.  But I guess 

there is a town called Stornoway, and MacNutt, Langenburg, 

Kamsack, again Calder.  Quite a diverse . . . across the province.  

I'd like to lay these on the Table on behalf of those people. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a number of 

petitions I'd like to lay on the Table.  The petitions are signed by 

individuals from the communities of Esterhazy, Yorkton, 

Moosomin, Estevan, Melville and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  I so 

present them to the House. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I as well have petitions 

dealing with the underground storage tank issue and the concern 

that people have surrounding that.  The petitioners come from 

Langenburg, Saltcoats, Saskatoon, Esterhazy, Churchbridge, 

Rocanville, Grayson and other areas of Saskatchewan.  I'm 

pleased to be able to present them on their behalf this afternoon. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of Saskatchewan praying that the Assembly urge 

the government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today it 

gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to all the members of the House, 20 grade 3 and 4 students 

from the Rhein School, who are seated up in the east side of 

your 



1728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  And accompanying the students here 

today is their teacher, Ms. Donna Dickie; their chaperon, Ms. 

Kyba; and the bus driver, Mr. Erhardt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll have the pleasure of meeting with this group on 

the stairs at 2:20 for a photo; then after that into room 218 for 

some refreshments.  And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, they'll have a 

number of questions for me which I'll be happy to handle at that 

time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask all the members in the House to 

join with me in offering these students a very warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 19 

grade 8 students from the Invermay School, which are seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, on the west side.  They are 

accompanied today by their teacher, Ms. Angeline Musckaluk, 

and bus driver, Joe Cherewyk.  I will be meeting with them after 

question period for a photo and a question period. 

 

And I would like all members of this Assembly to welcome 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and through you to members of the legislature, a group of 

visitors who have joined us in the west gallery today.  They're 

members of the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Advisory Council who 

are having a meeting in the building today. 

 

The council will advise the minister and Saskatchewan Health 

on policies and programs for people with alcohol and drug abuse 

problems.  This includes appropriate treatment, early 

intervention, prevention, and health promotion.  They were 

selected from more than 80 nominees submitted by various 

organizations working in the addictions field. 

 

Both Ministers Simard and Calvert are meeting with nurses 

today, so they've asked me to introduce the members of the 

council and if you would help me out by standing and being 

recognized when I call your name. 

 

Reverend Marg McKechney is the chairperson of the council. 

Doug Abrosimoff from Lashburn; Angus Campbell from 

Saskatoon; one member, Erika Cancino is not here today; Dr. 

Ken Crowe from Melfort; Jack Greening from Christopher Lake; 

Allan Morin from Meadow Lake; Christopher Mackintosh from 

Henribourg; Sheri McConnell from Saskatoon; Dr. Virginia 

McGowan from Saskatoon; Margaret Rainville, Creighton; and 

Don Stevenson from Regina. 

 

Could you please join me in welcoming the council members 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join my 

colleague today and have the members of the Assembly 

welcome Doug Abrosimoff from Lashburn.  Doug is a 

well-respected, well-known high school principal in our area and 

an excellent choice on the council. 

 

So I'd like you to join me in welcoming Doug. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to also join with my colleagues in welcoming the members 

of the advisory council and in particular I'd like to welcome 

Angus Campbell to the legislature this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Campbell spent many years working for SADAC 

(Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission) in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  He also is the author of a book that 

documents the history of public work in this province when it 

comes to drug and alcohol addiction.  I am pleased to see Angus 

has been appointed to the advisory council because he has a 

wealth of knowledge and history on this problem in the 

province.  So welcome, Angus. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Not to be 

outdone by any of my colleagues, I certainly want to join as well 

in welcoming the advisory council. 

 

I have two individuals up there that I recognize -- the one from 

Meadow Lake, Mr. Morin, and certainly also Chris Mackintosh 

who was originally from Meadow Lake and now has moved 

away.  So I welcome specifically both of you.  Thank you very 

much.  I hope you enjoy the proceedings here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

welcome a member from my constituency, Rev. Margaret 

McKechney, who's pastor of St. Paul's United Church in the 

Sutherland constituency and a well-known worker in the 

community there in Saskatoon.  Welcome, Margaret. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Lloydminster Rodeo 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to inform 

the Assembly that this weekend, April 22 to 24, the 

Lloydminster rodeo will be taking place.  This will mark the 

22nd year that this great event sponsored by the Kinsmen will 

come to Lloydminster. 

 

The Lloydminster rodeo is a pro rodeo, which means spectators 

will see some of the best and brightest stars of the arena.  

Contestants have been known to come to 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1729 

this event from all over Canada and the United States.  We are 

expecting a great time at the Lloyd civic centre and the weather 

conditions won't matter because this is an indoor rodeo. 

 

This event has been widely advertised throughout the area so a 

large turnout is expected since this is the only rodeo held in the 

area. 

 

Proceeds from the weekend will be divided among various 

community projects on both sides of the border.  The 

Lloydminster rodeo is also a time in which our community has a 

chance to get together.  The pride and spirit we have in our 

region will show through this weekend. 

 

I would like to wish all the volunteers, workers, participants, and 

spectators good luck and hope all have as much fun as in years 

past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all of those who enjoy the action of rodeo 

and the enjoyment of a community get-together to come up to 

Lloydminster this weekend.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

International Special Librarians Day 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, we are effective in our deliberations 

in direct proportion, I think, to the accuracy of information that 

is provided to us.  I want to take a minute today to recognize the 

hard work of the people in our Legislative Library. 

 

Today is International Special Librarians Day.  A special 

librarian, as the term suggests, is one who provides focused 

working information to a specialized clientele.  This includes 

legislative librarians. 

 

The theme this year is "building a better world with 

information".  Our librarians are doing their part.  They're doing 

research for us quickly and accurately. 

 

The special librarians who do such an outstanding job for us, 

Mr. Speaker, do it for each member of this Assembly and for our 

staffs, and they do it with total objectivity.  They are 

non-partisan.  As their mission statement says, they put 

knowledge to work for the benefit of the general public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Legislative Library is one of the most striking 

sections of this magnificent building, and the librarians and staff 

who work there uphold the library's tradition of excellent 

service. 

 

I ask members to join with me in thanking Marian Powell and 

her staff on this one day for the work that they do for us 

throughout the whole year.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

North Dakota Senator Conrad 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to respond to the serious threats that were 

made yesterday by a Democratic senator from North Dakota 

who indicated he would like to retarget 300 Minutemen missiles 

at Canada. 

 

First of all, I have a warning for Senator Conrad.  As some of 

you may know, Mr. Speaker, we actually have an American 

citizen working as a researcher in our opposition caucus office.  

And we intend to hold her, Mr. Speaker, as a human shield until 

this nuclear threat is withdrawn. 

 

Secondly, I note that the article in today's paper described 

Senator Conrad as a "frustrated North Dakota senator".  And I 

think I can understand some of the senator's frustrations. 

 

It must be frustrating to watch the World Series trophy wind up 

north of the border for two consecutive years, Mr. Speaker.  It 

must be frustrating to watch Canada, with one-tenth of the 

population of the U.S. (United States of America), win just as 

many medals in the winter Olympics, Mr. Speaker.  It must be 

frustrating for an American senator to see Canada's superior 

durum wheat industry outproducing and outmarketing American 

farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it must be particularly galling for the senator to realize that 

most of this wheat production takes place in a socialist-run 

province, proving that there is something even the members 

opposite can't screw up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say to Senator 

Conrad, if North Dakota dedicated a few more of its silos to 

agricultural production and a few less to housing nuclear 

missiles, they might not have a problem keeping up with 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

SRC Aquatic Study 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm happy 

to announce a project that is to take place at the Saskatchewan 

Research Council in Saskatoon -- a project with a title that defies 

comprehension, but a project of potentially great benefit to the 

Saskatchewan mining industry, and more importantly to the 

northern Saskatchewan environment. 

 

The SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) has been awarded a 

$540,000 contract by Environment Canada for study on, and I 

quote: the development of aquatic plant bioassays for rapid 

screening and interpretive risk assessments of metal mining 

waste waters, end quote.  I won't repeat that. 

 

In laypersons' terms what this means, I think, is that this project 

will study ways to use water plants as testing tools in streams 

that may be affected by metal mining liquid wastes.  This way 

problems can be pinpointed and dealt with quickly, thus limiting 

environmental damage and also reducing costs to the company.  

This technology will have application to 



1730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

base minerals, gold, and uranium mines. 

 

This study is being undertaken with the collaborative support of 

agencies in the U.S.A. and Europe.  And, Mr. Speaker, this study 

will further enhance the SRC's strong reputation as a body which 

combines its own applied research with that of universities, 

government and industry. 

 

I congratulate Dr. Hans Peterson of the Research Council and 

Dr. Ming Huang of the University of Saskatchewan, who will 

lead the research team. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Woodlands Enterprises Contract 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to tell 

the Assembly about some good news in my constituency.  A few 

weeks ago Weyerhaeuser announced it was cancelling its 

contracts with Woodlands Enterprises for tree harvesting.  This 

meant that as many as 86 jobs would be lost there. 

 

This was a tough situation for us to face.  That's why we met 

with some of the employees and encouraged them to put in a 

proposal to take over the contract.  Today Weyerhaeuser 

announced that one of the two proposals was accepted.  As such, 

many of these employees will be able to go back to work. 

 

While the second employee proposal was not accepted, 

Weyerhaeuser has agreed to sign a contract with a new 

native-owned company in the region to do tree harvesting.  And 

it will be expanding its allocation to some of its existing 

contracts. 

 

I want to congratulate the employees on their initiatives and note 

my pleasure that Weyerhaeuser saw the merits of the proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this announcement today is not all good 

news, it is a good start to getting people back to work and 

helping native people find work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Safari '94 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Over the past 

months we've heard a great deal about the future of 

communications in Canada.  This week we have experienced 

firsthand some exciting new initiatives related to unique learning 

opportunities made available for Saskatchewan people. 

 

As a result of a project brought together by Saskatchewan 

Communications Network and the Saskatchewan Science 

Centre, with sponsorship from Saskatchewan Education, 

Training and Employment, and SaskTel, Saskatchewan students 

have been linked with students from around the world in an 

exciting live, interactive program known as Safari 1994. 

This program, originating from Barkley Sound off the coast of 

British Columbia, has taken students and other viewers deep 

beneath the seas and encouraged them to focus on discussions 

related to the environment and natural life of that area. 

 

I was pleased to see Saskatchewan student Barrett Rankin from 

Milden Central School at the originating site of Barkley Sound.  

Undoubtedly he will be bringing back some incredible stories to 

share with his classmates. 

 

SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network Corporation) 

also took the opportunity this week to announce that it would 

link the Saskatchewan Science Centre's main floor theatre as a 

receiving site for its training network.  This site will provide 

greater public access to satellite-delivered sessions, expand 

SCN's potential for major satellite conference clients, and 

increase the Science Centre's ability to bring in a greater variety 

of satellite programing.  SCN's training network now links more 

that 100 classrooms province-wide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the partnerships SCN is building in our 

Saskatchewan way, demonstrating clearly how organizations can 

work together toward mutual solutions of increasing information 

access for all our residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gambling Addiction 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct 

my first set of questions to the minister responsible for liquor 

and gambling.  Mr. Minister, prior to question period I provided 

you with a briefing note about an individual with a serious 

gambling addiction problem.  And I have no desire to get into 

the particulars of this case other than to say that it illustrates the 

serious problem that your video slot machines are creating. 

 

Gambling addiction has created a major problem for this 

individual, his wife, his children, his employer.  It has cost him 

thousands of dollars and ultimately it cost him his job.  It is also 

worth noting that he never gambled, never gambled before your 

machines came to town. 

 

Mr. Minister, as of today your government is providing no help 

for this person or the hundreds of other Saskatchewan people 

who may already be addicted to your slot machines.  Why the 

delay, Mr. Minister?  Why is there no help for this person and 

his family to turn to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the 

member by saying that in fact there is a 1-800 number that is 

available for people who are having problems.  This 1-800 

number is an interim 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1731 

number being used by the department whereby people will be 

directed to services that are available in the community. 

 

In addition to that, there are four people presently being trained 

who will occupy and work with the new 1-800 number as soon 

as it comes into effect during the upcoming fiscal year, as we 

had indicated and had promised earlier on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't know why I'm dealing with you, but I 

guess I'll have to direct my questions to you, Mr. Minister.  That 

is simply not good enough.  On February 21, I asked the real 

minister -- that's two months ago today -- I asked that minister 

the same question.  I asked, where is that 800 number and the 

counselling services that he had promised?  I was told in no 

uncertain terms, as I was just told again today, that that 800 

number for counselling services is in place.  And, Mr. Minister, 

that simply is not true -- not true. 

 

And there's still not a place a person can call to get help with a 

serious gambling problem -- addiction.  Mr. Minister, why the 

big rush to set your slot machines up in every corner of the 

province, and why the big . . . even bigger delay in responding to 

the serious gambling problems that those machines are creating? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To answer 

the question from the member, I want to indicate to him that 

there is an existing number, the SADAC number, that he is well 

aware of.  And I also want to indicate that the 1-800 number will 

be in place in early May where there will be a window for 

people who feel they have a problem with respect to gaming 

addiction, where they can reach counselling.  We are at the 

present time training counsellors to deal specifically with people 

who have a gambling addiction.  These services will be 

available, sir, to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to say that for the first time in Saskatchewan there 

has been a government who recognizes, because of the fact that 

gambling is around this province, that there is a need to create 

programs and put programs together.  And I want to remind you, 

sir, that you were part of the government that expanded bingo 

gambling, as an example, from 1982, where there was $4 million 

spent to over a hundred million dollars when we took power in 

1991, and did nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm glad to notice 

that I finally got a full flush.  It took me two days to flush the 

real minister out, but here he is. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what your House Leader just told me about 

the 800 number and that you seem to be so 

fond of just doesn't work, because we put it to a test yesterday.  

Our office tried calling that 800 number that you gave me back 

in February -- February 23 I believe you gave me that, or was it 

February 13.  We were told that counselling services are not yet 

available for people with gambling addiction problems.  That's 

what we were told yesterday when we phoned that 800 number 

-- counselling services are not yet available.  So we asked, well 

is there a brochure or something that you can send us?  They 

said no, the government has not yet put together a brochure. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government has spent millions of dollars and 

thousands of person-hours installing these machines all over 

Saskatchewan.  You're spending hundreds of thousand dollars to 

send a health committee touring the province to talk to people 

about your wellness.  And you don't even have a brochure that 

you can send to a gambling addict, let alone, let alone providing 

them with adequate counselling, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, where are your priorities?  Why is it taking so long 

for you to set up a system of help for those people that are 

becoming addicted to your gambling slot machines? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I 

indicated to the member earlier on, and I don't know if he's 

phoned the wrong number or not, but there is a toll free number.  

It's 1-800-667-7560, and you can get that from Hansard or I'll 

pass it across to you, where people can access information and 

where they can access self-help and counselling services.  And I 

want to say that part of that process is that callers may be 

transferred to the manager of Myers recovery centre in Regina 

who will connect callers to local alcohol and drug and mental 

health counsellors. 

 

But let me say to the member and let me say one more time, as 

bingo gambling expanded in this province, you did nothing.  

Four million dollars to over a hundred million dollars, and now 

all of a sudden this new-found, sanctimonious attitude surfaces 

in this legislature.  I say to the member from Rosthern, have a 

look at what you did when you were in power, and have a look 

at the fact you did nothing to address this fact.  And this 

government has committed real dollars and there are real 

programs to help people in this province, and it will be a process 

that will be adequate to serve the needs of those few people who 

become problem gamblers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

would suggest those real dollars that you're talking about is 

phoney money, just like the play money that we were talking 

about in this House yesterday.  When we phoned that line, that 

line had absolutely nothing to offer.  In fact, the individual didn't 

even ask for a name, made no offer of any counselling or 

referrals. Absolutely nothing.  Nothing, 



1732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

Mr. Minister.  And you say . . . and I think the reason you're 

doing that is because you do not want to admit, you do not want 

to admit the problem of gaming addiction. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a quote here from Les Landry, the founder 

of the gambling addiction organization in Manitoba.  And he 

says, and I quote: 

 

 I believe the governments of the day are addicted (the 

governments of the day are addicted) and the worst symptom 

of addiction is denial. 

 

Mr. Minister, your slot machines are creating a serious problem 

all over the province.  And I think you are right now in a stage of 

denial.  Why don't you pull your head out of the sand, Mr. 

Minister, and admit this?  Will you recognize that your NDP 

(New Democratic Party) slot machines are hurting many 

Saskatchewan families, and then start dealing with the problem 

instead of pretending that it does not exist? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, given the display of competence, or 

incompetence, that was exhibited during the years of your 

government, I would find it not impossible to believe that you 

couldn't even dial the right phone number or that you would 

have staff around you who couldn't find the right phone number 

to help to phone for assistance. 

 

Let me say this, Mr. Speaker: there has been gambling in this 

province for years and years, casino gambling for decades, bingo 

gambling for years, which this government expanded unbridled 

and uncontrolled without any thought for addiction or any 

thought for helping people who may be in a problem in that area. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I would be more than willing 

to meet with the member to help him find, through the 

Department of Health, a source where someone, if he has a 

person who needs some assistance, can receive assistance.  He 

knows full well that during the time when he was government 

the Department of Health has sent people who have been 

addicted to gambling for treatment, as has this government in the 

past. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say, instead of the member from Rosthern 

grandstanding, if he has a case that needs to be dealt with, I'm 

more than willing to meet with him to help find a solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, during my drive to the legislature this 

morning I heard a radio ad that nearly caused an accident.  

Apparently the minister of SGI has purchased an extensive 

advertising campaign extolling the benefits of the new, no-fault 

insurance plan. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have very limited duties in cabinet, so I would 

hope that you could pass on this information.  Very simply, how 

much money has your government spent on this promotional 

campaign? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

minister of SGI, I'll take notice of the issue that has been raised 

as to the cost of the advertising. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Since the 

minister isn't here, I wonder if the minister could explain to us 

the rosy picture painted for no-fault insurance by the ad.  It tells 

people that the benefits paid out will increase and that SGI 

premiums will not increase for 1994.  And that's insurance 

utopia. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly if there will be an ad 

informing the general public of the disadvantages in no-fault 

insurance?  For instance, will there be an ad that tells people that 

only those who make more than $50,000 a year will be able to 

sue the government for additional benefits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that the 

member would be opposed to no-fault insurance.  His colleagues 

from Manitoba, the Conservative government of Mr. Gary 

Filmon, talks long and loud about the advantages of no-fault 

insurance. 

 

As to the debate about the new Bill and the changes to the 

insurance of SGI and the insurance that will be provided, there'll 

be ample opportunity for all of us to become involved in the 

debate and the discussion.  And I want to say to you that these 

changes which will help families involved in accidents, in terms 

of rehabilitation and helping meet their needs financially, it's 

hard to believe that that member would be opposed to these 

changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister 

mentions debate.  Perhaps the minister responsible will be 

prepared to debate the president of Saskatchewan bar association 

on this issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, perhaps the real name for this insurance should be 

it's-not-my-fault insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government and especially your Premier, 

love to pretend that they are defenders of the little guy.  Well the 

little guy here plainly loses.  Your insurance plan allows the 

president of SaskPower to sue for additional losses, while the 

president's secretary is out of luck -- assuming that she doesn't 

make $50,000 a year.  She has to take what you give her and 

that's the end of it. 

 

I realize that your government has a great fear that the public 

may take you to court; that you don't allow them to have access 

to the courts.  You have consistently taken away the 

fundamental right of 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1733 

redress in the court, time and time again.  And why this 

discrepancy?  Why not allow everyone to have their day in 

court? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, here again the member 

attempts to mislead on the issue of what and what won't be 

included in the new Act.  I say again, we will be getting into the 

debate here in the House on this Bill in the very near future. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what's ironic in the discussion that's going on 

here today about SGI is the fact that the members on the front 

benches of the Conservative caucus, while they were in 

government, spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to do what? 

-- to privatize SGI, which would have done away with the 

company.  Now they're saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Of 

course it's true.  We can produce the documents that will show 

you were actively considering the privatization of SGI. 

 

Now when some parts are being amended in order to make a 

stronger insurance company and maintain a solid base for the 

company and also give two years with no increase, those 

members bleat about the fact that we would be making changes 

to improve the status of insurance for ordinary Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

have to ask you: what is so special about you that you can be 

protected from additional loss of incomes as a cabinet minister, a 

minister of the Crown, when your back-benchers aren't offered 

that same protection? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Here again I talk about the 

misrepresentation, but there will be opportunities for the public 

to exercise the courts when their income is affected over a 

certain level. 

 

And for economic loss they will be able to use the courts in 

those certain circumstances.  So you're not right, and that's why 

the debate should go on here in the House and you will be able 

to ask those kind of questions to the minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Labour this afternoon.  Mr. Minister, 

Saskatchewan has had an enviable labour-employer record.  In 

fact, since 1984 Saskatchewan has been consistently below the 

national average in the time lost to strikes and lockouts. 

 

And this hardly indicates what one would deem a 

labour problem with labour legislation.  Mr. Minister, please 

explain why you believe that changing labour legislation will 

produce any competitive edge for Saskatchewan people.  Will 

this result in more jobs, more taxpayers and less burden for those 

suffering from a horrendous tax load in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is partially 

correct -- we have developed a decent labour-management 

relationship.  We most certainly did not have that when the 

Liberals were in office in the '60s, nor did we have an enviable 

labour office when the other right-wing party was in office 

during the '80s.  We had a rather sorry record. 

 

The purpose of these amendments is to develop a more 

cooperative relationship between management and labour.  

Given the record of both Liberals and Tories in office, one can 

hardly be expected that you would understand that, but that is 

what we're attempting to do and we are in the process of 

succeeding in doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

just gave you the statistics since 1984 in terms of labour 

relations in the province.  If Saskatchewan were in the midst of a 

serious labour crisis, then I think it would make sense to 

introduce the kinds of labour legislation that we have before us 

in the Assembly today. 

 

The number of days lost to work stoppages is at an all-time low 

and it reflects a nationwide spirit of cooperation between both 

employers and employees to keep work coming and to keep their 

jobs alive, even if it means concessions for both sides. 

 

The proposed changes to The Trade Union Act will make it 

virtually impossible for Saskatchewan companies to downsize or 

to change collective agreements even if those two things . . . one 

of those two things will save jobs and will protect 

competitiveness. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, if there is no labour unrest at this time in our 

province, and it doesn't protect jobs, what problems does this 

legislation fix? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well given the fact that the hon. 

member is able to pocket a 37 per cent increase, one can hardly 

be expected for you to have much empathy for working people. 

 

But the fact is there are some problems out there.  Everybody, 

everybody but the members opposite, acknowledge there are 

some problems.  Not everybody agrees on what we are doing.  

We are attempting to provide some solutions, but there are some 

real problems out there and if the member would come off her 

lofty -- and I may say very posh -- pedestal provided to her, she 

might understand that working people have some problems in 

The Labour Standards Act and we are on the way to resolving 

them. 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you haven't said what problem 

it is the legislation fixes.  That was the question posed to you. 

 

Labour Canada statistics indicate that the average wage 

settlement in February of 1994 was at its lowest since they 

began keeping records in 1978.  Workers who understand 

today's realities all throughout the country are willing to take 

less because they understand the global market and they want to 

keep their jobs.  They understand the necessity for remaining 

competitive. 

 

Now the assistant chief economist of the Bank of Montreal said 

yesterday, and I quote: 

 

 Canada is outperforming the United States, not only when it 

comes to inflation, but on limiting wage increases as well.  

Hopefully this is what will supply us with a continued 

competitive advantage. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Clauses 10 and 33 of your legislation will virtually eliminate the 

flexibility to renegotiate contracts even if that will save people's 

jobs, Mr. Minister.  Why are you determined, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to buck the entire trend of everything in Canada 

by legislating a competitive disadvantage for our labour force?  

That's what you're doing for our labour force.  Why are you 

doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this is hardly the place to 

enter into long dissertations about the reasons for this.  This has 

been extensively discussed in the debate on second reading and 

in the Committee of the Whole, and if the member were ever to 

deem herself appropriate to come here for those debates you'd 

have heard it.  That is the place for you to discuss this, not in 

question period.  There is more to the Assembly than simply 

question period. 

 

I want to go on and say to the member opposite that it is a little 

phoney for members opposite to pocket a 37 per cent pay 

increase and then say: Mr. Speaker, the economic health of the 

nation depends upon keeping wages lower.  Well I say to 

Madam Member opposite, austerity, like charity, begins at home 

or it's as phoney as a $3 bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I find it most interesting, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, you do not prevail to stay in here when 

I'm discussing The Labour Standards Act either. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talk about being concerned about workers.  

The Saskatoon Health Board just laid off 200 health care people 

-- 200 health care workers in our province.  They now have 

worked out an agreement with employees to take banked 

overtime on Fridays to 

reduce costs, and do you want to know why they did that?  So 

that they could avoid any further lay-offs for people who want 

jobs. 

 

Now the universities this very week cut back on faculty and staff 

-- we're talking real people. Why?  Because of their deficits and 

because of budget restrictions.  But the changes to The Trade 

Union Act could eliminate contracting out to non-union support 

services which may be the only way for these people to cope in 

their available administrations to deal with their restrictions. 

 

Mr. Minister, what have the health boards and the universities 

told you?  What have they told you about the impact that The 

Trade Union Act will have on their flexibility for dealing with 

budget realities and the ability to save more jobs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, those of us who have 

been in this House as long as I have, thought we heard the faint 

echoes of the ghost of Ross Thatcher talking just a moment ago 

when you go into the issues you do. 

 

I say with respect to the member opposite, this is not the '60s. 

The solution which the Liberal Party used in the '60s is not the 

solution for the '90s.  These are new problems, this is a new 

government, and we're going to resolve these problems and in 

the process we're going to build a Saskatchewan which won't 

just survive in the '90s, it's going to thrive in the '90s -- 

something Liberals have had no experience with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Welfare Numbers 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question to the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, the other 

day you promised to release a table showing that Saskatchewan, 

relative to its population, had the lowest number of people on 

welfare than any province in Canada.  We still haven't received 

that table and I suspect, Madam Minister, that the reason is, it 

simply isn't true. 

 

Madam Minister, we checked with the Social Services in Alberta 

and they informed us there are about 131,000 people on welfare 

in that province -- that's about 5 per cent of the population.  In 

Saskatchewan, there are over 81,000 on welfare -- that's over 8 

per cent of the population. 

 

Madam Minister, why did you mislead this House?  And when 

are you going to start lowering that number instead of trying to 

produce false figures and cover up your government's dismal 

performance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, let me make it very clear that 

the Saskatchewan dependency rate has been the lowest in 

Canada, but we will give that information after.  Now Alberta, 

the exception is Alberta.  The reason the exception is Alberta is 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

because they have given one-way bus tickets out of Alberta -- 

2,500 to B.C. (British Columbia) and several coming to 

Saskatchewan.  They're kicking people off assistance, 

transferring them over to other dependency programs.  Take the 

total dependency rate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it's the same old punitive attitude we see 

there as we see over with the Liberals.  We hear the Prime 

Minister last night -- I hope he was misquoted -- the Prime 

Minister last night, of Canada, is saying that people on 

assistance can no longer sit home and drink beer, as if they all 

are.  This is a very sad day.  This is a very sad day.   Mr. 

Speaker, this is a very sad day when the Prime Minister of 

Canada accuses people on assistance, in the midst of structural 

unemployment, of sitting home drinking beer and then says, well 

they're all not doing this. 

 

Then he talks about enhancing people's dignity at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker.  Then he talks about the provinces baulking.  We're 

willing to go to Ottawa any time.  We've had our proposal sitting 

on Mr. Axworthy's desk for five . . . for two months and we've 

still not heard when we're going to proceed with those 

initiatives. 

 

So all I'm saying is we're trying hard to deal with the 

unemployment rate.  Our numbers are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll direct my next 

question to the Minister of Social Services.  Mr. Minister, time 

and again we've heard you make excuses about federal 

offloading.  The Government of Alberta had to deal with these 

changes also, but instead of looking for excuses, Mr. Minister, 

they went looking for solutions.  As a result, Mr. Minister, the 

number of people on welfare has been reduced by 34 per cent in 

one year.  During the same period, the number of people on 

welfare in Saskatchewan increased by 20 per cent. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: when are you going to start developing 

solutions instead of excuses?  And when is the number of people 

on welfare in Saskatchewan going to start going down?  When 

are you going to get jobs for these people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

should think about that.  When case-loads are going up across 

Canada on the average of 51 per cent in the last three years, they 

go up in Saskatchewan on an average of 33 per cent only, that's 

the truth; when he talks about one province reducing their 

case-load and going against that national trend by 20 per cent in 

one year, what do you think they're doing?  They're knocking 

people off and into Manitoba and Saskatchewan and British 

Columbia.  Be honest about this.  They're transferring people 

over to other dependency programs, to municipalities, 

subsidizing 

businesses, and so on. 

 

We could do that too.  We're not doing that.  We're trying, 

through good economic development initiatives, to provide 

meaningful, long-term jobs, and we want some help from the 

provincial and federal Liberals.  The provincial Liberals were so 

unconcerned about economic development that they wouldn't 

participate in the debate last week, the motion last week calling 

for the federal government to create employment and jobs as the 

best social safety net program we can provide.  They opted out 

of that. 

 

Now the federal minister is . . . federal Prime Minister is 

attacking low income people just like you are, which goes to 

prove that there's no difference between your two parties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 40 -- An Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to provide for Mediation be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

few comments I'd like to make regarding Bill No. 40 before we 

move it into committee. 

 

As with Bill No. 39, I've had an opportunity to discuss this 

legislation with department officials prior to its consideration in 

the House and I appreciate that time and I thank the minister for 

allowing his officials and giving them the time to come and just 

to chat with me regarding the legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to also indicate that the legislation that is 

before us has been something that has been on my mind for a 

while.  And as I was discussing with my colleagues, one of the 

things I suggested in light of some of the concerns that were 

raised with me and have some of the ongoing concerns that are 

being brought up regarding mediation, it's appropriate I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that we do have this legislation before us. 

 

The intent of the legislation is to provide mediation services to 

those couples terminating their legal relationship.  I would think, 

Mr. Speaker, that maybe we should be looking at ways and 

means and efforts of trying to get couples to sit back and, if you 

will, cool off and take a serious look at the relationship.  

Possibly some couples may find that where they feel it more 

appropriate to terminate a relationship, at the end of 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

the day they may reconsider and decide to hold that relationship 

together.  However, Mr. Speaker, there are many occasions, no 

matter what you do, couples have reached a point where they 

just simply decide that there isn't a lot they can do and decide to 

part ways. 

 

Now parting of ways I think should be . . . we should be looking 

at ways in which we can help couples work through the 

problems of termination and how you divide up assets.  And I 

think that's one of the major problems and major confrontational 

elements we find in relationships when couples decide to part 

ways and terminate relationships -- how do you divide the 

assets? 

 

I think many couples are in an emotional state when they decide 

to part and I think it would be good for us to have this 

legislation.  I look forward to the legislation once it has basically 

moved through and I would say we probably would be viewing 

the trial period . . . or the first little while will be a trial period as 

the justice system reviews the legislation and puts it into practice 

and sees how it will work. 

 

And I trust, Mr. Speaker, that it will provide an avenue with 

which couples can separate, if they see that as the only solution, 

and part on very amiable conditions.  I think that if you talk to 

many couples who have separated and couples who have gone 

through the process of trying to divide assets, you will find that 

they have found that legal action is long, expensive, and 

mentally exhausting.  And certainly I believe that this mediation 

service is modelled on existing mediation programs available 

through Justice for farm families having trouble with their debt 

loads and we will be asking more questions about this in 

committee. 

 

When I talk about the long, tedious process of legal action as 

well, Mr. Minister, I'm reminded of a . . . I'm not exactly sure, I 

believe it was a Reader's Digest article about this couple that 

had decided to part ways and they just wrote of the 

circumstances that they had run into. 

 

The interesting scenario on that case, Mr. Speaker, was that the 

couple were quite well off and there were considerable assets to 

divide.  The couple had decided at the end of the day when they 

were going to terminate the relationship and just go through with 

it, they wanted to do it in a most amiable and understanding 

manner. 

 

So they sat down at a table and they basically went through the 

whole process of what they owned and what they had worked 

with, what they had accumulated together, and then they broke it 

down and they decided, okay you will have this and I will have 

this.  And they had come to a workable agreement regarding 

their separation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, was that they decided then to 

go to a lawyer to have this agreement signed and sealed in the 

presence of a lawyer, so that neither one of them could come 

back at the other 

couple . . . or at the other person. 

 

The interesting part was when they approached the lawyer, the 

lawyer suggested that each of the partners should have their own 

lawyer.  So they thought, well okay, maybe that's the proper 

route and we'll each get our own lawyer and we'll come back 

and we'll go before a judge and we'll have this separation 

legalized. 

 

Well at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I might add that the 

couple found out once they got their own lawyers, their own 

lawyers started giving them information and indicating that 

either one of them actually could get more if they just demanded 

more.  The result was they ended up in court; they ended up in 

heated and hated argument and debate. 

 

And at the end of the day, who benefited?  It wasn't the couple.  

They had come to a workable solution, but because of advice 

from lawyers and through the courts, the legal system and the 

lawyers got most of the assets and the couple were left with 

nothing. 

 

Therefore I think, Mr. Speaker, and I trust that this form of 

mediation will be an avenue that will allow couples to sit down 

and, in a very comprehensive manner, look at the assets and look 

at what they've accumulated together; look at what they've built 

together as a couple, recognize the rights of either partner and 

the fact that if they're going to part ways, they should do it in the 

most agreeable way that is possible. 

 

So even though at the end of the day we may find mediation 

may not work in every circumstance, Mr. Speaker, I think it's 

appropriate that we are taking this avenue, that this legislation is 

coming forward; that we are going to give couples this 

opportunity. 

 

And I think, hand in hand with the mediation process, Mr. 

Speaker, I think one of the other areas we should take a serious 

look at and I think . . . and I intend to bring it up with the 

minister, is that we also give the mediators, whoever they may 

be, the opportunity to sit down with a couple and go through 

their case scenario and see if we can't work out a way or come to 

an agreement with them whereby they might reconsider the 

separation and decide that maybe, in the long run and in the best 

interests of all involved, it might be better to continue that 

relationship rather than separate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is good.  We look forward to seeing 

how it's going to work in society.  But at the end of the day, I 

trust that we're not looking at ways to make it easier for couples 

to separate, but we should still strive and work towards ways and 

avenues in which we can give couples an opportunity to deal 

with people, sit down with people, and see if they can come to 

an agreement on the differences and maintain a relationship 

rather than breaking that relationship. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if there's children or family involved, 

broken homes and broken children, a lot of 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

hurt people throughout our society, it's something that really 

affects each and every one of us.  And I think we need to work at 

building homes, building families, building relationships, and 

building our society rather than tearing it down. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to a number of 

questions that we will raise with the minister regarding this Bill 

as we proceed in committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 39 -- An Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to create a Family Law Division 

and to enact Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as with the 

Bill No. 40, I did have the opportunity as well of discussing this 

Bill with department officials, and again, I appreciate the time 

and effort that they gave in relationship to sitting down with me 

and explaining the intent of the Bill and the process of the Bill. 

 

The Unified Family Court has operated as a pilot project in 

Saskatoon since 1978.  This being the case, there has been ample 

time to measure its successes and its failures.  I believe as well, 

Mr. Speaker, we found there's been ample time to determine 

what measures are necessary to enhance the Unified Family 

Court. 

 

Obviously its successes have been great or we would not be 

debating the Bill at this time.  I think this is a good piece of 

legislation and that many people across the province will benefit 

from it. 

 

This legislation will essentially expand the Unified Family Court 

concept through the remainder of the province.  According to the 

minister, there will be six judges assigned to the family law 

division created within the Court of Queen's Bench.  This 

legislation will give this division exclusive family law 

jurisdiction throughout the entire province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most people in Saskatchewan don't even know that 

the Unified Court exists.  The only people that are aware would 

be those that have had to go through this system. 

 

The minister outlined the various services that will be attached 

to this court.  For example, mediation services, custody and 

access investigation services, supervised access service, 

counselling in the case of family breakdown, and self-help kits 

including general information about the consequences of 

marriage breakdown.  And as I view the different services that 

will be available through this court, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

what I was just speaking about a  

few moments earlier, some of these concerns are going to 

certainly be raised through this Act, Bill No. 40, The Queen's 

Bench Act. 

 

I hope that the government, Mr. Speaker, is able to implement 

all these services.  I'm interested in the department's projections 

as to when the various services will be provided and which are 

currently being provided.  For those not yet provided, financial 

implications may slow the pace down -- how much I'm not sure, 

but certainly we want to raise those questions with the minister. 

 

I think there must be considerable expense involved in these 

endeavours; however, I believe that when we look at families 

and family relationships and homes, that sometimes we may put 

too much emphasis on the money and the monetary amount 

rather than looking at family units and keeping them together.  I 

believe when we get into committee I will get into the actual 

costs and time lines more in committee. 

 

If all these services are made available through the Unified 

Court, Mr. Speaker, I believe they are sure to assist families 

suffering a breakdown.  I feel for all individuals experiencing 

the ordeal of separation, divorce or custody hearings, and I feel 

for those children who must suffer through these difficult times.  

Any service made available to assist these individuals and 

children is more than welcome. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge that this Bill contains some 

other amendments not related to the Unified Family Court.  We 

have not heard from anyone opposed to these amendments.  The 

official opposition certainly does not intend to hold up any parts 

of this legislation.  We look forward to addressing some of the 

questions that we have and we trust that indeed The Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to create a Family Law Division 

and to enact Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act will provide an avenue whereby we can 

again look forward to working with families to overcome their 

differences and build more solid and loving relationships. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 46 -- An Act to 

amend The Provincial Court Act and to enact certain other 

provisions be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

with great regret that I rise to speak in this House on this issue.  

If this were a government of principle, this debate would not be 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key focus of this issue is not money; it 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

is principle -- the principle of law and order and justice and the 

responsibility of the government and the minister charged with 

upholding those principles.  That is what the issue is here. 

 

Before I begin my remarks I would like to say clearly, 

unequivocally, for the record -- and I urge the members of the 

government side to listen carefully -- the Liberal caucus does not 

support a salary increase of 24 per cent for the judges. 

 

Now that I have said that, I will say that it was extremely 

short-sighted of the minister to have struck a binding 

commission if he were not prepared to implement its 

recommendations.  And let's face reality -- the Hon. Minister of 

Justice, formerly minister of Labour, knows full well what it 

means to give an arbitrator or a commission the powers he 

invested in them through the amendments to The Provincial 

Court Act. 

 

If there were one person on the government side who believes 

that the Minister of Justice did not understand what the 

consequences were of giving the independent commission the 

power to create a binding settlement, I'd like that individual to 

step forward and state it for the record. 

 

In fact the minister himself stated in his August 1993 submission 

to the Provincial Court Commission, and I quote directly: 

 

 The first element of keeping judges free from arbitrary 

interference with respect to their financial security from the 

legislative branch requires that there be a process in place for 

determining compensation that ensures that judges can be 

secure in the knowledge that their judicial decisions will not 

affect their financial security.  The recent amendments to The 

Provincial Court Act provide this security. 

 

And the hon. minister goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote 

again: 

 

 The recent amendments to the new Provincial Court Act 

provide this security.  Under the recent amendments, the 

independent Provincial Court Commission makes 

recommendations respecting judicial salaries, remuneration, 

allowances, and vacation leave that must (and must is 

underlined in the original document, Mr. Speaker) must be 

implemented by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as complicated as legal jargon sometimes gets, 

there's absolutely no mistaking the intent of this legislation.  The 

minister was clear in his intent that the recommendations would 

be binding, but at no time did he exercise the judgement that 

could have set the maximum increase that government would 

support. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, this is a question of accountability on 

the part of the minister.  I believe that people have a certain level 

of expectation of the 

highest level of the Legislative Assembly.  Is it unreasonable 

that members of the public should expect the individual who is 

paid a generous salary, supported by dozens of expert staff, to 

make decisions which have been fully thought out in terms of 

their impact, fairness, and affordability?  I think not. 

 

It is interesting to compare the Electoral Boundaries 

Commission with the Provincial Court Commission.  The 

government had no intention of giving the Electoral Boundaries 

Commission the power to determine the number of seats in the 

Legislative Assembly.  And it clearly indicated that they were to 

redistribute the boundaries to arrive at 58 seats -- no if's, and's or 

but's. 

 

Why then, if the government clearly had in mind a maximum 

limit that it was prepared to pay provincial court judges, why did 

the minister not charge the commission with the responsibility of 

coming down with a decision that fit within those parameters?  

If the Minister of Justice was exercising thoughtful judgement, 

why did he not clearly explain to the independent commission 

the upper limits for their decision making before giving them 

far-reaching powers to set the salaries of the judiciary? 

 

There are only two possible answers to that question as I see it, 

Mr. Speaker.  One is that the minister did not want to take the 

political risk of interfering with the judicial arm of government, 

and was therefore prepared to live with the recommendations of 

the independent commission no matter what they were.  If that is 

the case, then he should indeed live with those results because 

that was his intent. 

 

The second possible answer is that he changed his mind -- 

changed his mind in midstream -- after hearing the potential 

public outcry at the size of the settlement awarded.  And for 

political reasons, nothing less that political reasons, he bowed to 

political pressure and actually broke the law. 

 

Either answer is unacceptable.  And both answers are as 

unacceptable as the 24 per cent salary increase which was 

permitted by the Justice minister's open-ended empowerment of 

the independent court commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry of Justice is one that must be above 

reproach; a ministry whose judgement cannot be suspect on any 

issue.  Clearly the decisions of the Justice minister on this issue 

are based on political hindsight, not judicious forethought. 

 

The taxpayers of Saskatchewan do not pay ministers for their 

hindsight, nor do they elect or pay them to pass the buck on 

sensitive political decisions to independent commissions without 

clearly defining the parameters within which these independent 

bodies are to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unspeakable that the government members 

would be so narrow of vision as to reduce this to a simple issue 

of dollars and cents.  Obviously the guiding vision behind this 

government is not one 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

of justice, not one of principle, but one of political expediency. 

 

In support of this theory, I ask the members to consider whether 

the Minister of Justice would likely have overruled the decision 

of a binding arbitrator if the salary award would have been to a 

group such as health care workers or government employees. 

 

Imagine for a moment a situation in which government could not 

come to an agreement as to the salaries of a government 

employees' union.  Let us assume for a moment that the two 

negotiating partners, government and the employees' union, 

agreed to a binding arbitration arrangement.  The question that 

we must answer is whether the Minister of Justice would dare 

overturn the recommendations of binding arbitration and what 

the political fallout from that decision would be. 

 

I think the answer is fairly obvious, Mr. Speaker.  I do not 

believe that the government would ever overturn a binding 

arbitration award with a group that has that kind of political 

clout. 

 

And this is an undisputed fact.  The undisputed fact is that 

judges are an easy target, an easy target because they already are 

at the top end of the public sector wage scale.  And for people 

who say that somehow they don't compare with other people -- 

deputy ministers make more than the Provincial Court judges; 

there are civil servants who make more than Provincial Court 

judges.  It's not as if there aren't people who are already within 

that salary range who would be asking for significant increases 

over time. 

 

The judges are an easy target.  A lot of people have no interest in 

defending them.  The question is whether the government has 

the right to break laws, break laws which ensure judicial 

independence, just because it is politically unpopular to give 

judges a pay raise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a much deeper issue at stake here.  I'm 

rather astonished with the number of lawyers who sit on the 

government side, that they find this acceptable -- acceptable 

when they are people who have given oaths that they are 

committed in fact to upholding the law. 

 

The issue of judicial independence is paramount to the 

functioning of a democratic society.  It is incomprehensible that 

any government would tamper with the independence of the 

judiciary by using political expediency as the touchstone for 

decisions on judges' salaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, judges are chosen from the legal profession for 

their qualifications and because of their experience.  Each person 

who appears before a judge does so under the assumption that 

the process has selected the most capable individuals available 

to occupy the seat of justice.  In order to attract individuals of 

integrity and to protect that integrity, we must ensure that the 

judiciary is, to quote the Minister of Justice, and I do quote: 

"secure in the knowledge that their judicial decisions will not 

affect their 

financial security." 

 

The actions of the Minister of Justice have clearly shown that he 

places a greater value on his political career and the political 

careers of his colleagues than he places on his responsibilities to 

uphold the laws of the province of Saskatchewan.  I believe that 

the Minister of Justice has breached his responsibility as the 

gentleman in charge in our province of law and order.  While he 

may have taken the politically correct action, he did not act in 

accordance with his responsibilities as the Minister of Justice.  

Therefore I believe that this is one of the most grave 

undertakings that has ever occurred in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and he should be held accountable. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberals do not support a salary increase of 24 

per cent for the judges; that's not the issue.  The Liberals do not 

support the actions of the government to ignore the 

recommendations of an independent commission.  The Liberals 

do not support any action to change the laws of the province 

simply because it suits their political aims.  I believe that no 

government, no arm of government, and no individual is above 

the law and its penalties. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to read verbatim from an article 

that was in the Birch Hills Gazette.  I wonder if the member 

from Kinistino actually read this, because his article about this 

very topic was in the same paper the same day.  Now I'm going 

to read this to you because it's from Pastor Randy Ariss, and I 

quote: 

 

 There is an interesting passage of Scripture in Psalm 15, that, 

were the government of Saskatchewan interested in walking 

righteously before the Lord, they would do well to abide by. " 

Lord, who may abide by your tabernacle?  Who may dwell in 

your holy hill?  He who swears to his own hurt and does not 

change . . ."  The Living Bible puts it this way: ". . . keeps a 

promise even if it ruins him." 

 

 What the government of Saskatchewan appears to have lost 

sight of is the meaning of the words such as integrity, honour, 

and honesty.  To give your word (is) to commit to a course of 

action, and then to renege on your word because you're not 

satisfied with the result of your decision, is nothing more than 

moral cowardice.  If the decision of the government of 

Saskatchewan was that the province could not afford to give 

the judges of the province a raise, then they should have made 

that decision before submitting the request to binding 

arbitration, not after.  They were obviously hoping that the 

Board of Arbitration would make the tough decision for them. 

 

 Never mind all the pious-sounding talk about struggling with a 

tough decision, and having the courage to make tough 

decisions.  The men 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

and women in power have proven to be untrustworthy, and at 

some point in time, it may be you or I they give their word to, 

and then renege.  I am not political (Pastor Ariss says).  I have 

never been.  I am saddened that men gave their word, and then 

men backed out.  I remember a time when a person would 

rather die than go back on their word.  Once again I have to 

ask: "Where is the outrage?"  "Where is the hue and cry from 

the common man?"  Have we become so morally bankrupt that 

we don't even care anymore? 

 

 This was not a case of a government faced with two alternate 

courses of action, and having to choose one, and thus 

displeasing the other side.  This was the government of 

Saskatchewan giving their word to abide by a decision that 

would be made by the arbitration board, and then not keeping 

their word.  And then they have the gall to pass legislation to 

make it impossible for that lie to be challenged in a court of 

law.  How far have we fallen, (he asks) and how much further 

must we fall? 

 

 The issue here is not the 20 percent increase; the issue is not 

whether the judges deserve the increase, or whether the 

province can afford to give the increase.  The issue is a 

person's word being his bond.  If the men and women have 

proven to be liars in this situation, in what situation can you 

trust them? 

 

I think that Pastor Ariss has said it as well as anybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan who has written about this particular 

item. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a very sad day in Saskatchewan when the 

Government of Saskatchewan yet again will prohibit people 

from being able to go to a court of law and defend themselves.  

They've done it with civil servants; they have done it with farm 

families; they would have done it with the upgrader, and they are 

going to do it today.  And I find that a very, very tragic situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I welcome detailed discussion of this Bill later in 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take a few moments as well to address the Bill before us 

and the issue before us, and that being the court Act, the Act that 

addresses judges' salaries in this province. 

 

I think one of the things that we have been bringing forward and 

would like to again reiterate is the fact of the principle of 

democracy and law and justice and order in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- not only in Saskatchewan but across this fair 

dominion of ours.  Governments in this country and in this 

province are also democratically elected to ensure law and order 

and good government in the land.  We all were elected by 

citizens who put their faith and trust in us.  And I don't believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that there is any arm of government that is above 

the law and its penalties. 

However, one would ask, what happens when government no 

longer honours its laws?  What happens when it strips the rights 

of individuals to challenge its decisions?  And unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, we can look at many jurisdictions around the 

world, some that are so-called democracies, where people do not 

have the same protection and the rights and the freedoms that we 

truly enjoy. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, even though the government and the 

minister would like to argue that the recommendations of the 

commission regarding a 24 per cent pay increase were just too 

exuberant . . . exorbitant, pardon me, Mr. Speaker, it would seem 

to me, Mr. Speaker, that the issue we're discussing certainly goes 

far beyond that. 

 

I would like to just bring to the attention of the House a letter we 

received by Mr. Gerald Seniuk, and he says: 

 

 The most disturbing deception is in the government's claim 

that they could never have expected the commission's result. 

 

 The Schmeiser commission, all of whom were named by the 

minister and not picked independently as in this commission, 

and two of whom were lay people, recommended $104,000 in 

the first year in 1990, with percentage increases in the next 

two years which would have brought the final figure to almost 

$112,000 by 1993. 

 

 In our discussions with government officials and the minister, 

it was conceded the Schmeiser commission recommendation 

was fair, although they did not want to pay for it.  Since they 

conceded they knew the first commission was in the ballpark, 

how can they claim they are surprised when the second 

commission, which was more independent than the first, came 

in somewhere in the same range?  As a result, cynics now 

suspect the minister always planned to do what they are now 

doing and that we have been manipulated and used as pawns 

and set up as a political football.  Obviously we need a 

commission to protect us. 

 

And that's from a legal professional in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that basically points out the major concern that has 

been raised here, Mr. Speaker.  And that's the deception that we 

have seen in the fact that the minister has continually and the 

government has continually argued the 24 per cent as if it was a 

one-year, one-time figure.  And yet if we look at that 24 per cent 

and the fact that the commission would be looking back, much 

the same as the Schmeiser commission, back to the period from 

1990 through to a culmination, I believe, in 1996 -- the way the 

new process of agreement is; the fact that there is a pay increase 

this year with two more increments -- that 24 per cent basically 

boils down to an increase of 4 per 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

cent over the six years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at it in that light and you 

realize that a number of government officials, in fact even the 

deputy minister of Justice was handed -- while he was making 

the recommendations of a 2.5 per cent increase to the judges -- 

was actually given an increase of some 6 per cent. 

 

And one would argue, was that fair?  Was it fair that the deputy 

minister of Justice should on one hand inform his minister that 

no, I don't think we can live with this, we'd better look at giving 

judges a little less, then to accept . . . I think the deputy minister 

should have accepted . . . if nothing else, indicated to the 

Minister of Justice that it would have been appropriate for him 

to receive the same kind of increase as he is recommending for 

the judges. 

 

I'd just like to comment on the fact that the Minister of Justice 

made some very sound arguments when he brought forward the 

legislation back in May 1993.  Last May the Justice minister 

quoted the Supreme Court, saying that it was necessary to take 

the veto power away from government in regards to deciding 

salaries, pensions, allowances, etc., of judges. 

 

He also went on to say the focus of his amendments were to 

ensure that benefits for Provincial Court judges and the method 

of determining those benefits adequately respect the 

independence of the court and the judges of that court. 

 

The minister also indicated, in his defence of why he was 

bringing in the legislation and he added: 

 

 The fact that an independent commission with the ability to 

make binding recommendations will be considering matters of 

judicial compensation will help to ensure that judicial 

independence will be indeed preserved. 

 

Even in his speech regarding the Bill at the time which said the 

commission . . . said, and I quote the Supreme Court, in a second 

reading speech, he quoted: 

 

 The essence of such financial security is that the right to salary 

and pension should be established by law and not be subject to 

arbitrary interference by the executive in a manner that could 

affect judicial independence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think as we see what has transpired with us today, 

that indeed I think that the minister has all of a sudden taken an 

about-face. And I'm not sure if he's forgotten about exactly the 

points that he raised when he very adequately argued for the 

binding commission and the appointment of the commission and 

the binding agreement. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that the principle that we're 

arguing and we're discussing this afternoon and bringing 

forward, the principle of law and order and justice, it would be 

appropriate for the Minister of Justice to indeed have listened to 

the very sound, 

reasonable arguments that he presented back in May of 1993. 

 

We've also noted that at that time too, when we were debating 

the Bill we had suggested to the minister that there might be 

some pitfalls.  And one of the major pitfalls that we foresaw in 

the legislation was the fact that that legislation made the 

commission's findings binding.  It was a binding agreement. 

 

And one would ask, why would the government do that?  Why 

would the government allow or even implement a piece of 

legislation and make it binding in light of the fact that the 

government has shown over the past three years that legislation 

didn't really mean a lot.  Legislation in place didn't mean a lot; 

that they would terminate an agreement if they felt led to, like 

we saw with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

contract.  But they decided to make this commission . . . give 

them the latitude to come up with the report and make it binding 

upon the government. 

 

Now I understand just from talking to the legal community, that 

one of the reasons for that was that the Justice department had 

been in contact with the judges and trying to work out a 

compromise and an understanding.  And they had agreed to the 

fact that yes, okay, appoint another commission, allow the 

commission -- give them the latitude -- the ability to look at this 

in a sound and reasonable manner, and come back to the House 

with recommendations and we will agree to accept whatever the 

commission comes up with. 

 

However, we want the government to give us their word that 

they will accept those conditions as well, and we want some 

kind of an understanding that goes just beyond a handshake.  

And I wonder why they would do that.  It would seen to me that 

normally a handshake in the province and we normally, as 

individuals, deal with a handshake and we believe that when we 

make a commitment to another person that that handshake is our 

word, but they ask for the government . . . and the government 

agreed to bring in the binding legislation saying that we will 

agree to this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the judges agreed to that, they realized 

that if the commission at the end of the day, looking at all the . . . 

listening to and hearing all the discussion on deficit reduction, 

looking at the fact, realizing that many people across our 

province had taken very minimal wage increases if any at all, the 

judges realized that the commission was in a very solid and 

sound position of coming back with a very low recommendation.  

The judges could have . . . or the commission could have come 

back with a recommendation that said no, we think maybe 6 or 7 

per cent over three years would be appropriate. 

 

Now I would suggest to you if the commission would have done 

that, the minister would have no doubt had a very broad smile on 

his face saying, well that's about right where we needed it.  But 

the judges may not have been happy; but the indication is the 

judges would have agreed and would have lived by that because 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

they had agreed to that principle of binding legislation. 

 

(1500) 

 

However, as we see, this government again, as it has time and 

time again, has continued to show its disregard for legislation, 

even its own legislation, and I believe that's unfortunate.  It's 

unfortunate that a minister who has stood in this Assembly and 

espoused the virtues of justice and law and order would decide 

at the end of the day that it's more appropriate to disobey the 

laws, his own laws, rather than following the laws. 

 

And I'd like to . . . Also I note an article in the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix of Monday, April 4.  It was written by an 

individual from Saskatoon, and the headline is "Consequences of 

judges' case far reaching." 

 

 At last, we have Justice Minister Bob Mitchell's decision on 

the raise in judges' salaries.  And what a decision it is: Wave 

the magic wand of retroactive legislation and pretend the 

whole thing never happened . . . no independent commission, 

no binding decision, nothing. 

 

 This is the government that decided some time after the 

commission was formed to investigate judges' salaries, that its 

decision should be binding.  We heard a lot of high-sounding 

praises at the time about maintaining the integrity of the 

judiciary.  I hope the judiciary has some integrity; the 

government certainly doesn't. 

 

I think that reflects some of the concern by people right across 

this province and certainly a number of editorials that we have 

seen since the decision has come down; a reflection which, Mr. 

Speaker, reflects on each and every one of us as elected 

representatives duly elected by our constituents to represent 

them. 

 

I'm reminded of a process that the, I believe, Reform Party went 

through and as I was observing that process -- it's regarding 

euthanasia -- they were contacting people via satellite or, I 

believe -- I'm not sure if it was a satellite hook-up -- but they 

were talking to people, they were asking people to phone in and 

let them know how they felt about certain issues and about this 

issue. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when people go to the polls to elect 

representatives, they go to the polls electing individuals who 

they believe will give leadership.  Now they certainly expect 

each and every one of us to give good, solid, sound leadership, 

to be listening, and to show compassion and understand and be 

caring people.  But at the same time I think they expect us to at 

least listen to the concerns they may raise, and even on this 

issue. 

 

And no doubt in the coffee shops after the announcement of the 

increase was made by the commission of the recommendations, 

the coffee 

shops talk was judges don't deserve a 24 per cent increase.  And 

the minister heard that concern.  And the government heard that 

concern.  I heard that concern, Mr. Speaker.  And everyone 

around us heard that concern.  The fact was the 24 per cent 

overshadowed the other most important issue about integrity of 

individuals and the integrity of government and law and order in 

this province. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, I would ask you, I would ask 

anyone, what perception do people across this province have of 

this government or even each and every one of us as MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) when they look to 

government for leadership and find that government is not even 

willing to abide by its own laws, and even by the binding 

agreements that they would pass upon us? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it certainly was important that the 

government step aside.  And I think in light of the decision that 

has been made and in light of the Bill that is before us, when the 

minister was arguing that it's important that the salary disputes 

be independent from government, I think that was truly an 

honest statement by the minister.  And the minister was being 

very open in what he was saying and therefore he came up with 

the Bill that set in place the commission. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the minister should have realized and as 

representatives we should have been also aware of the fact that if 

we're not willing to abide by the rules we establish and set an 

example, then we'd better not pass that type of legislation. 

 

I look at the problem that is happening in Bosnia right now, and 

we look at the atrocities that are taking place.  We're also aware 

of the fact that the UN (United Nations) has threatened the Serbs 

on numerous and numerous occasions.  And as the President of 

the United States said the other day in his frustration when 

they're trying to protect innocent people in Bosnia and the Serbs 

are attacking these small communities and they call for fire 

power and the President of the United States said, if we're not 

willing to go in and really back up our statements, we better not 

make statements; we better not stand up and say this is what 

we're going to do, if we can't back up our words with some 

action. 

 

And I think what the minister has done here and what we have 

here is the minister made a commitment to law and order and 

justice and integrity in this province. He made a commitment to 

reaching out and to try to come to grasps with the judges' 

salaries in this province.  The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is 

we've basically moved away, and the legislation we have before 

us today, we have backed up from our commitment to removing 

the judiciary . . . and to creating the independence of the 

judiciary in this province.  We have backed away from our 

commitment to law and order and justice, and there's a fair 

debate going across this country today about law and order and 

justice and about people, how people are held accountable for 

their actions. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that there was and 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

is only one real action for the government and for the Premier 

and for the minister.  And the minister certainly has taken the 

time to acknowledge that maybe this was a mistake, maybe we 

shouldn't have gone as far as . . . in fact, I believe in a comment 

the minister made on March 22, 1994, after he had finally come 

forward and given his decision to this House, to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, after missing some two or three 

deadlines . . . I'd like to quote a little bit of what the minister's 

statement was. 

 

 In an attempt to address this long-standing problem, this 

Assembly in June of last year approved a process by which the 

salaries of Provincial Court judges would be determined by an 

independent commission, with the recommendations of the 

commission to be legally binding on both the judges and the 

government.  The legislation received the support of the 

Assembly and of all parties in this Assembly. 

 

 Today, with the benefit of hindsight, it is obvious to all that 

this decision was a mistake. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that really was a mistake.  If 

we are willing to sit down and make laws, we better be willing 

to realize the consequences if we're going to break those laws 

before we ever make them. 

 

And I would trust that the minister and that this government, if 

it's going to make laws in the future, will sit down and, as we 

indicated to the minister last year, will take due diligence in 

determining the types of laws they're going to bring forward and 

whether or not at the end of the day that they will be able to live 

by and abide by the laws that they establish. 

 

If they can't, and as we've seen on a number of occasions that 

they're continually going to show disregard and disrespect for 

the laws that they make, for the laws that we have around us, for 

the rights of individuals, then I believe, Mr. Speaker, we are 

facing a scary time in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many areas that we could look at.  And 

when we look at the disregard this government has had for laws, 

I'd just like to go to another article and just a few comments 

before I sit down and allow the Bill to move on into committee. 

 

A headline that I picked up, and it's from the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix again, and this is Tuesday, March 9 -- the 

headline reads, "A scary disregard for the province's laws."  

 

 A clear abuse of power by government is something that 

should make us all nervous. 

 

I think that is unfortunate.  It is the type of argument and 

statement that none of us really want to hear. 

 

 And unfortunately though, like with most things these days, 

our outrage depends on the relative merits of the abuse. 

 In a climate where there are fewer and fewer moral absolutes, 

it is not surprising people look the other way when they're not 

being affected by a particularly foul decision of government. 

 

And I think that's what happened here.  People were more 

interested in looking at the 24 per cent than in law and order and 

justice. 

 

 And what makes the whole process disturbing is how it's 

consistent with the way this government has behaved in the 

past. 

 

 Since taking power in November of 1991 the Romanow 

government has broken countless contracts it didn't like or 

deem to be in the public interest.  With the power to change 

the law, it sees nothing wrong with breaking it and then 

retroactively making its actions legal. 

 

 It began with The Crown Employees Contracts Act which 

voided all contracts the previous Devine government had 

signed with its employees.  To justify breaking the contracts 

the government pointed to the unconscionable contract of 

former SaskPower president George Hill.  Realizing there 

would be little if any public support for Hill, the government 

knew it could act without fear of the political consequences. 

 

I believe it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that a government would 

look at one contract and put everybody in the same basket. 

 

 Then came the decision to arbitrarily change contracts 

individual farmers had with the government under the gross 

revenue insurance plan, GRIP.  With the province deep in 

debt, the government said it could not afford the program as it 

was structured.  It seemed to make sense and the only people 

who protested were the farmers affected. 

 

 Next came the NewGrade heavy oil upgrader issue.  This was 

another unconscionable agreement the NDP had inherited 

from the Tories.  But by refusing to live up to the terms of the 

contract with Federated Co-operatives Ltd., the government 

knew it would ultimately get its way.  Now we have the judges 

being victimized by the government.  The question is: who's 

next? 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the long and short when we look at the 

Bill before us and the debate that has taken place, it's imperative 

that as lawgivers and lawmakers in this Assembly and in the 

province that we sit down and we seriously consider our actions.  

I believe it's time the government sat down and seriously 

considered their actions.  And maybe it's time the people of 

Saskatchewan took a little more serious, a closer, look at what 

has been transpiring over the past number of years and realize 

that just because an action may not affect them today, it doesn't 

mean that 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

a similar action may not affect them tomorrow. 

 

And I think of the meeting just the other evening in Davidson 

with regards to the small retailers who met and the problems 

they're facing with the environment Act.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

when you look at the people who were there, the people who 

were at that meeting were the individuals who were directly 

affected today; but the unfortunate part is the same actions on 

that environment Bill are going to affect a number of people in 

the future.  But just because they're not affected today, they 

weren't really that interested; they may not be interested. 

 

I think people, Mr. Speaker . . . the same thing is apparent here.  

It's apparent that because it just affects one group, everyone else 

is quiet.  What happens tomorrow if government action affects 

another group of individuals and they say, will you come and 

help us?  Do you think that individual or group are going to be 

interested in helping? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to stand up for law and order and 

justice and what is right.  We need to stand up for the rights of 

individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many more comments that could be 

made on this subject and I know we will have an opportunity to 

debate this issue in committee.  And I want to thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for giving me the time to raise a few of the concerns 

and I look forward to debate in Committee of the Whole.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thought I 

would take advantage of my right to speak again in this debate 

by reason of the rather exaggerated remarks that have come from 

across the way during the debate of this Bill. And there are a 

number of things that must be said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The first thing that I want to say is that we quite understood, and 

I tried to make it clear in my second reading speech, that we 

quite understood the principles involved in this matter.  And it 

was hardly necessary for the Leader of the Third Party to try and 

dramatize what we had already agreed would be the case, as she 

did in her remarks today. 

 

This was not a question of politics, Mr. Speaker.  At no point 

was this a question of politics.  It wasn't a matter of somebody 

going out to the coffee shops and testing the wind.  That wasn't 

the point. 

 

(1515) 

 

What we had here was in effect a clash of two very important 

and riveting ideas.  On the one hand was the supreme 

importance of any government, this government or any 

government, to keep its agreements and follow its legislation.  

And we acknowledge the importance of that principle.  And 

nobody believes that more than do members of my own party. 

 

And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is because my 

party really believes in government.  My party believes that 

government is the instrumentality by which so many of society's 

problems can be addressed and by which the human condition 

can be advanced.  And that is not the same philosophy or 

approach as some of my friends opposite. 

 

Some of their positions over the years, indeed the philosophy 

underlying their party, is that we got too much government.  

What's wrong with Canada is we got too much.  We need less 

government.  Government shouldn't intrude so far.  Government 

shouldn't do so many things.  Government shouldn't pass laws 

with respect to part-time workers and the dreadful social 

problems they face in today's economy.  And so on and so forth. 

 

Our party believes that government has the capacity to solve 

some of these problems and should solve them.  And for that 

reason, Mr. Speaker, we believe in the integrity of government. 

And so we will respect our agreements and we will follow our 

legislation unless in extreme circumstances.  And that's the 

problem we had in this case. 

 

We have worked since the day on which we assumed office, the 

transition being completed by November 21, 1991, we have 

worked from that day to restore the fiscal integrity of this 

province.  That meant immediately taking steps to try and 

wrestle the huge deficit, the huge and chronic deficit that has 

faced this province continuously since 1982, to wrestle that 

problem to the ground.  And that has been our priority.  And 

every member of this House and every person living in this 

province knows and understands that that has been our priority. 

 

And we have been able over the last two and a half years to 

fashion a consensus, a consensus of the people of this province, 

around the need to curb expenses and the need to get on top of 

this problem of the deficit.  Then having done that, Mr. Speaker, 

we then have to get at the problem of paying back the debt.  And 

we have this consensus built around those ideas, and it's been 

difficult to do. 

 

A lot of people have had to make a lot of sacrifices along the 

way to buying into that consensus.  But they've done it.  To the 

great credit of the people and the organizations of this province, 

they have accepted the challenge of getting this province back 

on its feet financially.  And they have accepted in a very broad 

consensus the things that must be done in order to accomplish 

this. 

 

Now it is in that setting that the award comes from the 

commission studying the matter of judges' salaries.  I've said in 

this House before that the commission is . . . the make-up of the 

commission was . . . these are solid, sound people.  These are 

highly respected people trying to do the best job they could, and 

I know they did.  The problem with it though is that it proposes 

an increase for the Provincial Court judges which threatens this 

consensus that we have fashioned. 

 

It is our profound belief that if we were to have made 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

an exception of the judges, paid them the amount of the award, 

that would so damage the consensus that I've been describing 

that we would be unable to maintain our initiative of putting the 

fiscal affairs of this province back in good order and put 

Saskatchewan back on its feet. 

 

We saw that as a real threat, Mr. Speaker.  We believe it to be 

the case, as sincerely as I can possibly put those words forward, 

and we were not prepared to risk all of the work that we've done 

over the last two and a half years, as would have been the case if 

we had respected this award. 

 

Now that was a tough decision, Mr. Speaker, because in coming 

to that decision, we had to do two things.  We had to say we will 

not be bound by our agreement to accept the award of this 

commission as binding and we will not be bound by our own 

legislation.  And those are dreadfully important principles and 

only in the most extreme circumstances should they be departed 

from. 

 

We concluded on this side of the House that the circumstances 

in which we are in constitute the kind of extreme circumstances 

which justify a government doing what we're doing here.  We 

simply cannot live with the award. 

 

The consequences of living with it would be calamitous.  All of 

the groups and organizations and individuals who have 

sacrificed so much would then turn to us and say, I want my 

demands satisfied.  My case is every bit as good as the judges' 

case.  If the judges are entitled to this kind of treatment, I'm 

entitled to this kind of treatment too. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there would literally be no end to it, nor 

should there be -- nor should there be.  Because I believe that 

most people and most groups in this province could make a case 

that would be at least as good as the cases that the judges put 

forward. 

 

And on what basis could we turn to them and say, well the 

judges had a good case but you don't have a good case?  You 

don't have a good case, welfare mom.  You don't have a good 

case, unemployed worker.  You don't have a good case, 

part-time worker.  You don't have a case that's anywhere near as 

good as the judges so we're not going to give it to you. 

 

I say that in support of my argument that the consensus that we 

have around the need for restraint and the need for fiscal 

integrity is fragile and would be threatened if we had simply 

accepted the award of the commission. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we did not.  It had nothing to do with the 

politics of the question -- nothing to do with the politics of the 

question -- and everything to do with our ability to deliver on 

our commitment to the people of Saskatchewan to put the fiscal 

affairs of this province back in good order.  That's what we were 

about, Mr. Speaker.   That's what we were about. 

 

Now really dreadful things have been said from across 

the House during this debate.  Judges have been described as 

easy targets.  Judges have been described as not having very 

much political power and so we felt free to pick on them.  

Nothing could be further from our minds as we made this 

decision, Mr. Speaker.  Nothing could have been further from 

our minds. 

 

We have great respect for this court, great respect for it.  The 

Premier, when he was the attorney general, set the court up.  The 

court has been staffed with excellent people over the years.  This 

court, Mr. Speaker, is on the cutting edge of developments 

among provincial courts in this country. 

 

I cite, for example, the excellent work that members of the court 

have done on the aboriginal justice question.  Some members of 

this court, Mr. Speaker, have achieved national renown for the 

work that they have done on aboriginal justice questions.  

Similarly, our Provincial Court is right on the cutting edge of 

gender issues with respect to matters that fall within their 

jurisdiction.  And they have made a study, Mr. Speaker, that 

places them in that position, right at the vanguard of 

developments, of judicial developments with respect to 

questions of gender. 

 

There are other studies going on in this court of which we're 

very proud and which provide leadership nationally on these 

questions.  I won't take the time of the House to go into them, 

but let me tell you that we are very proud of this court and we 

are in no sense approaching this with any mean-mindedness as 

far as the Provincial Court judges are concerned. 

 

I want to say one other thing, Mr. Speaker, and this is very 

important.  We know that our judges are underpaid.  When the 

government of Premier Blakeney left office in 1982 the judges 

in this court were, I believe, the highest paid in the land, or right 

up there at the top of the list.  When our government took office 

in 1991 those same judges were now the lowest paid judges in 

the land.  And today they are the lowest paid judges in the land. 

 

And that is not a satisfactory situation.  Something has to be 

done about it.  We have gotten about the task of doing 

something about it with the Bill that is in . . . with the 

announcements that we've made and in the approach that we've 

taken to this matter.  And they will receive a two and a half per 

cent increase for last year and a two and a half per cent increase 

for this year. 

 

Now they would argue and lots of people would argue, with 

validity, that that's not enough.  And of course it's not enough 

because it doesn't treat our judges fairly in relation to the other 

judges of this country.  But, Mr. Speaker, not all at once, not as 

recommended by the commission.  That we cannot do and 

maintain the consensus that we have built in this province 

around the principles of restraint and the principles of fiscal 

integrity.  And that it seems to us is a principle against which the 

other principles have to give way. 

 

And when you come right down to it, Mr. Speaker, as 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

I've said during question period in answer to the member from 

Moosomin, it was a question of either you do it or you don't do 

it.  You either pay the award or you don't pay the award.  If you 

decide that you can't pay the award, then there's only one thing 

you can do.  You got to reach back and fix the legislation, and 

that's what we've done here.  There was no alternative; you 

either do it or you don't do it. 

 

And you don't escape that argument or put it into any different 

kind of context or plane by complaining about retroactivity and 

raising the dread R-word and drawing analogies to other 

situations where retroactive legislation has been used.  You 

either pay it or your don't pay it.  And if you don't pay it, you 

have to take action as we have done in this Bill. 

 

So I want to say those words, Mr. Speaker, because in one way 

or another the government has to speak to the judges.  And I try 

to do so now by saying, as I have said in debate, that this had not 

to do with the court.  This was not a question of trying to get . . . 

to take any action with respect to the judges themselves.  We are 

proud of our judges and we're very pleased with the court and 

we believe that they need to be paid at a higher level, and that 

will happen in the course of time. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my main 

argument, and that is that in these circumstances the government 

was in a position of really having no alternative.  If we were to 

have respected this award and simply paid it, then that would 

have been, I believe, the end of our efforts to hold the consensus 

together around the principle of restraint. 

 

What the opposition parties are saying, Mr. Speaker, is really 

very simple.  It is that a government must in all circumstances be 

bound by its agreement and by its legislation. 

 

And a graphic image comes to mind.  And that is the image of a 

deer crossing the highway at night, suddenly caught in the bright 

headlights of a speeding car, pinned by those lights, frozen, 

hypnotized, unable to leap to safety, simply staring at the 

headlights as the onrushing car bears down upon it.  Is it 

seriously argued that government is as helpless as that doomed 

deer?  Are we caught in the bright headlights of our agreement 

and our legislation, and must we simply stand here staring at the 

headlights, allowing the onrushing vehicle to do what it will? 

 

Because that's what's at stake here, Mr. Speaker.  This award 

presents the same threat to our efforts to restrain public 

expenditures as the speeding vehicle behind the bright headlights 

presents to the startled deer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say no.  Governments are not that helpless.  

When the public interest demands it, when the situation permits 

of no alternative, we may leap to safety, escaping the dreadful 

consequences of the speeding vehicle.  And that's what we're 

doing with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The division bells rang from 3:31 p.m. until 3:39 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Pringle 

Wiens Murray 

Shillington Draper 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Johnson Flavel 

Atkinson Cline 

Carson Scott 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Penner Knezacek 

Cunningham Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Jess t 

-- 28 

Nays 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Martens Haverstock 

Boyd Bergman 

Toth  

-- 9 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask for leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, this 

afternoon, in the west gallery we have some very influential 

municipal politicians, and they belong to the SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) board of 

directors.  And I would like to introduce Murray Westby, mayor 

of Watrous; Mark Thompson, alderman from Saskatoon, and 

chairman of the board; Keith Carleton, the RM (rural 

municipality) of . . . I'm not quite sure, but he's a reeve of an RM 

in the south . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Whiska Creek. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Okay.  John Lipp, councillor from the City 

of Regina; Alphonse Kurzinger from the SSTA (Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association); and Sinc Harrison, who is the 

president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities). 

 

I would ask all members to welcome them to the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with 

the minister today in welcoming our special guests here today, 

and having them watch the debate in the legislature. 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

I'm sure they've been debating some very weighty subjects 

themselves earlier today, and it's not a debate that will probably 

go away.  So I join with the minister in welcoming them here, 

and we look for more visits. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to 

welcome the SAMA board, and in particular their chair, 

Councillor Mark Thompson from Saskatoon.  Mark and I served 

for several years together on Saskatoon City Council and it's 

nice to see him here in Regina, observing the proceedings today.  

And I think it would . . . it's not inappropriate for me to note in 

this most political of chambers, that Councillor Thompson is 

now seeking a change in his status with respect to the mayoralty 

campaign in Saskatoon. 

 

Welcome to Regina today, Mark. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this point that the minister please 

introduce the official who has joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairperson, I'd like to 

introduce Stuart Kramer who is the acting president of New 

Careers Corporation, and he's sitting to my right. 

 

(1545) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, Mr. Kramer, thank you for coming in today. 

 

Before we start, I wonder if the minister would go through the 

purposes for the New Careers Corporation.  It's had somewhat of 

a change of direction in its history.  It started out in 1984 under 

the previous administration, but has changed its course since the 

new government has come to power.  And I wonder if you 

would mind explaining to the Assembly exactly what the role of 

the New Careers Corporation is today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, I will hand over this document.  But 

basically the mandate of the New Careers Corporation is to 

provide Saskatchewan people receiving social assistance with 

opportunities for increased independence by preparing them for 

employment. 

 

And the corporation is able to achieve this through the provision 

of integrated programs that combine career planning, job-search 

training, education 

improvement, vocational skill training, and work experience 

programs. 

 

The goals of New Careers Corporation is to enhance the 

employability of persons receiving social assistance by assisting 

them with career planning and vocational services, providing 

education and training, providing employment and on-the-job 

opportunities. 

 

A secondary goal for the corporation is to assist Saskatchewan 

communities through non-profit organizations and 

non-governmental organizations to achieve their goals.  And we 

give priority to projects that provide services to lower income 

people in the target groups of seniors, people with disability, 

aboriginal people, and children living in poverty.  And I will 

hand this document over to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In light of 

the current situation with the case-load on Social Services, with 

80,000 people being on Social Service assistance, it's very 

important that a program such as this be in place which 

encourages employment, which provides opportunities to learn 

and to provide employment. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I wonder if you could explain what the 

corporation has been doing in the past year along this line to 

provide employment for those people who are on welfare, 

particularly in the light of the fact that we have such a dramatic 

increase in Social Services over the past year.  I believe we're 

increasing at the rate right now of approximately a thousand new 

clients per month. 

 

I wonder if you could explain what New Careers Corporation is 

doing to try and aid these people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- What we're doing to try and aid these 

people, and if you look on page 3 of the document I've just given 

you, which is the overview of the New Careers Corporation, we 

have applied . . . have been able to assist 1,500 clients in career 

planning and job search.  We've assisted 1,665 clients at work 

preparation centres, 2,550 clients through skill training, 1,250 

clients in the community employment program, and 360 clients 

through the work experience program for a total of 7,325 clients. 

 

I guess the other point I'd like to make is that I have been in 

touch with Mr. Axworthy, who is the federal minister that 

basically is in charge of the federal government's social reform 

program.  And what we're suggesting to Mr. Axworthy is that 

instead of providing new structures, new administrative 

structures, to assist Canadians that are looking for work, what 

we might want to do is use existing provincial structures such as 

New Careers Corporation to deliver a single 

_window service to those people who are unemployed or living 

on social assistance. 

 

One of the things that I do know is that if you look at the 

statistics and the people that are coming to New Careers 

Corporation, those people who are unemployed in this province 

and are employable do in fact want to work, they want the 

opportunity to 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

improve their skills and work experience, they want the 

opportunity to have access to education -- educational 

opportunities and training opportunities.  And it's a matter of 

redesigning the existing system in this country so that the 

impediments that are presently there are alleviated so that we 

can have services that meet the individual needs of clients in 

order that they can obtain the skills necessary to get a job and 

keep it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The idea of 

working together with the federal government on this idea and 

providing what you might call one-stop shopping for this kind of 

a service, I think has some value.  Because too many times 

within government the funds available for any particular 

program are eaten up by the administration; so if you have more 

than one program dealing with basically the same service, you 

have that much more administration. 

 

If the service can be delivered through one program, then 

certainly there is a cost saving.  Which brings to mind the 

question: why is this dealing with Social Service clients -- this 

particular department, New Careers Corporation - dealing with 

Social Service clients and being handled by the Department of 

Education through manpower and training? 

 

Now is there a duplication of administration in this particular 

case, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I was a proponent of the idea when I was 

Minister of Social Services that New Careers Corporation should 

in fact be with the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment.  It seems to me . . . and what we are trying to do is 

not simply put social assistance clients through an employment 

situation where they can get off of social assistance and then on 

to UI (Unemployment Insurance).  What we're trying to do is 

link people who are on social assistance into education and 

training programs that will give them qualifications or 

credentials that they could then use to obtain employment. 

 

If you look at existing programs all across this country for social 

assistance clients, they tend to be: get off of social assistance, 

get into an employment situation, and then when that 

employment situation is over, they then can go onto UI .  What 

we're trying to do, is to link those clients into apprenticeship 

training programs, into programs that will give them a 

credential, a skill, a piece of paper that will be recognized by 

employers so that they can get real jobs and keep them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That is 

indeed what I believe should be the goal and I agree with you on 

that. 

 

But I'm very interested in a comment that you made when you 

talk of people on social assistance going through this program 

and them moving on to UI. 

 

How many people that have gone through these programs in the 

last year have actually received long-term, meaningful 

employment?  And how many 

have simply met the requirement for UI and then moved off into 

UI?  Are there significant numbers either way?  Could you 

explain that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- If you look at our programs, in the career 

planning and job search program we had 1,500 people go 

through that program.  That is to assist a social assistance client 

in determining what sorts of careers they are interested in and 

the kinds of credentials that they will require in order to go into 

those careers. 

 

For other social assistance clients, they may have the paper 

qualifications but they don't have the skills to know how to go 

about doing a rsum.  So the career planning and job search 

aspect of New Careers is to assist those people. 

 

In the skills training area, we are sending social assistance 

clients to adult basic education programs where they can do 

upgrading -- the 5-10 program and then the 11-12 program. 

 

Now those people will be in ABE programs or adult basic 

education programs and they won't be coming out of those 

programs and onto unemployment insurance.  Hopefully what's 

happening is they're coming out of those programs and going 

into other post-secondary institutions like SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology) or going on to 

university once they have the proper qualifications. 

 

In the work experience program, that is basically the 

construction part of New Careers Corporation where they are on 

sites constructing, perhaps helping a low income housing . . . or 

the housing authorities with some of their needs.  They may be 

in a non-profit day care centre where they're assisting the day 

care centre in doing some new construction. 

 

We have a home repair program.  It's a pilot program in 

Saskatoon to try and improve the housing stock.  And for those 

people, some of the people already have the appropriate skills 

and just need a leg-up in order to get out into the workplace and 

gain that valuable work experience.  For others in the program, 

they're interested in going into the trades and want the work 

experience to determine whether in fact they want to go off to a 

technical school to get the skills that are necessary. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When you 

mentioned the 5 to 12 program and the 11 . . . or 5 to 10 and the 

11 to 12 program, do the participants within that program 

receive any salary or remuneration?  And if they do, do they 

then pay UI premiums on those salaries? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Those people that are in the adult basic 

education programs are still on social assistance.  They're still 

receiving an allowance to go into those programs.  And what 

we're finding is that most of the people that are going into those 

programs are single-parent mothers with children.  They're 

interested in upgrading their skills, 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

or their basic skills, i.e., adult basic education, and then they can 

go on through student loans or whatever into technical schools 

or universities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Madam Minister, these particular 

people would  continue to receive their benefits from Social 

Services.  It wouldn't be classified as a salary of any sort, 

therefore they would not be paying any UI premiums? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- You're absolutely correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How about 

the people that are on the community employment program?  

When they receive a remuneration, is that classified as a salary 

and would they pay UI premiums on that income? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- The community employment program 

and the work experience program are job related.  They would 

receive a salary and they would pay into unemployment 

insurance.  And when the program ended, if they didn't go on to 

another job, they would in fact be entitled to receive 

unemployment insurance benefits. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  When a 

person enters into either one of those two programs, the 

community employment program or the work experience 

program, what length of time does the program normally run for 

for an individual? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We would have anywhere from 10 to 52 

weeks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I wonder if 

you could give me an average though.  If you have a thousand 

people who go through -- well you've got 1,250 and 360 on the 

other -- these 1,500, 1,610 people, when they've gone through, 

what would the average have been for each of the individuals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Average would be somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 20 weeks. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, we seem to be 

coming pretty close to that magic number of what a person has 

to put in to receive UI.  And you were stating earlier that you felt 

it was wrong that social assistance provides the job and then the 

person moves off from this program, or any other similar type of 

program, to UI.  And yet you state that your numbers average 

out to 20 weeks.  And I could be wrong on this because there has 

been some changes to UI in the last year or so, but I believe 20 

weeks in Saskatchewan is the amount of time required to qualify 

for UI. 

 

Is there some reason that 20 weeks is the average?  Is the 

consideration given to put people into the position to receive UI? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I understand your point.  But one of the 

realities with unemployment insurance is that if you're collecting 

unemployment insurance, you can then be shifted into training 

programs.  So my 

understanding is that for a lot of the people that we're talking 

about, they then go on to unemployment insurance training 

programs in technical schools because they've been linked into 

an apprenticeship program, or some non-apprenticeship trade, so 

then they go into these programs so that they can get the kinds of 

skills that employers are looking for. 

 

The Chair: -- The member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1600) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's a very 

good and a very great pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to the Assembly this afternoon four young people who are 

visitors to Canada and to our Assembly this afternoon. 

 

We have with us Derk Shilling -- I'm going to ask him to stand 

-- Derk Shilling, from Hamburg, Germany.  He's an engineering 

student who is touring Canada.  He started in Vancouver and is 

working his way to Toronto. 

 

We also have Barbara Doichel, who is from Buxtehude, 

Germany, and is a librarian there. 

 

We have also Rose Oduho, who is from the Sudan.  Rose is a 

first-year English student at the University of Regina and plans 

to spend three more years here studying nursing. 

 

We also have finally Gesche Doichel, who is from Buxtehude, 

Germany, and has spent the last year here at the University of 

Regina studying native Canadian literature, and she will be 

leaving for home in August. 

 

Derk and Barbara are leaving tonight for Toronto by bus.  So 

they'll be seeing much of the great Canadian countryside. 

 

I'd ask all members to give them a warm welcome to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

New Careers Corporation 

Vote 59 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I'd 

like to take the opportunity to welcome the students here today 

and wish them well in their visits to Canada and on their bus 

trips to Toronto. 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

Madam Chairman . . . Madam Minister.  Sorry about that.  

Madam Minister, your program is shifting people from welfare, 

which is a provincial responsibility, through the system, 

providing them with some training, to UI, which is a federal 

responsibility. 

 

Now you shake your head when I say that, but you've already 

said that that happens in a good number of cases here.  So I'm 

wondering what numbers, what percentages of these 1,610 

people did that actually happen to and how many of them went 

on to receive employment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I will say this.  That one of the reasons 

why we want to engage the federal government in social reform 

in this country is because we have played . . . and provinces all 

across this country are doing this, and Alberta is a classic 

example.  And what they have done is they have shifted people 

off of social assistance into short programs and then onto 

unemployment insurance. 

 

We acknowledge in this province, that we have the situation 

where we have people, some people, not all people, but there are 

some people in our programs that work for 20 weeks, then go on 

to UI.  Many of those people, we are advised, go into training 

programs through unemployment insurance because what they 

have done is reduced the benefits for those people who are 

unemployed and shifted the money into training for people who 

are unemployed.  All provinces play this shell game that you are 

referring to. 

 

What our province is saying to the federal government is that we 

need to have a meaningful social reform in this country so that 

people who are unemployed -- and when we say unemployed 

we're talking about people who are on social assistance, and 

people who are on unemployment -- have avenue, have access to 

meaningful training programs that in fact will lead to a job. 

 

And so I guess what I want to say to the member is that it is in 

fact very disappointing that Mr. Axworthy chose to cancel the 

meeting that my colleague, the Minister of Social Services and 

myself were to attend earlier this week.  Now I understand why 

he cancelled the meeting because he hasn't been undergoing 

much consultation with the provinces. 

 

But we have some things we want to talk to the federal 

government about because we have provincial programs, we 

have federal programs, we have federal-provincial programs, 

and in fact because of jurisdictional issues, because of rules, it 

sometimes makes it very difficult to deliver a training program 

to people that makes sense and will in fact assist them. 

 

And so I want to say to the member, any way you can support us 

in this endeavour to stop a federal program here, a provincial 

program there, federal-provincial programs, and move to a 

system where we are providing a continuum of services, 

avoiding waste and duplication and overlap, then we can put 

limited financial resources into meaningful training and 

employment programs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I can 

support you to this extent at least right away.  I too find Mr. 

Axworthy a disappointment. 

 

Madam Minister, I think it's very worth while that we integrate 

as many programs as possible to eliminate the administration 

and the duplication.  But that wasn't the direction my question 

was going to you. 

 

I asked you, how many people have actually either received 

employment after going through the program, or how many 

people went on to some form of UI.  Because there's only one 

taxpayer; and the taxpayer, whether they pay provincial taxes 

and support this program or pay federal taxes and support the UI 

program through their work, because tax money goes to support 

the UI as well as the UI premiums that the workers pay, so 

whoever it is that's paying the taxes is paying for either . . . on 

both of these programs. 

 

So, Madam Minister, how many either received employment, or 

how many received UI after completing your programs? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well first let me say this, that 

unemployment insurance in this country is not tax supported.  

It's supported by workers and employers paying into the 

unemployment insurance scheme.  It's not tax supported. 

 

Now certainly social assistance programs in this country, 

training dollars that go into some of our technical schools and 

universities are tax supported through EPF (established 

programs financing), which is federal transfer payments, and 

provincial tax dollars.  So I just wanted to clarify that for you. 

 

Now just getting back to the difficulties that it . . . Sometimes 

there are impediments, federal impediments that make it difficult 

for provinces, particularly a province like ours which is basically 

enduring some fiscal hardship and we've had to cut, as you 

know, or reduce funding to many third-party organizations like 

technical schools, universities, municipalities and hospitals. 

 

So what we have said to the federal government is that we have 

limited financial resources, you have limited financial resources; 

let's see if we can put some of our limited financial resources 

together to avoid overlap, duplication, and waste, and see 

whether we can deliver a program that makes sense.  Because it 

is difficult for that person who may be on social assistance or on 

unemployment insurance, trying to make their way through 

federal programs, provincial programs, and federal-provincial 

programs.  It's difficult when you're unemployed and looking for 

a way to get further training or employment and there are these 

host of programs; it is difficult. 

 

In fact we have the federal government delivering some 

programs for social assistance recipients in this province.  We 

have the province delivering programs 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

for social assistance recipients.  We have the feds delivering 

programs for unemployed people, people on unemployment 

insurance.  And what we're saying, is there a way that we could 

use, for instance, a New Careers Corporation which has the 

infrastructure in place all across the province; is there a way that 

we could use New Careers Corporation to start delivering 

federal, provincial, and federal-provincial programs in a single 

window?  So that we have unemployed people who are either 

receiving unemployment insurance benefits or social assistance 

benefits, having to deal with one structure -- a structure that 

would be helpful and not a hindrance. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Madam 

Minister, the work experience program had 360 client spaces.  

Now does that mean 360 clients actually utilized this program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I understand it, there are 360 spaces.  

We would have more than that begin the program.  There's about 

a 20 per cent turnover.  But 360 people would end the program. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, of the 360 people who 

completed the program, how many of them received 

employment after completion? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We could give you that information for 

1993-94, but I can't give that to you today because the official 

doesn't have that information here.  But I will table that 

information and give that information to you before the session 

ends. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Can you 

also provide me then with, for that 360 people, the number of 

people who returned to Social Services assistance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That will be difficult.  We'll have to pick 

a particular date because people come onto and off of the 

program.  But we will attempt to do that for you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'd 

appreciate that.  Now I wonder if you could tell me, while you're 

doing your research, how many people completed your program, 

or the numbers that have started and went out of the program, 

how many of them ended up on UI after the program that they 

were in ended? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That's a figure we could estimate; it's not 

a figure we could document.   I mean this is one of the problems 

with unemployment insurance over in federal.  This is a federal 

program; we're a provincial program, and these are . . . the 

questions you ask is basically one of the frustrations because we 

don't necessarily get that information because that's under 

federal jurisdiction.  And that's why we're wanting to see if we 

could have a single window so we could track to see whether our 

programs are effective. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Will you 

try to provide me with those numbers?  Thank 

you.  The minister says that she'll try to provide those. 

 

Madam Minister, the same for the community employment 

program, has 1,250 spaces.  How many people would have been 

. . . gone through that program in the last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I can attempt to give you the information 

for the community employment program that we're going to give 

you for the work experience program, if that's satisfactory. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, Madam Minister, you'll provide me 

with the same three kinds of information -- jobs, social 

assistance, and UI?  Minister says that she'll . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I just want to make a point that New 

Careers Corporation is a very small organization and we have a 

very thin administration.  You're asking us to take precious 

resources and put it into the answers to the questions.  They may 

not come as quickly as you would like, but we will attempt to do 

that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  You 

mentioned that you have a small administrative staff there, but I 

also note that your small administrative staff gets $1.4 million, 

according to the information you passed me today. 

 

Madam Minister, when a person goes through your programs, I 

would almost think though that you would somehow track them 

afterwards.  Because you have to wonder, what's the point of 

going through the training program if you take your 20 weeks on 

average and you go through and you come out at the end of the 

day, do your clients then just sort of wander off into the blue?  

You don't know whether or not your program is being at all 

effective?  Whether there is any employers out there who will 

accept your trainees when they come out of the program, as 

having some valuable information? 

 

How do you judge then, if you don't measure it in some manner, 

whether or not your program is providing a service of any value 

whatsoever?  I find it surprising actually that you don't have 

some sort of record, some sort of tracking of the clients that go 

through the program.  If it is indeed just simply a means to 

provide 20 weeks of employment for someone so that they can 

qualify for UI, then I guess there is no need to track them.  

Because as long as they get onto UI, then the program has 

fulfilled its purpose; they no longer are on the provincial welfare 

rolls and you're happy with that, I guess. 

 

But I would think if you're really trying to provide some training 

and some worthwhile benefit to the clients that go through the 

program to enhance their lifestyle, then you would want to know 

whether or not your program is actually providing some benefit 

for them. So you would know, I would hope, at some point in 

time whether or not the clients that you service do receive some 

beneficial employment, some long-term employment, which this 

training has 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

provided them with some assistance for. 

 

What type of tracking, what type of evaluations do you do to 

evaluate whether or not the program is providing the services 

that it is supposed to be providing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- We know that the New Careers 

Corporation has been restructured.  We have tried to bring the 

various training programs that were in different parts of 

government under the umbrella of New Careers Corporation; not 

unlike what we're trying to convince the federal government to 

do.  So we have moved the training and employment programs 

in Social Services over to New Careers Corporation. 

 

We're in the process of discussing with other government 

departments the possibility of bringing a couple of more 

programs over, so that it will basically be the training and 

employment agency.  All of those programs that government 

delivers, like vocational rehabilitation for disabled persons, will 

come under this corporation. 

 

(1615) 

 

You raise a good point about evaluation and tracking.  And with 

the change of the mandate and the restructuring of the 

corporation by bringing all of these programs together, we are in 

the process of hiring someone who will do research and 

evaluation.  You raise a very good point and it's a concern of the 

provincial government.  We've had New Careers Corporation 

around for some time in the province and what we need to do is 

to evaluate the effectiveness of our programs.  And that's why 

we're in the process of hiring someone who can give us the kind 

of information that you're talking about. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

My colleague from Maple Creek will indeed be questioning you 

here shortly, but I wanted to ask a question first dealing with 

The Labour Standards Act and the SSTA.  The SSTA felt that 

they were not properly consulted about this legislation before it 

was presented to the House. 

 

They only found out about it by accident, Mr. Minister, when 

they attended another meeting, that indeed this type of 

legislation was coming forward to the House.  And yet you've 

been informing my colleague that you made extensive 

consultations across this province and yet one of the major 

employers in this province with approximately 18,000 

employees seems to have been left out. 

Now they did get the opportunity to make a presentation to you 

but very shortly before the Bill was presented to the House, after 

all of the other major groups seem to have been consulted with.  

Why, Mr. Minister, was the SSTA left out of your consultations?  

Because they do have some very serious concerns throughout 

the whole Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I suppose there's a number of 

answers to that.  Somebody's got to be first; somebody's got to 

be last. 

 

They weren't last, but they were somewhere close to it in our list 

of people.  That didn't in any sense reflect their importance, 

although I should point out that it is different for the SSTA.  

Teachers as an employee are not under labour standards, and so 

that whole group was outside the system. 

 

Yes, I agree with the member from Morse; there is still a lot of 

people employed.  It wasn't any attempt to exclude them.  We 

had a list of people; we met them in no particular order.  And we 

did, I may say, meet them before it was introduced.  We had a 

lengthy session of about four hours before the legislation was 

introduced.  Now they felt that insufficient and we met with 

them again afterwards.  But they certainly got as much time . . . 

they certainly got their proportional share of our time.  We met 

with as many people as we had time to meet and we did it as 

soon as we could. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, in all 

of the discussions we've had in relation to the Department of 

Labour and The Labour Standards Act, I'd like to know from 

you how many people you expect that this is going to benefit, 

and how you perceive the business community to react to the 

imposition of these labour standards, and how many jobs you're 

going to lose in relation to the business community.  And we 

have had a great deal of representation from across this 

province. 

 

It's my view, and the Minister of Finance has said on three 

specific budgets, that her focus is jobs.  And I would say that if 

she's aware of it, she's conscious of the fact that jobs need to be 

created.  But on the other hand, all of the other ministers turn 

around and jeopardize the opportunity for her to create jobs.  So 

what you're doing, in my view, is you're counteracting all of the 

opportunity for employment that you could have in the province 

by the kinds of things you're doing through your Labour 

Standards Act. 

 

We could go into The Trade Union Act; some of the other things 

too. But in Labour Standards, how many jobs do you think 

you're going to lose by the very fact that people have to move 

and cannot provide the services -- or not services -- opportunities 

in benefits to those employees who are part-time employees, for 

example.  There is no way that any company is going to provide 

an employee who works less than 20 hours a week with an 

opportunity for benefits.  There is no company in Saskatchewan 

that can do it; there is no company in Saskatchewan that will do 

it. 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

And how are you going to supply those benefits and then 

increase the cost of all of the fast food outlets in this province, 

all of those areas where people have made arrangements within 

their workplace to have offsetting times when they can job 

share, and they want to job share?  How are you going to now 

say it's going to be done with . . . we're going to finish with this 

and those people are going to be off work? 

 

We have almost 82,000 people on welfare and 12,000 less jobs.  

How much is that going to reflect on those numbers when you 

get this thing completed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There isn't any evidence that there is 

going to be any loss of jobs.  I do not regard the letters which 

have been read so eloquently by the member from Maple Creek 

as evidence of loss of jobs; that's evidence of concern.  There 

isn't any evidence there's going to be any loss of jobs.  And we 

think there's a rational argument for suggesting that this 

legislation will indeed assist in the creation of jobs through the 

revitalization of the economy. 

 

It is our position that progressive labour laws are an essential 

part of economic restructuring, and restructure we must.  It is 

apparent that the world is changing; it is apparent that we can no 

longer be hewers of wood and drawers of water and expect to 

enjoy the very high standard of living we do.  We must build 

here a progressive, modern economy, composed of industries 

with high productivity and which make use of high technology. 

 

We are not striving to create, as is apparently the position of the 

Liberal leader, we are not striving to create a low wage and 

therefore low productivity economy.  That may be her view; that 

is not ours.  Our view is, what we want to construct is a high 

productivity economy.  This day and age, that generally means 

an increase in use of technology which contains both benefits 

and risks for employees.  If employees are going to share in the 

risks of this brave new world, they should also receive a 

reasonable degree of protection.  And in the broadest terms, 

that's what we're doing. 

 

There's no evidence which has been put forward by the business 

community or by the members opposite there's going to be any 

loss of jobs. 

 

Every time, since the abolition of slavery by the imperial 

parliament in England two centuries ago, every time anything 

was done for the ordinary person, economic ruin was predicted 

by forces of the right. 

 

I said the other day in question period, you were wrong on the 

abolition of child labour; you were wrong when you said that 

with respect to The Occupational Health and Safety Act; you 

were wrong when you said that with respect to the Workers' 

Compensation Board.  I don't know how many times Tories 

want to be wrong.  I guess there's no limit to your enjoyment of 

this state.  But you're going to be wrong with respect to Labour 

Standards Act, and you're going to be wrong with The Trade 

Union Act as well. 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well it's like the 

story of the woman who saw her boy marching in the army, and 

her son was the only one out of step.  And she said, isn't it 

interesting that everybody seems to be out of step with the 

music.  And I think that's the way I think that you are acting at 

this point. 

 

A letter from Flexi-Coil that we received indicated that their 

plans for possible expansion -- and they have 1,100 employees 

in the city of Saskatoon and surrounding area and throughout the 

province, 1,100 people employed at Flexi-Coil.  If they want to 

expand, will they expand in Saskatchewan with the kinds of the 

things that you're doing with Worker's Comp, labour standards, 

and with The Trade Union Act? 

 

I doubt it, Mr. Minister, because they have said they would not 

because they cannot afford it.  They're competing on an 

international market.  They have to pay the wages that result in 

profit for the company.  What's the matter with having a little 

profit?  Isn't that good for the economy in the province of 

Saskatchewan so that it can grow and build and pay down their 

loans and their cost to the . . . so that they can benefit the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

They have become a major supplier of manufactured agriculture 

machinery parts for John Deere and other companies, and now 

you're going to say to them, go find another place, go find 

United States to build in or go find a place in Alberta to build in 

rather than in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

And Terry Summach has made that observation to us and I'm 

sure he's made it to you.  Why would you want to destroy an 

opportunity for an economic impact benefit to occur in 

Saskatchewan with something that we have traditionally done 

well -- is manufacture short-line agriculture equipment?  And 

you're going to say no to economic development and more jobs?  

You're going to say no to that because he can do it for less cost 

in Alberta or in Montana or in North Dakota than in can in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, those are real, those are real across the board.  

And if you continue to do the things that you're going to do, they 

are going to do that.  And that's why I asked you.  The total 

volume of welfare will go up in the province and there's less 

people employed to pay for it.  The total of people off work 

because of those things that you're doing will be increased and 

therefore there'll be more and more people who are struggling 

and struggling to eke out an employment.  And that is the 

seriousness of the problem that we have here today. 

 

And I don't believe you even consider that.  I don't believe you 

have.  And when the business community comes to us over and 

over and over again, you just stand there and glibly say they 

have no proof.  Well their bottom line is beginning to be the 

proof. 

 

Last Friday, I walked into a tire shop in Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan, and at 5 o'clock in the afternoon the 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

employees had left and there were three of the owners in this tire 

shop.  And I asked them one question.  I said, what do you think 

of The Labour Standards Act?  And they were so hostile, Mr. 

Minister, that if you would have been there fixing a tire, you 

wouldn't have got a tire fixed.  Plain and simple.  And so then I 

said to them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I didn't agitate them 

at all; I just asked them one simple question. 

 

(1630) 

 

The next question I asked them,  what do you think of the utility 

rates?  And it was like the whole mountain kind of came 

spewing out of them.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the feeling of 

resentment they have towards this. 

 

Why do you want to split the labourer from the employer, the 

employee from the employer?  Why do you want to divide that?  

You have said to us we are the ones that do it; go back to child 

labour. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you have got your head in the sand if that's 

the only argument that you can bring forward to this House as to 

the reasons why you would put this Bill into this Assembly at 

this point in time. 

 

When people are struggling, the very existence of their business 

is in jeopardy, and you say, I'm going to force them to increase 

the costs.  And you've done it on every occasion.  You did it on 

Workers' Comp.  The day I walked into that same tire shop in 

January after the Liberal government put in the changes to the 

Workers' Compensation . . . to the unemployment insurance, 

there was that same anger there, Mr. Minister.  That same anger 

was there, and that anger is there today as I have never in my life 

seen it before. 

 

What are these people going to have to do?  They're going to 

say, I can no longer afford to repair or be a small-business man 

in this community.  I went . . . and just down the street, I went to 

see a friend of mine who is in my constituency, who runs a 

carpet store.  He sells linoleums, carpets, flooring -- all those 

kinds of things.  And what did he say to me about this kind of 

thing?  This, Mr. Minister, is the tip of the iceberg, and the 

iceberg is just beginning to roll over and they cannot afford it.  

They cannot afford it.  You get out into the real world and see 

what's going on. 

 

As a matter of fact, the day that you were in Swift Current I 

heard reports of that meeting.  And they said, don't have that guy 

come back again because he was not only incapable of 

answering questions, he didn't even understand what he was 

doing there. 

 

That is the report I got from numerous people about what you 

were doing in that community.  You should have been able to 

say, I am prepared to defend the employer and the employee in 

providing jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and you didn't 

do that, sir.  And that is the kind of thing that you really need to 

begin to do.  You cannot take and defend one position over 

another.  And that's what you're doing, Mr. Minister. 

 

And my question to you is, how are these small businesses going 

to survive -- this husband, wife, children, family operation -- 

how are they going to survive under the context of The Labour 

Standards Act that you have provided to this Assembly?  Will 

you tell us that, and give them at least a little bit of hope about 

what their future has in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Part of their concern, which I admit to 

be genuine, is because of the irresponsible campaign carried on 

by some business . . . by some lobbyists on behalf of the 

business community, and by some members of the opposition.  

The most irresponsible statements have been made about what 

we are doing -- the most irresponsible statements. 

 

Let us take the case of Flexi-Coil.  What I understand them to 

have said is that this legislation could affect where we locate.  

Of course it could, but it might not. 

 

I spent an hour and a half, almost two hours with them.  When 

we were finished, they would have . . . I think they would have 

agreed that what we had discussed did not cause them any 

enormous concern. 

 

What has happened since then is that various lobbyists and some 

members of the opposition, for the narrowest of partisan reasons, 

have made the most irresponsible statements about what this 

legislation contains.  As the same people did last year with 

respect to workers' compensation, it was said the rates were 

going to go up by 200 and 300 per cent.  We said they were 

going to go up by ten and one-half per cent, and on the average 

that's what they did. 

 

I'll bet you one thing, Mr. Member, I'll bet they didn't . . . when 

you were there this year they didn't mention occupational health 

and safety, about which you were fanning the flames of fear last 

year.  Those have been largely abated.  And I'll bet you they 

didn't mention the Workers' Compensation Board rates, unless 

they happened to have had an increase because of a bad 

experience at their shop.  But most business people agree that 

what we did was reasonable, fair, and balanced. 

 

And as soon as the lobbyists find something else to do, and as 

soon as we have an opportunity to put this in place, I also 

believe they will say of this: it was fair, reasonable, and 

balanced. 

 

You may spread what nonsense you want among the business 

community.  You may tell them whatever you want to tell them, 

but at the end of the day you're going to be judged by the final 

product.  And I don't mean this "you" in the sense the member 

from Morse, but I mean those who make irresponsible 

statements about this legislation, eventually they're going to be 

judged by it.  And when it turns out to be a fair, reasonable, 

balanced approach, those who have made these outlandish 

statements are going to lose credibility as I think they did over 

their crazy comments about the cost of WCB (Workmen's 

Compensation Board) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes 

indeed, they were. 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

Those who said the rates were going to up on an average of 200 

and 300 per cent -- you can't find them now.  You can't find 

those people because they're ashamed of having made the 

comments.  And some day, their comments on these Bills are 

also going to come back to haunt them . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, you may do so.  I genuinely look forward 

to the member from Maple Creek getting back into this. 

 

But their comments have been irresponsible and that's part of the 

reason for the concern.  The end result of the legislation I do not 

think will cause them concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I also received, Mr. Minister, a letter from 

Graham Construction which are located in Saskatoon.  Graham 

Construction operates a large construction company.  They also 

are saying, it's time to look some place else.  It's time to look 

some place else, Mr. Minister. 

 

There are those people who have been in business in this 

province for a long time.  The Flexi-Coil family -- they've been 

in business a long time in this province.  They bought Friggstad 

out; Friggstad was in business a long time in this province.  

There are a whole lot of these people that are saying:  I think it's 

time to move.  How long is it before we can kick these guys out? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what they would prefer is that the jobs don't 

come out of their shops, the jobs come out of your shop.  You 

lose your job.  Because I believe that you are incompetent in 

dealing with this kind of legislation and putting it before the 

House at this time in the economic problems that the people of 

this province are facing. 

 

They are very, very serious, Mr. Minister.  The construction 

opportunities in this province are way down.  If they have to go 

to Alberta already to bid, why don't they live there?  If they have 

to go down into the United States to do their business, why don't 

they take the whole business and go down there?  If Flexi-Coil 

wasn't connected with financing to the Government of 

Saskatchewan, they probably would move, Mr. Minister.  That's 

as serious as it is.  And that's the kind of thing that you have to 

be aware of. 

 

And I stand here as a part of a community that is dying.  They 

had 15,000-plus people and they're under 15,000 now.  And 

they're a dying community with 15,000 people because of those 

kinds of services that are provided now -- where?  And from 

where?  Out of Medicine Hat, Mr. Speaker.  Over and over again 

these people are moving to Medicine Hat.  They just built a 

brand-new mall there.  Why is that?  Because the opportunity to 

do business in Saskatchewan is getting tighter and tougher and 

harder to do all the time. 

 

My question still hasn't been answered: how many more jobs are 

you going to have because of this Labour Standards Act?  How 

many more?  Because I personally believe that out of the 15,000 

employed in the fast food industry alone you could have a third 

of 

them lost, a third of those jobs lost and gone.  Why and where?  

Because the kids that are working there today, that is the place 

where they have to have time to . . . before school, after school, 

dinner time, off hours, where they want to work and have some 

pin money.  They're going to be gone, Mr. Minister. 

 

They're going to be gone because those people don't have an 

opportunity to put them into place in delivering that service to 

the community.  And that is serious business, Mr. Minister.  In 

my community, that is serious.  It may not be in Regina.  It may 

not be in your constituency, but it is in mine.  And that's serious 

problems. 

 

Put those kids on welfare, put those young people out of school 

on welfare instead.  Eighty-two thousand people and going up, 

on welfare.  That's a cost.  That's the cost of your legislation.  

And it will go up, Mr. Minister.  If half of those people apply for 

welfare -- attached to that 82,000, that's 85 -- by the end of the 

year you could be approaching 90,000 people on welfare.  And 

that is serious stuff, Mr. Minister.  And that's what we have to 

deal with. 

 

The taxpayers are getting fewer and fewer, and they're getting 

more tired and more tired all the time in carrying that load.  And 

you have to be held accountable for that, and we're going to do 

that because we don't think you're doing the right thing.  It isn't 

labour against management, employer against employee.  

Somebody's got to pay the bills.  And if the bills are no longer 

being paid, then what's the purpose of staying here? 

 

That's the question they're asking me, and I'm directing that to 

you: why would you stay here if you were in the red and not in 

the black?  Why would you stay here and do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are a great many reasons why a 

person would want to do business in Saskatchewan.  I want to 

say the behaviour of the former government is not one of them -- 

of which the member was a front 

_bencher.  The behaviour of the former government in 

conducting the public affairs of this province is certainly not one 

of the reasons why you'd want to do business here.  You have to 

look a long way to find an administration which so mismanaged 

its affairs as the former administration. 

 

With respect to the issue under debate -- as distinct from an issue 

which is ever present in people's minds, which is the former 

government's record -- with respect to the matter under debate, 

we did a scientific study which suggested the macro costs are 

minuscule.  Those who oppose it have nothing but rhetoric, 

nothing but empty, hollow breaths.  They're just that.  And I 

truly believe you're going to be judged by them. 

 

We have approached this in a competent, professional, scientific 

fashion.  We got our study done by Price Waterhouse.  You have 

provided nothing except bald assertions that there's going to be 

widespread unemployment.  And the member just doesn't have 

any evidence to support it nor is there 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

any rational analysis which will support that.  And history 

suggests it's bunk. 

 

So I guess when you ask me where I'm coming from, I'm coming 

from a study done by Price Waterhouse.  Where are you coming 

from? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I asked you the question, how many more jobs 

are you going to create because of this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Its primary purpose is not to create 

jobs, nor should it be judged on that basis.  It's a little like asking 

the member opposite how many orthopedic operations are you 

going to perform today?  I don't think you're going to perform 

any, because that's not what you're about. 

 

Well this legislation is not about creating more jobs.  It's about 

justice.  It is about people who have no protection, who live at 

the whim of their employer, most of whom are fair-minded 

people but some of whom are not.  It is about justice and 

compassion, and it is about restructuring this society so that we 

may take our place in the future which is coming up. 

 

Having said all of that, there is no evidence it's going to destroy 

jobs and there is a rational analysis which I gave you a moment 

ago which suggests it's an integral part of restructuring. 

 

I just ask the member to look around the world at those 

industries . . . at those societies which are thriving. They're not 

the societies which have feeble labour laws and feeble protection 

for workers.  By and large societies which are thriving are those 

which treat workers with dignity and respect.  And that is the 

group we want to join.  We do not have any interest in joining 

low-wage, low-productivity societies which apparently is what 

the Liberal member has in mind.  That's her goal; that's not ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1645) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm about 

to introduce some guests that I don't know and I'm doing it on 

behalf of someone who doesn't have a venue to do it.  Our page, 

Daryl Beadnell, has with us in the gallery today his wife, 

Evelyn, and their two children, Tandrell and Adrienne, watching 

the proceedings here today. 

 

So on behalf of our page, Daryl, I'd like to welcome his wife and 

two children here today.  So if you'd join with me in welcoming 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to 

welcome our page's family to the Assembly and hope they enjoy 

themselves here today. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He doesn't get to sit around all the time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, his job responsibilities make him do a little 

bit of work once in a while besides just sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No 32 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In the instance of a very major meat packing 

firm in the province of Saskatchewan, Intercontinental Packers, 

they have a facility that they purchased in Moose Jaw which is 

not being operated at this point.  They have had serious labour 

problems in that facility.  And I believe that they will keep that 

thing closed until there is an opportunity to earn a living and 

earn a profit from that facility, and it will stay shut until that 

happens. 

 

Do you know what they're competing with, Mr. Minister?  

They're competing with higher interest rates with the United 

States; they're competing in an international market where they 

have to deliver goods and services to that international market 

on the basis of the labour that is being provided in that place. 

 

In Alberta they provide that labour at about $10 an hour.  In 

Saskatchewan, they're looking for 10.50, competing with huge 

facilities in the United States that can run anywhere from 5 to $8 

an hour. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is what they're competing with.  We have an 

international market that we're competing with, and we cannot 

do this in isolation.  And that facility is not going to open in 

Moose Jaw until that has rationalized itself.  And it isn't going to 

make any difference what you do or any of the members across 

the way do.  It isn't going to change until that happens.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

The second point I want to make to you is this.  Flexi-Coil is in 

the same position when it comes to establishing a larger facility 

within Saskatoon.  Or do they move it some place else where 

they can provide the same workmanship and the same quality 

standards, the same delivery at what? -- lower interest rates and 

lower costs of production to give them a profit. 

 

Will they do that in Saskatchewan under these circumstances?  If 

Intercontinental Packers can't do that in Moose Jaw, then why 

would Flexi-Coil venture an opportunity to do that in 

Saskatchewan?  Why?  And I don't need a big amount of studies 

to say to me that the reason they're not opening in Moose Jaw is 

because they can't make a profit out of it.  They can't under the 

circumstances that exist there today. 



April 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

Whether they're locked out, whether they're on strike, or 

whatever the situation is there, they will not go back to work. 

 

Think about the impact in Moose Jaw.  Joyners shuts down, 

there's a hardware store shutting down, Woolco is shutting 

down.  At least four major businesses in Moose Jaw are closing 

down, Mr. Minister.  Why is that? 

 

One of the reasons could be maybe that Intercontinental Packers 

can't have a factory processing meat in the province of 

Saskatchewan in Moose Jaw because the employee costs and all 

of the other costs that you have placed on them are too high.  

They are too high, Mr. Minister.  The costs of doing business, 

whether it's interest, whether it's utility costs . . . and there's lots 

of costs there that are extremely high. 

 

And I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, how those people 

in Moose Jaw can get a job back in Saskatchewan, because they 

won't be able to do it.  Tell me where they're going to go. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I have talked to a large number of 

people about the strike at the Western Canada meat plant.  It is a 

regrettable affair.  Everyone would like to resolve it.  As I say, 

I've talked to hundreds of people.  You are the first person I ever 

met who thought that that strike had anything to do with The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it makes my point about the 

increased costs of doing business in this province because of the 

things that you're doing in relation to labour and the decision 

that you're making as it relates to Workers' Compensation, 

occupational health and safety -- you brought up those issues -- 

as it relates to The Labour Standards Act and as it relates to The 

Trade Union Act.  You tell me how they're going to be able to 

increase their productivity with no work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This Bill is not going to increase their 

costs so far as I can see.  If you think it will, you might be a little 

bit more specific than simply making bald assertions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, I'll go to another point of view.  You're 

not going to answer the question anyway. 

 

Have you asked any of the people who will provide benefits to 

those part-time workers, have you asked any of the agencies that 

provide opportunity for those benefits to be supplied to the 

workers, have you asked any of those companies to give you an 

assurance that you will be able to provide a benefit equivalent to 

a full-time staff for those part-time employees?  Have you asked 

any agency, insurance company, or whoever, to provide you 

with that documentation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we've had extensive discussions 

with them and there are a variety of ways that it might be done.  

If the member wants to enter into a more specific discussion of 

that, I'd be happy to do so. 

We have had extensive discussions and there are a variety of 

ways it might be done.  And there are a variety of ways it's 

currently being done by more enlightened employers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a small business in my community.  It's 

a farm implement dealership; he's got about 30 employees.  

London Life supplies his benefits to his employees.  London 

Life will not supply anybody under 20 hours, will they?  Have 

they given you assurance that anyone under 20 hours a week 

will be able to be supplied with benefits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We've had discussions with a number 

of insurance companies who are quite interested in getting into 

this, which they see to be a growing field.  And so I think the 

insurance companies are actually interested in the business. 

They're interested in providing it, recognizing that there may be 

some limitations with respect to some benefits. 

 

But in fact our impression has been the exact opposite.  

Insurance companies are interested in what we're doing.  They 

see it as a leading edge in Canada.  And many of them, as soon 

as the Bill was tabled, many of them contacted us, wanted 

information. Why?  Because they see this as the wave of the 

future and they want to be ready for it and they want to provide 

these services. And they will. 

 

There's one thing about the business community which I would 

readily admit -- it is that the profit motive induces considerable 

flexibility of mind and imagination.  If there's a market, 

somebody there is going to supply it, and they admit they want 

to be the people to supply it. 

 

So yes, we have had extensive discussions with them.  And it's 

being done now by some more enlightened employers.  I'm not 

sure I want to discuss individual names.  Having made the 

comment, I'm not sure I want to raise individual businesses here.  

But there are businesses who make extensive use of part-time 

workers, who give the part-time workers benefits on a prorated 

basis. 

 

It's being done now.  This is not something off the moon.  It's 

something that's being done here and now by some enlightened 

employers.  And I, while I'll discuss the generalities of it, I won't 

mention names.  But if you want, I'll discuss the generalities of 

how it's done. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, members of my family are 

in this business and the lowest that they will go is 17 hours at 

this point, and that is very, very difficult to control.  And I want 

to know from you how you're going to deal with those kinds of 

problems that I have clearly identified as a major problem 

because no one will sell that to them. 

 

And here is where the hook is, Mr. Minister.  They may be able 

to provide it, but at what cost?  And who's going to pay that 

cost?  Will the employee pay a 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 1994 

portion of that cost?  And if the employee must pay a portion of 

that cost, then it becomes something that he should perhaps have 

the ability to choose whether he wants to do that or not. 

 

If a young adult, 16, 17, or 18 years old, works at McDonald's 

and has an opportunity to get these benefits and works 15 hours 

a week, that cost is going to be so high to that individual that he 

will in no way be able to work and pay the benefits of that.  And 

is that the reason why you want to have it?  So that you can pull 

all the money in another form of taxation into the opportunity 

for the government? 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is where these people lose their jobs.  

They can't afford to work part-time because they cannot afford 

the benefits.  You've got a curve that goes just about straight up 

when it comes to those businesses and the costs of doing 

business with those employees and employers who will have 

that kind of a work schedule.  If it's 18 or 20 hours, it's going to 

be very, very difficult for these individuals to pay for those 

costs.  And those costs are the costs that we're talking about. 

 

When the employer is asked to pay for those costs, is he going to 

deliver that?  He will say no.  No, Mr. Minister, I am not going 

to do that.  And I believe that when you come to the end of the 

day, those insurance companies will say yes, we will cover that. 

 

At what cost is it going to be -- $2 an hour for that individual to 

have to pay when he's earning $5.50?  And that young person 

will say no, I'm not going to have anything to do with that 

because I'm paying more for my benefits than they're worth. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what the problem is.  And that 

is going to happen over and over and over again.  And they 

might be interested in doing business with these companies, but 

my question is: have you discussed the cost in relation to the 

volume of benefit that the individual will get; and the cost of 

him in relation to the hours, the pay he gets per hour?  Have you 

ever considered those relationships? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we have.  And the information we 

have received from both brokers and insurance companies is the 

opposite of what the member assumes, and that is that some of 

these benefits can be provided on a prorated basis. 

 

Let us be honest about this.  There are some benefits that can't 

be prorated, and that's admitted.  And that's why much of this 

was left to regulation.  We need to work with the insurance 

industry, with the business community, and with the workers 

who are involved, to work out what can reasonably be done. 

 

There are some benefits which cannot be prorated.  Let me give 

you an obvious . . . I'm going to make this comment and then I'm 

going to adjourn the committee. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- All right, because I've got some more. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well we'll get back to it another day; 

I'll look forward to that. 

 

Some benefits cannot be prorated.  Let me give you an obvious 

example -- unemployment insurance.  It's wholly within the 

jurisdiction of the federal government and there's nothing we can 

do about it, and that's outside the system. 

 

But many of the benefits which are provided from private 

insurance companies -- our information in talking to brokers and 

insurance companies is they can be prorated on a basis that's 

fairly reasonable and doesn't add a whole lot of additional cost. 

 

The legislation makes provision for another option and that is 

that employees might choose from benefits, a package of 

benefits -- they may take one or more.  There is more than one 

employer now that in fact does that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And it raises the cost. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well more than one employer does it.  

And while I don't feel free to name them, I can assure the 

member that these are some of the more successful in the 

industry that do this.  What there is not is any evidence that poor 

. . . there is no evidence to suggest what the Liberal member 

suggested in question period, which I still take serious objection 

to, and that is that ratcheting down wages and ratcheting down 

benefits is good for the economy.  Most of the employers I have 

met who do provide benefits are some of the more successful 

ones.  Why?  Because they've got a loyal and dedicated group of 

employees. 

 

Members, with that, I'm going to move the committee rise, 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 

 


