






















































Hansard: February 21, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 279 
 February 21, 1994 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act (Free Votes). 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 
shall Wednesday next ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Energy Corporation, 
SaskEnergy, please provide: (1) a list of all fees and charges 
levied by SaskEnergy; (2) the amount of increases in each fee 
and charge for the last fiscal year; (3) the total revenue raised 
by fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (4) additional 
revenue raised by increase in fees and charges in fiscal year 
1993; (5) total revenue raised by fees and charges to date in 
the fiscal year 1994; (6) the projected revenue for the fees 
and charges in the fiscal year 1993; and (7) the projected 
revenue for the fees and charges in the fiscal year 1994. 

 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 
that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

 Regarding SaskTel, please provide: (1) a list of all fees and 
charges levied by SaskTel; (2) the amount of increase in each 
fee and charge in the last fiscal year; (3) the total revenue 
raised by fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; (4) 
additional revenue raised by increases in fees and charges in 
the fiscal year of 1993; (5) total revenue raised by fees and 
charges to date in the fiscal year of 1994; (6) the projected 
revenue for the fees and charges in the fiscal year of 1993; 
and (7) the projected revenue for the fees and charges in the 
fiscal year of 1994. 

 
I so submit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move that 
a Bill to amend The Ombudsman Act be introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Power Corporation, please provide: 
a list of all fees and charges levied by SPC; the amount of 
increase for each fee and charge in the last fiscal year; total 
revenue raised by fees and charges in the fiscal 

 year of 1993; additional revenue raised by increase in fees 
and charges for the fiscal year of 1993; total revenue raised 
by fees and charges to date in the fiscal year of 1994; the 
projected revenue for fees and charges to the fiscal year of 
1993; and the projected revenue for fees and charges in the 
fiscal year of 1994. 

 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday ask the government the following 
question: 
 

 Regarding the Department of Finance, please provide: the 
total revenue raised by taxation, excluding corporations, in 
the last fiscal year; a detailed breakdown by tax of revenue 
raised; the projected revenue by tax for the last fiscal year; 
the projected revenue by tax for fiscal year of 1994; and a list 
of studies conducted analysing the impact these taxes have on 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 
and members of the Assembly, it's an honour and a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, sir, and of course through you to 
members of the Legislative Assembly, two very distinguished 
visitors to our province and our country from South Africa, Mr. 
Patrick Lekota and Professor Dirk du Toit. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, South Africa will hold its first 
non-racial democratic election for a new national assembly and 
nine provincial legislatures in April 1994.  Some 22 million of 
South Africa's 40 million people will be eligible to vote, with 
approximately 70 per cent of these voters casting ballots, it is 
estimated, for the first time. 
 
Given the constitutional and social history of South Africa and 
the fact that provinces are a new concept to the country, none 
of the candidates for leadership in the provinces has had 
experience in government or in the mechanics and challenges 
of governing.  In an effort to provide a useful example of 
federalism in action, Canada is hosting three of nine African 
National Congress, ANC, candidates for premierships of South 
Africa's new provincial governments. 
 
These visits are part of a familiarization program called the 
public service policy project, established in South Africa one 
year ago.  The program was developed by the Canadian 
International Development Agency, CIDA, and the 
International Development Research Centre (IDRC) in 
collaboration with members of South Africa's democratic 
movement, to help political candidates prepare for their role in 
a new and democratically elected system of government. 
 
Now broadly speaking, Mr. Speaker, the objectives of the 
program are three-fold:  one, to familiarize these candidates for 
political office with the issues, challenges, expectations, and 
constraints of 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

governing in a federation; two, to provide hands-on experience 
of the work of a provincial premier and a provincial 
government through briefings, readings, meetings, and in 
general, other opportunities to see government in action on a 
day-to-day basis; and three, to help the candidates assimilate 
their learning by linking the Canadian and South African 
contexts. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is very pleased to welcome Mr. 
Patrick Lekota, ANC candidate for premier of the Orange Free 
State of South Africa, and his principal secretary, Professor du 
Toit, as our guests. 
 
Mr. Lekota has opposed South Africa's apartheid system of 
government for over 20 years, and in pursuit of his goal, 
unfortunately has spent many years in prison.  Happily, that's 
behind him now and he's building a brand-new South Africa.  
Since 1989 he has worked to organize provincial ANC 
branches and is a member of the ANC national executive 
committee.  He is also secretary to the ANC elections 
committee. 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Lekota, you might just stand and be recognized by 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Travelling with Mr. Lekota, the 
premier candidate, is the principal secretary to Mr. Lekota, 
Professor du Toit.  Professor du Toit is head of the department 
of constitutional law and philosophy of law at the University of 
the Orange Free State. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me a little extra time in this 
introduction.  Let me close by saying that Saskatchewan is 
honoured to have been chosen as one of the participating 
provinces in this program.  Canada, I believe, is in an excellent 
position to assist in the structuring and functioning of the 
provincial governments provided for in South Africa's new 
constitution, given the similarities and the contrasts between 
the functions and the institutions of the provinces of Canada 
and those in South Africa. 
 
I believe that our government can provide Mr. Lekota and 
Professor du Toit with the unique perspective and insight of the 
workings of government through meetings with myself, other 
cabinet ministers, and various government officials and, dare I 
say, even question period today. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome very 
warmly our very special guests from South Africa to 
Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's indeed 
an honour for me to express welcome as well from the official 
opposition to Mr. Patrick Lekota from the African National 
Congress and those who are travelling with him.  I would like 
to also congratulate Mr. Lekota for his being a candidate for 
premier of the province of the Orange Free State in South 
Africa's first democratic, non-racial elections. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a feat in itself, given the political climate 
in South Africa over the past several years.  Many ANC 
members have been murdered and persecuted for attempting to 
achieve democracy, reform, and the basic right to vote. 
 
These are things, Mr. Speaker, that we in North America have 
taken for granted for many decades.  And I'm sure that Mr. 
Lekota is really pleased and counts it an honour to be able to 
stand and visit Canada, go back to his country and enter into 
the democratic process that we have achieved for years.  And 
we congratulate you, we wish you nothing but the best, and 
welcome to our fair province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- I too would like to welcome Professor du 
Toit and Mr. Lekota to Saskatchewan and to our legislature.  It 
is indeed a privilege to have a man in our midst who has so 
dedicated so much of your life to pursuing equality for people. 
 
Mr. Lekota and Professor du Toit, I hope your visit to our 
province is a most fruitful one.  And I would also like to wish 
you the very best in your bid for premier of Orange Free State. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to 
the legislature Mr. Dennis Banda today.  He's sitting in the 
Speaker's gallery. 
 
Amongst other roles in life, Mr. Banda chaired our Farm 
Support Review Committee.  And I'm sure, having chaired a 
committee of 32 farmers, he could also give lessons in 
democracy.  So please welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 
through you and to you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a group from Gemma House in Regina.  They're in 
the Speaker's gallery.  And I'm going to meet you on the steps 
for a photo at 3 p.m. after you're done your tour and we'll have 
a little visit after that and question in the boardroom.  Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to draw your 
attention and that of the members to a group of six students 
who are seated in your gallery.  These students are enrolled in 
the English as a second language program at the University of 
Regina.  They're accompanied by their instructor, Ellen Gillies. 
 
And the note that I have, Mr. Speaker, says that they're in an 
early stage of study in their program so I'm not sure whether 
everything I say is going to be well received.  But if the 
members join with me in clapping enthusiastically, I'm sure 
they'll get the message. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
friends who are in your gallery today, Rod Gantefoer -- if you 
would stand, Mr. Gantefoer -- and his daughter, Bonnie; Wally 
Lockhart and his daughters, Wendy and Laura, are visiting with 
us this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer owns a business in Melfort and is very active in 
our party as the VP (vice president) of member services.  Mr. 
Lockhart is a business person in Saskatoon and a very energetic 
and active member as well. 
 
I hope that they enjoy their tour of the legislative buildings this 
afternoon.  Please warmly welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the 
Leader of the Third Party in welcoming Mr. Gantefoer and his 
daughter to the legislature this afternoon.  Mr. Gantefoer is the 
president of the chamber of commerce, a very active group in 
Melfort.  And I wish them well in Regina today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to 
you and to all members of the House six guests of mine today.  
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, three guests from the 
constituency of Regina South -- Barbara Schmitz, Ryan 
Schmitz, and Kristen Schmitz, and three constituents from my 
constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow, three very special 
constituents -- Betty, David, and Stephanie Calvert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to report that at least 
four of my guests are enjoying a school break this week and I 
do fully expect to be providing drinks before the day is over. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Gambling Addiction 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Much 
has been said about democracy this afternoon and we will 
engage in that process now as the minister of Gaming and I 
enter into dialogue. 
 
Mr. Minister, today four of your cabinet colleagues held a news 
conference to talk about measures that your government is 
taking to help families, and that is laudable.  We even heard the 
Minister of Social Services give notice on the change to The 
Ombudsman Act, ostensibly to change the child 

advocate.  Now that is also laudable. 
 
Your ministers talk about prevention and support for the most 
vulnerable families in our society, and they talked about 
stopping family problems before they start.  Unfortunately, Mr. 
Minister, there was nothing in your colleagues' comments 
about a serious family problem that had been created in this 
province by your government, and that is addiction to video 
gambling machines. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about preventing family problems, 
stopping them before they start.  What specifically is being 
done to help Saskatchewan families with a family member who 
is addicted to your gambling machines? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To 
answer the member's question, let me begin by saying that 
when his party was the government in this province from 1982 
to 1991, the amount of dollars that were spent on gambling in 
this province increased dramatically.  The amount of dollars 
that were spent on bingos increased from $4 million to well 
over $100 million.  And, Mr. Speaker, his government did 
nothing to recognize the fact that there were a number of 
people who were becoming . . . had a problem with gambling in 
bingo. 
 
Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this government put 
together a ministers' advisory board from health care 
professionals -- people who have a history in dealing with 
people with gambling addictions -- to put forth 
recommendations as to how we would handle an already 
existing problem I say, Mr. Speaker.  It was nothing new.  
We've had casinos in this province for 25 years.  The amount of 
dollars that were spent on break-opens and on lottery tickets 
and on bingos and the increase that happened under that 
administration, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, little was done. 
 
We have taken the initiative to recognize that there is a 
necessity to put together programs and we are in the process of 
doing that.  It's a process that will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, let us 
remain focused.  Today in the Leader-Post there's a 
compelling article about gambling addiction and the fact that 
you have made no effort to take responsibility for this problem 
despite the fact that it is your government that is installing 
gambling machines all around this province, 
 
In fact your government is saying that VLTs (video lottery 
terminal) will not cause a serious gambling addiction problem; 
that's what you're saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, this article cites people who have already lost 10 
and $15,000 gambling on your machines in a period of a few 
weeks.  It says the Saskatchewan Council on Compulsive 
Gambling is 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

now receiving 10 calls a week from people who are addicted to 
your VLTs.  These are the people who are willing to 
acknowledge that they do have a problem.  And the question is, 
how many more problem gamblers have your video gambling 
machines produced? 
 
Mr. Minister, will you acknowledge that your VLTs are 
creating a serious addiction problem for many Saskatchewan 
families, and I ask you what concrete steps are you taking to 
deal with this problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 
member opposite that we are not without programs in this 
province.  There are a number of self-help groups, Gamblers 
Anonymous, that have established themselves, not just solely 
because of the video lottery terminals, but because of 
addictions to other forms of gambling that they may or may not 
have received in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health has four trained 
individuals in phase 1 of the national council on problem 
gamblers' certification program, and these are strategically 
located in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina.  Alcohol and 
drug services has operated a toll free information line since 
1987. 
 
We are putting together information packages and informing 
the people of Saskatchewan where they might be able to 
receive information and where they might be able to receive 
help.  And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think we've taken a 
very positive approach to what can become a problem for some 
people who involve themselves in gambling. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 
promised at the outset to establish an 800 number to help 
problem gamblers get counselling.  Now why are you not doing 
that?  I would suggest that it could be possibly for two reasons.  
Why has this not happened?  Where is that 800 number?  Is it 
because you are afraid of being overwhelmed by calls and/or 
because you don't really want to stop people from pumping 
their entire pay cheques into these machines?  Which reason is 
it, Mr. Minister?  Or is it both? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me inform the 
member from Rosthern that a full, detailed package will be 
announced next week.  And I want to say in the meantime, the 
information line that has been in existence since 1987 is 
1-800-667-7560.  So if the member from Rosthern has any 
people -- or Mr. Gribbins has any people -- who contact him, 
they certainly can access help through this number and we 
would welcome anyone to feel free to call. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I think this 
calls for a bit of clarification.  Are you giving me the alcohol 
and drug number or are you giving me a specifically set-up 
gambling number that you have just quoted me?  That's a 
question I want you to clarify here.  Are you playing tricks 
here? 
 
Mr. Minister, in today's paper there is a quote from a person 
who counsels problem gamblers, who says: 
 

 The end result is usually depression, divorce, bankruptcy, 
unemployment, and sometimes . . . a high risk of suicide. 

 
Those are the problems that we are dealing with.  And these are 
being caused, Mr. Minister, by your gambling machines. 
 
Mr. Minister, if a person goes into a bar and gets too drunk, 
that bar owner has a legal obligation to cut him off.  If a person 
goes into a bar and starts getting carried away on their 
gambling machines, you take no responsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, what specifically are you going to do to keep 
people from dropping 10 or $15,000 into your machines?  Or 
don't you really want to stop these people from doing that since 
gambling seems to be now such an important source of revenue 
for your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me once again 
remind the member of the increases in the number of dollars 
that were spent in bingo under his administration when they 
turned a total blind eye to what the implications of that might 
have been.  So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 1-800 
number that I quoted earlier is there for both drug and alcohol 
addiction and for gaming addiction. 
 
And as I've indicated to him, we will be announcing a detailed 
package of assistance and a program next week and I'm certain 
that the member will be satisfied that finally it's been 
recognized that government has a responsibility to deal with 
some of these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last Friday the 
official opposition tried to get some explanation and rationale 
behind some of the government's revenue projections.  And, 
Madam Minister, today we want to have you discuss some of 
them. 
 
You have projected an increase in individual income tax of $40 
million.  At the same time your budget predicts a growth in 
employment of 5,000 people and I think it's an optimistic 
projection.  If all else remains the same -- if taxes remain the 
same as you have pledged -- that means that 5,000 people 
would have to be taxed $8,000 which means an average salary 
of approximately $48,000.  Creating 5,000 new jobs 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

would be quite an accomplishment, Madam Minister.  Creating 
5,000 new jobs paying $48,000 a year is something even more 
exaggerated. 
 
Madam Minister, where do you plan to create these 5,000 new 
jobs?  In what sector of the economy will these jobs be created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 
answer that question.  First of all, revenue estimates are based 
on more than just employment statistics.  They're based on 
estimates about the growth in the economy.  What we have 
assumed for next year is that the economy will grow by 2 per 
cent, GDP (gross domestic product).  In fact if you look at what 
other external agencies are saying, our estimate is the most 
cautious and the most conservative. 
 
We also have a track record in terms of predicting the growth 
in the economy.  Last year we predicted the growth in the 
economy would be 2.8 per cent -- members opposite criticized 
our projections at that time -- in fact the growth in the economy 
was 3.5 per cent.  It does not depend on the number of jobs 
alone that are created, it depends on the quality of jobs that are 
created.  This government is committed to increasing not only 
the number of jobs created but also the quality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, your 
government's taxation policies over the past two years are 
certainly not a source of job creation.  The Saskatchewan 
Mining Association have generated a report which determines 
the operating cost increases experienced by the mining industry 
as a direct result of your government taxes since you took 
office.  Their report says that they are paying $53.5 million 
more in taxes than they did prior to your government taking 
office -- fifty-three and a half million dollars. 
 
Madam Minister, the average industrial wage in this province is 
25,000.  That means fifty-three and a half million dollars you 
have taken out of the industry could have produced 2,100 new 
jobs. 
 
Madam Minister, perhaps you could explain how raising taxes 
for small business, industry, and Saskatchewan families creates 
jobs?  Could you tell the mining industry how jobs are your 
government's number one priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 
answer that question.  Our view of taxes is that they have to be 
fair.  Everybody has to pay their fair share.  We make no 
apologies for expecting resource companies to pay their fair 
share.  We tax their income.  We also tax their assets. 
 
But we're also willing to be flexible, and that's why we have 
recently announced a revised royalty structure 

for the oil and gas industry which was well received by that 
industry and which they acknowledge will lead to increased 
investment in the province. 
 
I also would like to point out, the member talks about small 
business and he says we've increased taxes on small business; I 
would like to say just the contrary has occurred in this 
province.  We have reduced the tax on small business over a 
four-year period.  The reduction will account . . . will be 20 per 
cent. 
 
So over four years we've reduced the tax on small business by 
20 per cent, and there's a very particular reason why we've done 
that -- co-ops and small businesses create the majority of the 
jobs in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, the mining association 
has provided a breakdown of their annualized cost, increases to 
their industry.  It says $13 million -- nearly one-quarter of the 
53 million your government has taken out of the 
industry -- comes from as a result of utility and electrical 
increases and their costs.  Twenty-five per cent of that are 
utility rates, Madam Minister.  Utility rates, or perhaps more 
accurately, utility taxes.  You did such a wonderful job of 
explaining how taxes create jobs, could you perhaps tell us how 
raising utility rates for Saskatchewan businesses and families 
creates jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have no lessons to 
teach the members opposite about increasing taxes.  They know 
that by themselves because when they were in government they 
increased taxes.  They increased the sales tax by two points; 
they increased gas taxes; they added the flat tax. 
 
Now what's key about increasing taxes is what you're doing it 
for.  The members opposite increased taxes in order to throw 
the money away, to spend it.  The same time they were 
increasing taxes they were, on average, spending more than a 
billion dollars a year than what they were taking in.  Yes we 
have had to increase taxes, because we've taken a balanced 
approach to reducing the deficit of the province, and our taxes 
have been used to good end -- to reduce the deficit to ensure 
that we can have a high quality of life for our children and our 
grandchildren. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sask Water Construction Project 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 
today is to the minister in charge of Sask Water.  Mr. Speaker, 
figures from the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
indicate that $187,000 was wasted on construction of the 
Melfort to Weldon water pipeline using A K Construction, a 
contractor from Alberta.  In December, A K Construction 
advised Sask Water it was going to default.  It never did finish 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

its part of the work. 
 
To the minister in charge of Sask Water, with all the 
contractors in Saskatchewan looking for work and the high 
unemployment in this province, why would the government 
consider hiring a company from Alberta, and what safeguards 
are now in place to investigate the financial stability and 
competence of competitors before tenders are awarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member for his 
question and through you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, on costs, I 
cannot answer that at this time because the work, as you know, 
is not completed. 
 
But I want to tell the member opposite that this very good 
project for rural Saskatchewan employed 82 people from the 
Melfort district.  The project, when completed, will supply 
9,000 households with better quality water than they had 
before, showing, I believe, showing our belief in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member opposite talks about union and non-union 
contracting, and that's interesting.  In 1993, Sask Water had 27 
contracts that it let.  Of those, 23 contracts were non-union.  It's 
interesting also to note, Mr. Speaker, that of the 23 non-union 
contracts that were let, some of those non-union contracts were 
let . . . were sublet to unionized subcontractors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to 
the same minister.  Constituents -- and constituents in your 
area; I'm glad you raised those people -- have talked with us 
and they say that A K Construction left the province owing 
several businesses in Melfort a total of $700,000 in unpaid 
bills. 
 
To the minister, can you confirm this figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- To the member opposite, again I want to 
say I cannot comment on what the cost was because the work is 
not completed and I don't know the amount that he's speaking 
about.  But I want to say to the member opposite that projects 
like this are good for rural Saskatchewan.  This one in 
particular created 82 jobs -- many of those local jobs, Mr. 
Speaker.  That money was spent in the local community at the 
local stores for the betterment of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think the member opposite should be a lot more positive 
about projects like this for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, to the minister: was a 
performance bond required for A K Construction, and what 
plan is in place to see that the affected businesses will be 
repaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again, I want 
to tell the member opposite that I cannot tell him what the exact 
cost was but I want to tell him one 

more time that rural Saskatchewan wants jobs.  They need jobs 
in the rural communities and this particular pipeline will feed 
9,000 households in north-eastern Saskatchewan with a better 
quality of water, creating many new jobs.  And these projects 
are seen as a benefit to rural Saskatchewan; many other 
communities want projects like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Being that the 
minister in charge doesn't have the ability to answer the 
question, then I place it to the Premier. 
 
As mentioned earlier, it cost $187,000 more to build the 
Melfort to Weldon portion of the water pipeline using a union 
contractor from Alberta.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, did your 
government feel A K Construction was worth $187,000 more 
to do this job and how much money was advanced to A K 
Construction for the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 
member raises the issue of, as they phrase it, union preferences 
in contracts.  Mr. Speaker, what we have been seeking to do is 
to try to protect the construction industry from competition 
which is really very cutthroat. 
 
The construction industry, Mr. Speaker, is operating at a 
fraction of its capacity.  That is resulting in a loss of skilled 
tradespeople and indeed a loss of companies.  What we have 
been seeking to do is to ensure that when public funds are used, 
competition does not result in cutthroat wages being paid.  
That's what we have been seeking to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that policy continues.  Unlike members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, we are not attempting to involve ourselves in 
either discouraging or encouraging unions.  I know members 
opposite have an irreversible streak of anti-unionism in them.  
That's not part of this government's approach.  We have tried to 
be fair to all concerned and continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The concerns I 
have are over your government's policy of hiring for the water 
pipeline between Codette and Melfort.  That portion of the 
pipeline was not awarded on the basis of either original open 
tender call or the union-only tender call. 
 
One-half of that project was awarded to the original non-union 
bidder at an unknown negotiated price.  The other half was 
undertaken by Sask Water directly hiring all union workers. 
 
According to the Saskatchewan Construction Association and 
calls we've received from Melfort, the non-union contractor has 
completed his half of the line with less than half the number of 
employees and less than half the equipment than Sask Water 
employed on its half.  In addition, the non-union contractor 
portion is completely pressure tested.  The 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

Sask Water portion isn't and is showing numerous leaks. 
 
To the minister: will you table today the comparative costs 
between the two separate contracts and the original budget 
provided in the tender? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I might point out to the 
member opposite and to members opposite that an attempt to 
work out sensible arrangements as between trades and the 
construction companies and the government is nothing new.  
That was done by the former administration in such places as 
the upgrader and I believe at Rafferty dam as well.  That's what 
we were seeking to do. 
 
I say to members opposite, your attempt to pander to the 
anti-unionism I think is unworthy of opposition and unworthy 
of a party which seeks to put itself forward as representing the 
new-style politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that strikes me very much as old-style politics.  
And if anyone can tell the difference between what the Liberals 
stand for in this area and what the Conservatives stood for in 
this area, I wish they'd point it out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
SaskTel Tendering Policy 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 
the Deputy Premier.  Mr. Minister, last Thursday in this House 
you made some very serious accusations.  You accused me of 
misleading the House with regards to the amounts of some 
SaskTel contracts.  Mr. Minister, will you today apologize to 
this House for making this serious and false accusation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I'm glad the member opposite asked the question 
because this is my first opportunity in fact to address this issue. 
 
He is correct that in the answer that I gave him that I wasn't 
totally correct because I had misread one of the numbers that 
was before me.  The member had indicated a number which I 
had heard him to say to be 200-and-some thousand dollars.  In 
fact when I looked at Hansard that's not what he had said.  
And for having misheard him, I guess I'm quite happy to 
apologize to him for that. 
 
But I also want to point out that although I was correct in one 
of the contracts that there was a spread of $15,346, which I 
indicated, on another one I had indicated there was 27,000 and 
this is where I had misread the information; it was 127,000.  
But it was still within the keeping of the policy which is to try 
to distribute the work equitably between unionized and 
non-unionized contractors so that everybody has a fair and 
equal share of the work that's available through the Crown 
corporation, SaskTel; also keeping 

in mind, Mr. Speaker, the importance of protecting the taxpayer 
and to protect the business interests of the corporation.  We are 
doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your 
apology is accepted.  Even though it is spread a little thinner 
that it should have been, I do accept it.  And just for the record 
though I think I should point out the figures so that we have 
them for the people in the media that you also pointed out the 
other day that needed to be corrected.  And so for the record, 
Mr. Minister, I'm going to file and table today some 
documentation of the figures that we present to prove our point, 
and I'll do that as I finish my question. 
 
And the two Regina SaskTel contracts, Mr. Minister, awarded 
in November included a site-hardening contract awarded to a 
union contractor whose bid was $127,049 higher than the 
lowest non-union bid, and a sprinkler contract awarded to a 
union contractor whose bid was $15,346 higher than the lowest 
non-union bid.  This, Minister, was a total of $142,395 that the 
government spent unnecessarily.  And, Mr. Minister, I think it's 
time that you corrected these kinds of policies for the people of 
Saskatchewan.  And I'll table these documents now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm glad that the 
correction has been made.  But I also want to point out to the 
House and to you, Mr. Speaker, that today has been a rather 
interesting day.  Today we have seen the Conservative 
opposition and the Liberal opposition try to outbid each other 
as who is going to be the most anti-worker in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to make it clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that the intent of the policy in SaskTel, as it is in the 
Government of Saskatchewan, is to make sure that all workers 
have a fair share of the work that is available because of the 
capital budgets of this province in the Crowns and in the 
government proper.  That is the intent of the policies we have 
here.  It's quite different than the policy enunciated by the 
member from Shaunavon earlier and the policy which has been 
followed by the former government and enunciated today, 
which would be a policy that would discriminate against 
unionized workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to repeal The Agriculture  
Development Fund Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
repeal The Agriculture Development Fund Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Vegetable and 
Honey Sales Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Mr. Draper: -- With your permission and the permission of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, sir, I'd like to make a short statement on 
Saskatchewan Heritage Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'm pleased to 
ask the House to join me today in celebrating Saskatchewan 
Heritage Day.  Heritage Day celebrations have gained in 
popularity over the past 18 years.  What began as a few local 
events with little publicity has grown into a recognized national 
day of celebration. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we're lucky that our heritage is so vivid.  
The history of the native peoples coupled with that of 
immigrants from many nations have all blended to create 
something that is very special -- the basis for the place we all 
call home. 
 
The Saskatchewan Architectural Heritage Society, the 
Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, the Saskatchewan History 
& Folklore Society, the Museums Association of 
Saskatchewan, Nature Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan 
Library Association, and the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation are just some of the organizations involved in the 
preservation of all that we have come to regard as uniquely our 
own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sir, I ask the House to join me in this celebration 
of our heritage.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would 
like to recognize Heritage Day.  Today we pay special attention 
to our roots, our culture, and the individuals that worked hard 
to build our province and our country.  No matter what your 
heritage or when your ancestors arrived in Saskatchewan, only 
with courage and perseverance did they survive Saskatchewan's 
climate.  It took great foresight for Saskatchewan's pioneers to 
do what they did.  It took strength and vision to build up 
homes, farmsteads, and businesses in a land that Palliser 
reported to be not fit for human habitation. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have a collection of heritages, 

and this diverse collection is reflected in such celebrations as 
Mosaic.  While it is important to recognize our diverse cultural 
heritage, it is also important that members of the various 
cultures support, promote, and further their own cultural 
interest without relying on the taxpayer. 
 
We see evidence of our heritage in every town, every village, 
every city in Saskatchewan.  Roots that we can be proud of and 
roots that we as individuals must ensure are preserved. 
 
On Heritage Day we celebrate how far our province has 
progressed in the 89 years since becoming a province.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, it must also be a time of reflection, a time to think 
about mistakes of the past and to take steps to ensure that those 
mistakes are not repeated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all of those who came 
before us, whose tireless labour has helped to build our way of 
life.  As we celebrate Heritage Day and those who came before 
us, we should honour their labour by continuing our own 
labours today. 
 
Our ancestors were proud of their work and we should honour 
them by continuing our work on this day rather than taking a 
holiday from work.  We must continue their example, and hard 
work pays off.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask members of 
the Assembly for leave to comment on Heritage Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Saskatchewan society is truly a mirror that 
reflects the image we present to the nation and to the world as a 
result of the coming together of so many diverse cultures, so 
many rich backgrounds.  We should all pay tribute to the 
pioneers who built this wonderful province and reflect on what 
makes ours such a unique society, a true mosaic of many 
different ethnic backgrounds. 
 
There was a time in Saskatchewan society when people were 
ostracized and punished for their differences.  Today it is a 
credit to the people of Saskatchewan that we have developed 
harmony with, respect for, and curiosity about people of 
different backgrounds.  The many festivals, celebrations, and 
exhibitions of art and music which have become part of our 
Saskatchewan tradition are a tribute to the pride we take in the 
ancestry of our friends and neighbours. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I wish to 
congratulate all of Saskatchewan for its contribution to heritage 
week and to encourage all citizens to appreciate its 
significance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

ask leave from the members of the Assembly to comment on 
Agriculture Technology Week being held at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Agriculture Technology 
Week begins with today's beef research field day.  Many of the 
province's top beef producers meet with academics to discuss 
many facets of the industry, including branding, disease 
control, and pasture management. 
 
Later in the week discussions will focus on many issues of 
great significance to Saskatchewan, including soil and crop 
research, rural sustainability, farm management, and value 
added processing. 
 
Agriculture technology must play a critical role in 
Saskatchewan's economic future.  I believe that Saskatchewan 
can lead the world in this exciting industry and I applaud the 
individuals and organizations who have recognized the 
potential benefits to our agriculture community and to our 
future economic development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I ask leave of the 
Assembly to say a few words about a former member of this 
Assembly who was fatally injured in a traffic accident over the 
weekend. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues.  It was with a great deal of shock last night that I 
learned of the untimely passing of a former member of this 
Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, it is with sorrow that I rise today in 
recognition of a former friend and colleague, Mr. Walter 
Johnson. 
 
Walter Johnson sat in this Assembly for two terms, from 1982 
to 1991, representing the constituency of Saltcoats.  And by all 
reports, Mr. Speaker, he served the people of Saltcoats well 
with a dedication and good nature that was his trademark. 
 
On a personal level, I found Walter to be a quiet and 
unassuming member of this legislature; unassuming in public, 
but let me assure you that as a revered member of ag caucus, he 
was as vocal and voracious in pursuit of his ideals and what he 
thought was right as any member of caucus. 
 
Now the effort and energy, Mr. Speaker, that Walter expended 
in those two terms are but a small sample in comparison to his 
other endeavours in the community in which he lived. 
 
Walter was a member of the Esterhazy Legion, the Masonic 
Lodge, and the Wa-Wa Shrine Temple.  He was a director of 
the Saskatchewan Livestock Association, the Tantallon 
Agricultural Society, and the Saskatchewan Hereford 
Association. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a shame and so unfortunate that Walter, who 
was spending his retirement with his wife Dorathea, has been 
taken from his family and friends in such an untimely and 
tragic nature.  He will be sorely missed. 
 
And on behalf of caucus, I extend our sympathy to the Johnson 
family, and especially to Dorathea who survived this accident.  
And I wish her a speedy recovery and trust that she finds 
comfort in the arms of friends and family. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to join 
with the hon. member in extending to the family of Mr. 
Johnson our condolences and sympathy.  I want to say it was 
with shock and some disbelief that we heard or read in the 
newspaper this morning of the passing of a former friend and 
colleague from the legislature, Mr. Walter Johnson. 
 
Walter, as we all knew him, served with us in the House from 
1982.  I remember his election very clearly from the 
constituency of Saltcoats.  We had opportunity on many 
occasions to sit on committees in that nine-year period, and we 
always found Walter to be cordial, friendly, quiet, as the 
member opposite mentions, unassuming. 
 
So it's difficult for all of us to understand what happens in a 
circumstance like this, except to say that the passing of Mr. 
Johnson in a shocking traffic accident, I understand on a road 
between Tucson and Phoenix, an individual who was enjoying 
retirement with his family, only to say that, Mr. Speaker, it 
points out again the instance of where we as members, we as 
human beings, should be aware that the friendships that we 
share in this Assembly and throughout the province as we 
travel around, are very important.  And I think on many 
occasions we may lose sight of that in the cut and thrust of this 
place.  But really at the end of the day, friendship is much more 
important than other items we might debate from time to time, 
and we'd be wise to remember that in tempering our comments 
to one another. 
 
Having said that, I do want to extend to the family, especially 
to Dorathea who I understand is recovering in hospital, who 
was also injured in the accident, we want to extend our 
condolences.  And I'm sure other members will want to join 
when the formal condolence motion comes forward, but just to 
say we join with members of the official opposition in 
extending our sympathy and condolence to the family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 
join with the government and the official opposition to express 
my condolences to Dorathea and the family of Walter Johnson 
on the tragic accident which claimed his life on February 19. 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, Walter will be sadly missed and fondly 
remembered by all who knew him.  He was an individual who 
took a leadership role in his community and was recognized for 
his contributions to many organizations, and to many provincial 
agricultural organizations as well, including what have been 
mentioned previously, the Saskatchewan Livestock Association 
and the Saskatchewan Hereford Association. 
 
Walter was a very respected individual in his home community 
and in his constituency.  It has been mentioned when he was 
elected, but I think he was most fondly remembered as 
someone who believed in the potential for Saskatchewan.  His 
appointment as legislative secretary to the Hon. Lorne 
Hepworth, minister of Agriculture, in 1983, his work with the 
ministry of Agriculture, and his dedicated commitment to 
farmers through his work with Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
were indicative of his intense belief in the value of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Walter Johnson was a man who provided wise 
counsel to me, encouraging comments and personal warmth 
and support that I'm going to miss.  He was a friend and a man 
of tremendous conviction and spirit, one of the few people who 
provided me with support during very lonely times here. 
 
On behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I extend my 
sincere and heartfelt sympathy to Dorathea, his family, and to 
all who loved and respected this fine gentleman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Knezacek: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf of 
the Saltcoats constituents, add my measure of condolence to the 
Johnson family at this time.  I'd like to state that this certainly 
came as a shock and a surprise to the people of Saltcoats when 
the news was announced Saturday night and Sunday morning. 
 
I would like to recognize Walter's contribution for the years 
that he spent in the Legislative Assembly as the representative 
of Saltcoats.  He did a fine job of representing the people of the 
constituency and he was well regarded in that light. 
 
On a personal note, I'd just like to mention that I ran against 
Walter in 1986 and he was the victor in that election and we 
had the very good understanding in terms of friendship as the 
election moved through its course.  I'd also like to extend 
condolences to Dorathea, Mrs. Johnson, and to the members of 
the Johnson family, Ken and Terry, Karen, and Dawn, and their 
families. 
 
I had an opportunity to teach Dawn, the youngest daughter, 
while she was attending high school in Esterhazy and also had 
the opportunity to teach Jason, one of Walter's grandsons, just 
before the 1991 election.  As I mentioned, this came as a great 
shock to all the constituents and I'm sure that I would not be 
out 

 of order to, on their behalf's, extend sympathy and condolence 
to the Johnson family.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to rise today and join with my colleagues in the 
Legislative Assembly in expressing our condolences to 
Dorathea and family, to say that on behalf of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, which I have the honour of leading at this 
time and in this Assembly and in the province of 
Saskatchewan, that we were deeply honoured as a party to have 
a person of Walter's integrity, a person of Walter's leadership 
capabilities, represent us in this Assembly for those nine and a 
half years. 
 
When I came into this Assembly in the spring of 1985, Walter 
Johnson was one of those people in my caucus that really went 
out of his way to make me feel welcome into this family that all 
legislators belong to.  I think when one goes around this 
province and talks to people that knew Walter and worked with 
him, that was a universal comment about Walter Johnson. 
 
It didn't matter if it was in the early days of starting Agribition 
or promoting the Hereford breed or doing the things that Walter 
felt so deeply about when talking about rural people in 
particular.  The comment was that it never really mattered to 
Walter what your politics were, what your background was, he 
just wanted to work with you to improve rural Saskatchewan.  
And I think it truly was an honour that a person of Walter's 
calibre had the opportunity to serve his constituents in this 
Legislative Assembly.  And I know all of us wish that Dorathea 
does have a speedy recovery because certainly her family is 
going to need her more than they ever did. 
 
And on behalf of the Progressive Conservative Party, we just 
wish that she have a speedy recovery and that the family know 
that we are all thinking about them at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 
want to begin by commending the government for delivering its 
budget early in the year, thus allowing the many agencies who 
depend upon provincial revenues to plan their budgets more  



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

accurately. 
 
As Liberals stated in our 1991 platform document, we believe 
in set budget dates so that the fiscal planning of those who are 
funded by or affected by government budgetary decisions is 
more predictable.  Ultimately it would be ideal for all three 
levels of government to coordinate their budget processes.  I 
acknowledge that it is difficult to make provincial revenue and 
expenditure predictions with some of the federal factors 
unknown. 
 
In this same vein, however, I would like to commend the 
federal government for the quick steps they have taken to 
revise the equalization formula and reach an agreement with 
Saskatchewan for the next five years.  That, Mr. Speaker, will 
add a great deal of stability to fiscal planning in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister entitled her budget speech: 
Delivering the Promise.  I want to spend some time today 
reviewing the many promises made by this government, in 
order to assess the worthiness of that title. 
 
Of course the government has made deficit reduction a priority, 
but their approach has been driven entirely by taxation, both 
direct and indirect.  While they have laid out a plan by which to 
budget or balance the provincial operating budget by 1996, 
they have based their entire success on the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to shoulder continual increases in 
taxation.  The approach used by the New Democrats assumes 
that the income tax base will remain consistent or will grow. 
 
The approach assumes that new labour legislation will not 
result in increased costs and lower profits to business.  It 
assumes that these pressures will not cost people jobs.  It 
assumes that consumer spending will maintain current levels or 
increase.  It assumes that the federal government will not ask 
Saskatchewanians for increased tax revenues to address the 
federal deficit. 
 
And the New Democrat approach to deficit reduction assumes 
that increases to utility rates, gambling revenues, all indirect 
taxation increases and offloading to third parties, this 
government assumes, Mr. Speaker, that none of these factors 
will have a negative influence on the number of people 
employed, on the revenue pool being generated by 
Saskatchewan consumers, businesses, and working people.  In 
other words, Mr. Speaker, this budget is based on the theory 
that there is no limit to the amount that one can get from the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan takes issue 
with these assumptions.  I have in fact spoken with and written 
to the federal Finance minister, the Hon. Paul Martin, to inform 
him of the current tax levels in Saskatchewan.  We have 
discussed at length my concerns about the damaging effect that 
the provincial government's taxation levels have had on our 
fragile economy.  And I have urged him to be very cautious 
about adding further to that burden at this time. 

I realize that the federal minister faces an onerous task in 
cleaning up after the Conservatives, just as the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) have faced in Saskatchewan.  But I wanted 
Mr. Martin to be aware of the fact that we have very few 
people being asked by our provincial government to reduce a 
huge deficit very, very quickly.  Perhaps more quickly than our 
taxpayers are able to support. 
 
I wanted the federal Finance minister to understand that 
Saskatchewan people are being given very little breathing room 
by the provincial New Democrats.  And I explained to the 
federal minister that, except for the federal Liberal 
infrastructure program, we have had absolutely no significant 
job creation since the NDP came to power in 1991. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that I have done 
my best to present the facts to the federal Minister of Finance.  
At the same time, I cannot make excuses for the fact that other 
provinces such as New Brunswick are taking a double-barrelled 
approach to fighting their deficits while Saskatchewan seems 
stuck in the single track of attacking the deficit through 
taxation. 
 
I think it is important for Saskatchewan people to recognize 
that as much as the Saskatchewan Liberal Party agrees that 
deficit reduction is necessary, we do not believe that the entire 
deficit can be dealt with on the backs of the taxpayer. 
 
Now then the members opposite love to shout and catcall 
across the Assembly asking, what would you do?  Well let me 
tell the government members two things.  First of all, the way 
to create wealth and to generate prosperity is to begin with 
giving people the tools with which they will be able to pay 
taxes.  These tools are the three E's -- an economic 
development plan, education, and employment opportunities.  
Those are the bases of a sound economic strategy, a strategy 
that will empower people to contribute to deficit reduction 
without causing so much social pain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people do not object to paying taxes.  
Saskatchewan people recognize their obligations as citizens of 
this province and of this nation.  What they object to is having 
their pockets picked over the counter, at the gas pumps, on their 
utility bills, and through indirect fees and charges.  People 
object to being told that there will be no tax increases when 
their deficit reduction tax doubles on their income tax form. 
 
People object to the Premier twisting statistics in his speeches 
about there being 3,000 more people working in Saskatchewan 
when Statistics Canada says there are actually 9,000 less people 
working in Saskatchewan than there were in 1991.  People 
object to the Finance minister telling them there are no new 
taxes when their disposable income continues to shrink as the 
result of tax increases that were loaded into last year's budget to 
take effect this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers object to 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

being treated as though they had a pocket for every level of 
government; object to the provincial government claiming no 
new taxes knowing full well that their decisions to offload to 
the municipalities will mean increased taxes at the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is an effective political piece, but then 
that is reflective of a government that consistently puts politics 
ahead of governing.  From a political perspective, the 
government has done a masterful job of loading all of the tax 
increases into the 1993 budget -- like a time bomb waiting to 
explode in 1994.  And now that the bomb is being detonated by 
this budget, people will be left wondering how a budget with 
no new taxes could be so hard on their pocketbooks once the 
municipalities have to bring down their budgets in April. 
 
Politically speaking, they have timed the budget to ensure that 
whatever shortfalls there are in the provincial estimates can 
likely be placed at the feet of tomorrow's federal budget.  And 
that is fine, Mr. Speaker.  This is a government who spent its 
first two years in office blaming the previous federal and 
provincial governments for its own inability to create economic 
growth. 
 
This NDP government will predictably spend the next two 
years blaming the current federal government in Ottawa.  The 
lucky thing for the NDP is that they will never have the 
problem of defending a federal New Democrat government 
because there will never be one. 
 
But who are the Saskatchewan people supposed to blame when 
it comes to their unfulfilled expectations?  Who was it that 
promised that $4.5 billion simply had to be enough?  It was the 
Premier and numerous ministers over there who made that 
promise.  The same people who applauded wildly when the 
Finance minister brought in her budget of $5.03 billion last 
week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was it that promised 2,000 new jobs to 
Saskatchewan people in their economic renewal plan?  And 
who are people supposed to hold accountable for that failure, 
Mr. Speaker?  Who was it that said that taxes are the silent 
killers of jobs?  Could it be the Premier of Saskatchewan?  And 
who, Mr. Speaker, who was it that promised that there were 
other ways to fight the deficit than by increasing taxes? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was the same bunch over there who have 
since raised taxes on fuel, on alcohol, on cigarettes, on lottery 
licences, fishing and hunting licences, permits, utilities, income 
tax, and sales tax on consumer goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who was it that promised to create a climate for 
economic development to let small business create jobs?  It is 
the same bunch that have increased costs to businesses through 
labour laws and regulations resulting in lower profits and 
threatening the very jobs of the people they were trying to 
protect.  The same bunch who sent shock signals through the 
free enterprise community by threatening to legislate 

retroactive changes to legally binding contracts. 
 
Is that what the NDP call delivering the promise?  Delivering 
budgets that cost people jobs, delivering policy decisions and 
legislation that put people out of business and drive investment 
out of the province.  Sneaking taxes in through the back door 
while shouting from the rooftops, no new taxes. 
 
Is that what the NDP calls delivering the promise?  Delivering 
an economy with 9,000 less jobs than when they started.  
Delivering 21,000 more people onto the welfare rolls.  Is that 
what the NDP calls delivering the promise? 
 
Saskatchewan people can only hope that either this government 
does not promise too much more or that they continue to break 
those promises because what they have been delivering has 
been too painful to bear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's talk for a minute about delivering on 
promises.  February 13 marked 100 days since the Liberal 
government took office in Ottawa.  In just 100 days the 
government has kept these commitments it made to Canadians 
in writing: launching the national infrastructure works program 
which they should get down on their knees and thank them for; 
it helped balance . . . helped them make their projections for 
their deficit reduction this year; cancelling the $5.8 billion 
helicopter deal; reducing the size of cabinet and cutting the 
PMO, Prime Minister's Office and ministerial staff; reviewing 
and cancelling the Pearson Airport deal; achieving major 
improvements with NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement) and negotiating a GATT (General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade) deal that will hopefully increase Canada's 
world trade; beginning the process of replacing the goods and 
services tax; launching thorough reviews of foreign and 
defence policies; reforming the National Parole Board through 
appointments based on merit and expertise; allowing refugee 
claimants to seek work rather than forcing them onto welfare; 
revitalizing the Immigration and Refugee Board; opening up 
the budget process to broad public participation; reforming 
parliament to make MPs (Member of Parliament) more 
effective representatives of their constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what's been accomplished by a government 
that delivers on its promises after 100 days in office.  Mr. 
Speaker, this particular provincial government has been in 
power now for 853 days and let's take a look at their record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that promised they would not 
need more than $4.5 billion to govern this province.  Last 
week's budget -- 5.03 billion.  This is a government that spent 
tens of thousands of dollars mailing out little green booklets 
promising economic development and jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, after 853 days in power, what have we got 
to show for that expense?  A bare handful of new jobs and a net 
loss of 9,000 working people in the province of Saskatchewan.  
That, Mr. Speaker, is a 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

shameful record. 
 
(1515) 
 
This is a government that claims to, and I quote, reduce "the 
cost of government administration at every turn."  But have 
they delivered on that promise? 
 
This government boasts in the budget speech that it will save 
$12 million on highway signs.  But you have to read the fine 
print to find out that it will spend $4 million less on 
maintaining our roads, while the Department of Highways and 
Transportation will spend $250,000 more on planning and 
coordination.  The Department of Highways will spend an 
additional $167,000 for regulation, safety, and compliance to 
protect our safety on their poorly maintained roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the $200,000 saved on health stickers is a great 
idea and I give them full points on this.  But it concerns me, 
Mr. Speaker, that the $200,000 saved by an innovative idea 
suddenly seems eaten up by an additional $231,000 in salaries 
for administration costs in the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government promised to make government 
more open and accountable.  But what did they do when they 
had the opportunity to open the Board of Internal Economy 
when they took power? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you what they did.  I guess the 
evidence is what it is.  For two years after the NDP were 
elected on promises of open, honest, and accountable 
government, the doors of the Board of Internal Economy were 
kept closed by New Democrat and Conservative members -- for 
over two years.  That is the evidence, Mr. Speaker.  The doors 
of the Board of Internal Economy remained closed in spite of 
the many, many opportunities there were for the members of 
that board to vote on opening the process to the public; despite 
my repeated requests for inclusion at the meetings to represent 
the Liberal Party. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the result of pressures from the public, 
this government has now agreed to appoint an independent 
commission to review the salaries and benefits paid to MLAs.  
But where was that initiative before this was open to the public, 
before we were allowed to participate?  Where was the 
openness and accountability that could have been delivered at 
no cost whatsoever?  Where was that commitment over two 
years ago? 
 
And while we're on the topic of wages and salaries, let me say 
this, Mr. Speaker.  While the government has no hesitation to 
unilaterally raise salaries and add more staff to its departments 
under the disguise of "cutting administration costs at every 
turn," they cannot seem to get over the fact that the Liberals are 
now officially entitled to the money set aside for a third party 
by virtue of The Legislative Assembly Act. 
 
It is interesting to listen to the members opposite grandstanding 
about my "wage" as Leader of the Third Party.  Something for 
which I did not qualify until we 

achieved official party status in complete adherence with 
criteria laid out by this very Assembly and those very members. 
 
May I take this opportunity to remind the members opposite 
that it was they, not the Liberals, who set these criteria.  And it 
seems odd that they are now having so much trouble accepting 
the fact that we have met the criteria and qualify for the 
additional resources they were responsible for assigning to a 
third party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting indeed to note that it was the 
former member for Regina North West who resigned months 
after declaring his decision to seek the federal nomination, even 
though he remained on full MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) salary and expenses in the interim.  It is interesting, 
Mr. Speaker, that it was Mr. Solomon who approached me to 
lobby for support for official party status for none other than 
the New Democratic Party of Canada at the federal level. 
 
Obviously Mr. Solomon and the New Democratic Party have 
different ideas about meeting criteria at the federal level than 
they have about the third party provincially.  Obviously Mr. 
Solomon feels that the Leader of the federal NDP and the 
members should have some mercy shown towards them.  But I 
have a hard time mustering sympathy for their situation, given 
the incredible immaturity being shown by members opposite 
about the third party status we have legitimately achieved in 
this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this fair and open and honest government talks 
about providing audited financial reports for every Crown 
corporation, every agency, board, and commission.  May I 
suggest to the Finance minister that it would be far more 
effective to have the revenue expense and retained earnings 
statements of the Crowns.  It would be far more effective to 
provide that in the form of an appendix to the annual budget so 
that we could have a truly accurate picture of the financial 
status of the Crowns relative to the dividends paid by CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) in the 
annual budget. 
 
There have been considerable improvements, granted, as the 
result of some of the Gass Commission recommendations that 
have been implemented.  However there are still a great many 
apples-and-oranges comparisons that have to be made between 
financial documents to get an accurate picture.  It certainly does 
not make the cross-references easier for people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It doesn't make it easier for people to understand when there is 
only a one-line item in the budget on Crown Investments.  The 
Crown corporations and agencies and boards and commissions 
constitute a major component of the fiscal picture in 
Saskatchewan.  If the true intention of government is to reduce 
confusion about our financial realities then it makes sense for 
the government to be including more than a one-line item about 
Crown dividends in the provincial budget.  The idea of a 
summary statement is 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

to give a total picture, but negligible information included in 
the budget on the Crowns appears purposely set so that it 
cannot be properly analysed. 
 
I would suggest to the Minister of Finance that future budgets 
include a detailed summary of the Crown corporations' 
financial statements complete with previous years' figures, 
estimates, and projected revenues and expenses, just as is done 
with other departments.  Only then will we complete the 
achievement of what the government claims to have now and 
that is, quote: one of the most useful financial statements issued 
by a senior government in Canada, end of quote. 
 
I should like to remind the government that this is not all that 
the Provincial Auditor said in his report.  About Crown 
corporations, he recommended among other things, and I quote 
from page 289, appendix V, section 6.5: 
 

 All dividends declared by Crown corporations and similar 
government owned entities and all dividends which the 
Province receives from a joint venture in which it is a 
shareholder should be paid directly into the Consolidated 
Fund. 

 
That recommendation would have ensured at the very least a 
more accurate picture of the profitability of the Crowns to be 
included in this budget.  The government, for some reason, 
objected to this and I quote again the auditor's report: 
 

 The Government appears to disagree with the central notion 
of the (Gass) Commission that CIC should not be permitted 
to expend . . . excess earnings of Crown corporations without 
the specific approval of the Legislature. 

 
 The Government has indicated it views CIC as the holding 

company for the Crown's investments. 
 

It considers it appropriate that the other returns from 
investment flow to CIC rather than to the Consolidated Fund. 
 
I suggest that until there is a more accurate picture of Crown 
activity included in the budget, we will not have achieved that 
"most useful document" that the Finance minister refers to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister talked at some length about, 
and I quote again: identifying the risks in the balanced budget 
plan.  It is interesting that the minister seems so concerned 
about the potential for the federal government to offload onto 
the province; at the same time, however, in her 1993 budget 
offloads more cuts onto the municipal government for 1994, 
more cuts to education and acute health care funding -- all 
under the warm and fuzzy term, partnership. 
 
While the budget speech contains graphs and statements about 
what a 5 per cent reduction in federal spending could mean to 
the province, there 

are no charts or graphs or impact studies to show what the 
offloading from the government to the municipalities has 
already meant to local communities in terms of property tax 
increases, program cuts and lay-offs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this back-door budget claims to set a 
priority on jobs.  But how can this be so?  How can a 
government which has imposed the highest provincial taxes of 
any government in Canada, has made Saskatchewan people 
amongst the highest taxed people on the North American 
continent -- how can this government claim to make jobs a 
priority?  And where is the evidence of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
Is it in the list of companies that have laid off workers since the 
government was elected?  Is it in the list of the 700 companies 
that we were told might want to locate here but haven't shown 
up yet?  Is it in the 9,000 less jobs, less people working in our 
workforce since 1991?  Is the evidence in the 21,000 more 
people on welfare?  Where is the evidence, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this government places a priority on job creation. 
 
This government had a chance to create jobs by joining the 
federal infrastructure program.  And what did they do after 
tripping over themselves to try to be the first in line to sign up?  
What they did, Mr. Speaker, was to cop out.  They stuck their 
fingers into the federal funding pot, took out $17 million of the 
money which could have been available to municipalities. 
 
Did they put up their share to get things moving at the local 
level?  No, Mr. Speaker, this government which supposedly 
makes jobs a priority didn't do that.  What they did was to 
change the wrapping paper on some capital funds that were 
already designated, and they called that their share of the 
infrastructure program.  Even when there were 50-cent dollars 
on the table, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial government 
jumped in to grab some federal funds to supplement its own 
capital plans.  They did not fund new initiatives at all, but 
added federal money to pay for part of capital projects already 
scheduled.  They jumped in and took some money off the table 
that municipalities could have put to work at the local level. 
 
Furthermore, they put almost nothing into matching the 
expenditures except for advancing funds on projects that 
cash-strapped municipalities were able to finance.  This is a 
government that claims to be delivering the promise of job 
creation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make it clear that Liberals see 
economic growth as the key to deficit reduction, not 
unreasonable levels of taxation.  And that, I want to make clear 
to the members opposite, is the key difference in philosophy 
between the Liberals and the New Democrats.  Liberals 
believe, Mr. Speaker -- and perhaps they should pay some 
heed -- in the empowerment of the individual to enable him or 
her to contribute to the collective.  New Democrats believe, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that it is the job of the collective to look after 
the individual. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

And I want to explain today that individuals in Saskatchewan 
want the opportunity to look after themselves.  They're willing 
to work and study and train to improve themselves, but they 
need to have that opportunity, an opportunity which this 
government in their Speech from the Throne and their budget 
does not provide.  There is nothing of substance in this budget 
to empower the individual, to give the men and women of 
Saskatchewan a chance to improve their lot in life. 
 
There is nothing in this budget that gives the students and 
teachers in our province a reason to believe that education is a 
priority for this government.  It is not possible to believe that, 
because the government has once again cut funding to 
education at a time when business and industry is telling us that 
education is the key to a skilled workforce. 
 
It is not possible to tell this New Democratic government is 
committed to jobs when it cuts funding to New Careers 
Corporation.  That's right, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  At a time 
when a government supposedly committed to jobs should be 
announcing changes and improvements to better training and 
retraining opportunities, this is the government that cuts back in 
this area. 
 
While this government claims its commitment to primary and 
post-secondary education, the evidence shows that the priorities 
are askew in this area as well.  This year's budget shows an 
increase in the cost of department administration, albeit just 
$102,000.  But it is an increase at the top, while K to 12 
education and post-secondary education and skill training are 
reduced. 
 
I ask how a government can justify increasing funding for its 
own department while field level cuts are the order of the day.  
The message is that this government expects to have more 
funding to deliver less service, while it expects everyone else to 
do less with more.  And that is not only unfair; it is 
unexcusable. 
 
There is nothing in this budget to give our rural residents -- our 
farm families and citizens in our smaller rural 
communities -- any hope for the future.  Where is the rural 
economic development plan, the funding for programs to 
develop industry and markets in rural Saskatchewan?  Where is 
it? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has shown an 
embarrassing lack of interest in agriculture.  In fact there has 
been very little understanding shown towards the difficulty 
faced by rural Saskatchewan in general.  After two and a half 
years, this is the government that is still trying to develop an 
agriculture plan, and I am concerned that the entire fiscal 
strategy of the New Democratic government is driven more by 
its obsession with power and an underlying desire for 
re-election than it is by a sound economic plan. 
 
(1530) 
 
There are some promises to develop a farm safety net 

program.  But let's get real; this government has shown no 
serious intent to do so for the last two years, and farmers have 
absolutely lost faith in this administration. 
 
The promise to improve crop insurance will surely come with a 
price tag, and the details of just how much whole farm 
premiums will cost do not even appear in the budget.  With so 
many farmers having dropped out of crop insurance due to its 
unaffordability, we'll be watching very closely to see if 
government moves to reduce the exposure of farmers with this 
initiative.  The meagre $20 million which will be invested over 
four years to develop new markets and new jobs contains no 
details and is being watched with scepticism by farmers to see 
if there is a real strategic plan attached which will create 
measurable results. 
 
The obvious neglect of rural Saskatchewan leads one to believe 
that this administration has written off its electoral hopes in 
rural Saskatchewan.  This clearly explains their willingness to 
watch the rural economy and infrastructure being dismantled 
under their very noses. 
 
Instead of working to enhance rural economic development, the 
government has chosen to create a central vacuum of indirect 
taxation by plugging video lottery terminals into every small 
community, hoping to suck millions of dollars from 
Saskatchewan communities into the government treasury. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is a government which has chosen to 
prey on the weaknesses of people, to prey on their desperate 
need for a lucky break.  This government has chosen to attack 
the limited disposable income of vulnerable people just to meet 
its political objectives.  I wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
Tommy Douglas would think about that. 
 
And who are those vulnerable people, the people this 
government claims it has to protect in difficult times?  Who are 
the people who will be sitting in front of the video lottery 
terminals helping the government to balance its books at the 
expense of their families and creditors?  Who'll be risking the 
hundreds of millions of dollars required to generate the profits 
the government wants to get?  Will it be the wealthy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker?  Will it be the upper income earners, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker?  Will it be the well-educated and the business 
leaders and the politicians of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker?  Not likely. 
 
Present trends show that it is ordinary people, people who are 
already supportive of other gambling opportunities in 
Saskatchewan, who will be drawn to these devices.  And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the minister of Gaming says he intends to 
draw tourists to Saskatchewan, to stop the flow of gaming 
dollars out of the province of Saskatchewan?  Well I have news 
for the minister of Gaming, who should do his homework. 
 
Manitoba already has huge numbers of video lottery 
terminals -- two 100,000-square-foot entertainment 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

centres in Winnipeg, brimming over with VLTs and bingo.  
Alberta, Mr. Minister, has had video lottery terminals for two 
years.  Montana has slot machines.  North Dakota is right next 
door to Minnesota, which has slot machines, and North Dakota 
has casinos on its reserves, as does Minnesota. 
 
So I ask you this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From where exactly 
does the minister expect these tourists will be coming to pay 9 
per cent provincial sales tax and 55 cents per litre for gasoline?  
And has the minister taken note of the studies from numerous 
other jurisdictions which support the statement that the more 
gaming offered in a particular state or province, the greater the 
number of trips to places like Las Vegas and Atlantic City from 
those areas? 
 
The Minister of Finance and the minister of Gaming know full 
well that increased proliferation of gaming simply whets the 
appetites of those who can afford to go to the city of lights, 
while the poor must stay home, content to gamble their money 
against the government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial government tells us that 
this so-called gaming strategy is directed at rural hotels and that 
future multimillion dollar casinos are in support of the 
aboriginal population.  I challenge the minister to show how 
this strategy will benefit the small towns who are sending tens 
of thousands of dollars per month to the government -- money 
which can no longer be spent in their struggling economies, 
money which will no longer find its way into charitable coffers 
of local fund raisers. 
 
And I challenge the minister to show how the draining of 
millions of dollars in disposable income annually from the 
Saskatchewan economy, particularly from lower income 
groups, how this will benefit the aboriginal population by 
creating a handful of jobs as casino workers. 
 
I challenge the minister to show the local charitable groups will 
not have their revenues eroded, that the exhibition boards in 
Regina and Saskatoon will earn more from the proposed 
casinos than they do now from the existing format. 
 
And I challenge the minister to prove that bingo revenues and 
horse-racing betting will not be diminished as the result of the 
new gaming focus on video lotteries and casino gaming. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge the minister to show how 
much revenue will be needed from Saskatchewan people to 
produce the profits and offset the damage this will surely do on 
many social and economic levels. 
 
The economic development strategy of this government is 
nothing short of shameful.  Two and a half years of opportunity 
have been wasted while the government tried to convince us 
that it had a strategy, a plan for economic development.  Now 
two and a half years later they have finally admitted that their 

job creation predictions were unfounded and that their plan has 
failed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, hope is not a strategy.  Wishful thinking 
is not a plan.  It concerns me deeply that it has taken two and a 
half years to put together a strategy for the North.  What is 
more disturbing is to hear that, I quote from this budget: 
"Northern people will be directly involved in the planning and 
priority setting." 
 
Why has it taken so long to set this priority?  I find it 
interesting to listen to comments by an aboriginal leader who 
says that communities will be pitted one against another in 
making these decisions.  He feels that it is unfortunate that the 
focus of these discussions will be on the means rather than the 
ends. 
 
I believe that aboriginal people want, deserve, and are capable 
of more than just a piece of the gambling action.  And I believe 
that we must have a stronger commitment towards improved 
justice, education, and economic development if aboriginal 
peoples are to take their rightful place as equals in this society. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the way to achieve this is not to 
replace the guns and whisky of the 1800s with the video lottery 
terminals and card games of the 1990s.  I do not believe that 
the majority of native people support this approach and I 
believe that first nations people are worthy of a better future. 
 
This government has talked for almost three years about its 
commitment to children and to the family, yet the evidence of 
that commitment has been minimal.  I believe that the 
government's slot machine solution to deficit reduction will do 
more to damage the family unit in Saskatchewan than any other 
initiative to date in this province's history. 
 
For a party that complained bitterly when it was in opposition 
about the lack of attention to the poor and the children of our 
province, it is inexplicable why it should take so long to act on 
the establishment of the Children's Advocate, talked more than 
two years ago in this very Chamber.  And when was it 
announced?  It's disgraceful. 
 
I want to point out that I took the time to track down the 
information on a proposal from Manitoba on a Children's 
Advocate on a similar focus more than two years ago.  The 
Minister of Social Services was wondering why I don't rush off 
to write copious notes to the Department of Social Services any 
more.  Check into the history perhaps and see how much 
information I have sent there, none of which had been 
acknowledged at all. 
 
For me, that was a test. The test with the Manitoba information 
was a test to see what this government does with information 
that's been offered up as part of their input.  The length of time 
they have taken to act and the fact that there was no 
consultation has given me serious misgivings about providing a 
great deal of time and energy and effort into input with these 
people in government. 
 
I realize that this government would love to have 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

constant input from this side of the House, but it has become 
obvious that input does not equal output where the government 
is concerned.  Like many Saskatchewan Liberals, our caucus 
may choose to send our ideas elsewhere -- to Ottawa, to other 
provinces -- or wait until we are in a position to implement 
them ourselves. 
 
Speaking of input, the most interesting claim in the budget is 
the government's statement that: 
 

 . . . wellness reforms are based on the concept of community 
decision making.  Local people are best equipped to make 
choices for their communities. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously the writer of the Finance 
minister's speech has not been watching carefully as the Rural 
Health Coalition had to practically drag the Department of 
Health kicking and screaming to the table under the threat of a 
lawsuit to make this government aware that local communities 
do know what is best for them, a fact that the department 
approach has failed to acknowledge from day one of the 
wellness model implementation. 
 
This budget plays a shell game with rural health care by 
promising an additional $10 million for the rural health 
initiatives fund.  Now I will say that again for those who want 
to look it up -- the rural health initiatives fund, $10 million. 
 
The fact is, there is no detail provided as to what this fund will 
do.  The reality, however, seems to be that a 2 mill levy which 
was previously collected by the cities in which there were 
union hospitals will now be collected province-wide by the 
provincial government. 
 
What this really means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there is 
less money available at local levels and more control of it by 
the province.  In actuality, while the government is saying that 
there will be a 1.6 per cent increase in health care funding, 
there will actually be a loss of $10 million in acute care funding 
as the funding is cut by 2.8 per cent as the result of last year's 
budget. 
 
The increase of $4 million more for home care and $4 million 
to long-term care will not be sufficient, given the number of 
acute care beds currently being taken up by level 4 patients.  
When those acute care beds are cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
people are going to be displaced and the funding for home care 
and long-term care will not be adequate by any means to cover 
it off. 
 
(1545) 
 
Currently what is happening is that beds are closing and that we 
have a large number of level 4 patients blocking acute care 
beds.  This shell game will simply result in a greater crisis in 
acute care as the funding becomes more and more inadequate.  
The budget talks of the savings amassed by the Saskatoon 
Health Board in the magnitude of $7 million.  What it fails to 

mention, Mr. Speaker, it fails to mention that the board is 
operating at a massive deficit and how the department plans to 
address the issue of deficits at the local level. 
 
There are commendable initiatives in the nutrition and breast 
cancer screening programs, but I will raise issues with this 
government about areas in which far more could be done to 
prevent illness. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, this budget is indicative of why NDP 
governments are becoming an endangered species across 
Canada -- extinct in Alberta; on the endangered list federally; 
and hunted by the electorate in Ontario, British Columbia, and 
soon Saskatchewan.  The NDP are proving to be incapable of 
evolving to be a government of the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier went on at some length in this 
Assembly to remind us of the glory days of the NDP-CCF 
(New Democratic Party-Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) but he does not give an accurate account of history.  
Looking back to postwar years, the Premier would have the 
people believe that Tommy Douglas was the only fiscal wizard 
of unparalleled talent in the nation. 
 
When we look at the 10 years . . . pardon me, let's just take 5 
here. Let's go from 1951 to 1956, for instance.  The Liberal 
Government of Canada started with a total GDP of $21.64 
billion.  The national debt was 17.58 billion for a debt:GDP 
ratio of 81 per cent. 
 
By 1956 that ratio had dropped significantly and it was around 
61 per cent.  The Liberals oversaw an economy with a GDP of 
$32.058 billion, with a debt of 19.815 billion. 
 
In other words in just five short years, they succeeded in 
reducing the debt:GDP ratio significantly and they were aided 
in this by an economy of the times, which was being 
experienced across the nation, that grew by 48 per cent in five 
years. 
 
Now at the same time they were successfully reducing the 
debt:GDP ratio, guess what they were doing while they were 
reducing that, Mr. Speaker?  They were increasing the transfer 
payments to the provinces including Saskatchewan.  In fact 
transfers virtually doubled from $257 million in 1951 to $507 
million in 1956.  These transfers made it much easier for the 
provinces to meet their financial obligations.  This in turn 
meant that the provinces should have had a much easier time 
controlling their debts, if not reducing them overall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now curiously enough, let's look at what the books tell us 
about that particular time in the province of Saskatchewan 
under the previous CCF-NDP.  Even though Saskatchewan was 
benefiting from transfers that were almost doubling in size, its 
debt grew by 2 per cent -- from 12.5 per cent to 14.5 per 
cent -- while the federal government's debt as a percentage of 
gross domestic product fell by 20 per cent. 
 
So who were the better managers of money, Mr. 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Speaker?  The federal Liberals who were doling out more 
money to the provinces in transfers and taking care of onerous 
programs such as defence while the Korean War was on, new 
social programs like unemployment insurance and many 
veterans' pensions?  Or the Saskatchewan CCF under whom the 
debt actually increased even though they were receiving more 
federal money and an economy which grew by 29 per cent over 
five years? 
 
T.C. Douglas was a good manager, but certainly no better than 
many others of his era.  When the economy was growing as it 
was and the federal transfer payments increased as dramatically 
as they did, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason why they should 
increase their debt as a percentage of the GDP. 
 
While we were looking back at history, it is interesting to note 
a comparison between the Thatcher government in 
Saskatchewan and the Conservative government of Manitoba at 
the same time.  Between 1962 and 1971 Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan had economies of almost identical size.  
Saskatchewan's economy was 4.2 per cent of the national 
average and Manitoba's was 4.3 per cent.  Saskatchewan had an 
8 per cent average annual rate of growth compared to 7.9 per 
cent average annual rate of growth in Manitoba. 
 
In 1964, the year Ross Thatcher took power, Saskatchewan 
began to outperform its eastern neighbour that was under the 
administration of the Conservatives.  The fact that 
Saskatchewan's accumulated debt -- equal to that of Manitoba 
in 1967-68 -- fell to $904 million while Manitoba's went from 
$914 million to 1,696 million for the same period, says a great 
deal for the tight fiscal management of the Thatcher years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in spite of whatever light we may want to 
cast on the history of our respective political parties, today is 
today and the future is coming.  I regret, Mr. Speaker, that this 
is not a government that is providing us with the necessary 
leadership for the future.  This budget is not about creating 
activity and enthusiasm.  It is not about enticing investment 
from the huge reserve of savings in the province of 
Saskatchewan.  It is not a budget about getting in on the ground 
floor for an economic recovery.  This budget is not a tool with 
which the government can guide and craft the economic growth 
in our province.  It is simply a level -- a level which stays the 
course of deficit reduction without providing the slightest 
incentive or encouragement to forge ahead into a new era of 
economic success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget -- like the government which 
produced it -- lacks the vision necessary to inspire job creation 
and the economic recovery in which Saskatchewan business 
and Saskatchewan workers are ready to participate.  With 
creative leadership and an innovative approach to the budget 
process we could be recovery bound.  However this particular 
administration, in its single-minded, taxation-only approach, 
may have missed the golden opportunity people have been 
trying -- through 

sacrifice -- to create. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot endorse this budget as a part of a sound, 
economic recovery plan for the province of Saskatchewan.  I 
suggest that its priorities are misplaced and it lacks the 
creativity to generate the economic growth upon which its 
estimates rely.  If the growth referred to by the Minister of 
Finance really existed, if there really were the economic 
recovery taking place that she suggests, then it would be 
reflected by a growth in taxation revenues.  I suggest that the 
levels of taxation imposed by this government have driven 
large portions of our economy underground.  I suggest that they 
will not resurface until there is renewed confidence in the 
political leadership of this province. 
 
Therefore, since the growth these estimates are based upon is 
clearly not there, I suggest that this budget will not hold the line 
on deficit reduction.  This deficit reduction however . . . Pardon 
me; it will hold the line of deficit reduction but it will come at 
the expense at whatever economic recovery may have been 
trying to emerge in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore, because of its lack of encouragement for the 
economy, I will not be supporting the motion to approve the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 
pleased to rise in the House today and to respond to and to 
provide my wholehearted support for this government's 
priorities as expressed in the budget speech. 
 
Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a special hello 
again this year to the residents of Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain 
who continue to give me support and encouragement, and I 
appreciate that very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend, unlike the previous speaker . 
. . And I see she's leaving.  I'd like if she could stay and listen . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think the member 
knows that he may not refer to people either being present or 
leaving the Chamber, and I ask the member to please refrain 
from that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say 
that I commend the Minister of Finance, the Premier, the 
cabinet and my caucus colleagues, and the citizens especially 
of Saskatchewan for their ideas and their commitment to 
rebuild this beautiful province from the devastation of the 
1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might say that the previous speaker, the third 
party leader, quoted Tommy Douglas two or three times.  I 
would like to quote Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker  And in 
some ways I find it interesting that she would quote Tommy 
Douglas because Tommy Douglas spent his whole life fighting 
Liberals, because he didn't stand for what Liberals stand for.  
So I find it 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

interesting that the Liberal leader is quoting Tommy Douglas, 
because he would fundamentally oppose their positions today 
as he did years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1954 this is what Tommy Douglas said, and I 
quote.  He said: 
 

 The philosophy of this government is humanity first.  We 
believe that the measure of any community is the amount of 
social and economic security which it provides for even its 
humblest citizens. 

 
Tommy Douglas, 1954. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me quote what our Premier said in 1993, 
almost 40 years later.  And I quote: 
 

 I am a New Democrat because I believe in economic and 
social justice in a society which seeks fairness, compassion 
and equity in all its affairs. 

 
Premier of Saskatchewan, 1993, almost 40 years later, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 1954 to 1994, we have new challenges and 
new realities, but the fundamental commitment of this 
movement, this party, remains the same, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 
proud to be associated with the comments from Mr. Douglas of 
'54 and our Premier of 1993.  And that commitment is reflected 
in this budget, Mr. Speaker.  This budget does reflect 
compassion, equity in government affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that different from the view we saw today 
in question period where both parties were jumping up to beat 
up on working people.  Mr. Speaker, you have never heard 
either one of those parties, including the member who crossed 
the floor, speak about social justice and equity.  You've never 
heard that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader is so concerned about the 
precarious position of the Saskatchewan financial situation.  
Let me read what Mr. Carmichael, the senior . . . Ted 
Carmichael, the senior economist for Burns Fry said about last 
week's budget.  And I quote: 
 

 The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 
record in reducing the enormous deficit it inherited . . . We 
expect the government to continue to hit its target and 
therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook as very 
positive. 

 
Now why on earth would a third party leader, who as a leader, 
be feeding into cynicism and be so negative when we got 
external people saying that we're on the right track and trying 
to be positive about it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So I think the Saskatchewan public would likely pay more 
attention to Mr. Carmichael on the health of Saskatchewan's 
finances than the Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker. 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, just on the Liberal leader's 
comments for a moment, that in my six years in this Chamber I 
have never heard such a self-righteous speech as we heard 
today, Mr. Speaker -- self-righteous and full of rhetoric, but 
didn't really say anything.  Mr. Speaker, she didn't talk about 
the budget.  That's last year's speech she was using; she didn't 
even talk about the budget. 
 
She criticizes the government for making some assumptions 
about developing its budget.  I assume Mr. Martin is making 
some assumptions about developing his federal budget.  That's 
what you do when you're in government, Mr. Speaker.  You 
consult and you make your best judgements about the 
indicators.  You can't develop a budget any other way.  And 
Mr. Martin in Ottawa is likely doing the same thing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We hope he is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we hope that he is, as my colleagues 
say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can't pick numbers out of the air and put a 
budget together.  Is that her solution? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader talks about the taxation levels 
in Saskatchewan.  I mean this is really, really funny.  Because I 
have an analysis here, Mr. Speaker, where she's talking about 
taxes provincially and her concern about Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of taxation levels for families below 
$25,000, which are a concern of ours, families with that low of 
income, Mr. Speaker, the provinces with the highest combined 
taxation levels for families below $25,000, Mr. Speaker, are all 
Liberal provinces.  Mr. Speaker, they're all Liberal provinces.  
And then when you add Quebec into that, that's another Liberal 
province that's taxed higher than Saskatchewan.  For families 
below $25,000, Mr. Speaker, we're the third lowest.  Mr. 
Speaker, the Liberal provinces on the top seven have four, four 
provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Liberal leader said during the North West by-election 
that she was going to adopt the McKenna model.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. McKenna has got the second highest tax rate of 
any province in Canada.  For a family below 25,000 the 
McKenna model has an 11 per cent sales tax, Mr. Speaker.  The 
McKenna model has a combined tax rate of $1,000 more per 
family less than $25,000 than Saskatchewan.  Now if she's 
going to adopt the McKenna model, we know what she would 
do in government if she were here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when you move along the scale up to 
$75,000, yes the Saskatchewan tax rate if much higher; in fact 
we're the fourth highest.  Mr. Speaker, the Liberal provinces 
come down because they're not concerned about taxing high 
income people.  So, Mr. 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Speaker, we don't apologize for taxing high income people at a 
greater rate. 
 
And we'll see what her federal counterparts do in terms of 
taxing high income people and then we'll have a kind of a fair 
test here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to reiterate that the Liberal leader 
needs to do her homework when she starts expressing concern 
about Saskatchewan taxation relative to her own Liberal 
provinces.  Because that's the best indicator as to how she 
would operate if she were in government. 
 
I would like to make a couple of other points, Mr. Speaker, 
with regard to the Liberal leader's speech.  I could go on and on 
because it's so full of rhetoric.  But, Mr. Speaker, she says that . 
. . Well, maybe I'll just add a couple of other things here, a 
couple of other quotes of the Liberal leader's, with regard to 
taxes because I think these are important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same person who wants to . . . who said 
back in 1990 that Saskatchewan should set up its own Senate.  
Well presumably that would cost us some money, Mr. Speaker, 
setting up our own Senate. 
 
This is the same Liberal leader, Mr. Speaker . . . And this is 
why Saskatchewan people have to be very careful and look 
very carefully at what she's saying.  On December 1, 1990 in 
the Leader-Post, she said -- this is in regard to building and 
taxation fairness -- she says, and I quote: I "personally favoured 
extending the goods and services tax to food." 
 
That's in the Leader-Post.  The Liberal leader -- my colleagues 
can't believe this -- she said December 1, 1990 in the 
Leader-Post: I "personally favoured extending the goods and 
services tax to food."  Well, Mr. Speaker, that certainly isn't 
someone who sounded like she was concerned about taxation 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on October 2, 1992, this is what the Liberal leader 
said in the Star-Phoenix, and I quote:  "Health premiums 
based on income would be implemented by the Liberal 
government."  She wants health care premiums now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course we know where they're coming from on 
health care premiums.  Their record is pretty clear in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make another point here with 
regard to the Liberal leader's concern about us raising her 37 
per cent salary increase.  Now, Mr. Speaker, she can squirm all 
she wants, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the matter is, two 
secretaries get reclassified, two women secretaries get 
reclassified, and they get a 4 per cent salary increase.  Any way 
you cut it, Mr. Speaker, whether it's a reclassification or the 
addition of another member, that is a pay increase.  The bottom 
line is she got a pay increase of 37 per cent. 

Mr. Speaker, she can't have her cake and eat it too.  Mr. 
Speaker, she's wanting two sets of rules -- one for her, where 
she gets a 37 per cent increase, and one for a secretary in 
Executive Council, a single parent in one case, who gets a 4 per 
cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is the new politics, we don't want any part 
of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Another point I'd like to raise, Mr. 
Speaker, is that the Liberal leader I presume was responding to 
my comment in question period the other day when she says 
that the reason she didn't meet with me when I extended the 
invitation to her three months ago is because in her experience 
Social Services don't respond to her letters.  Mr. Speaker, I 
would like her to prove that.  I would like her to prove that 
because I don't think that's an accurate reflection of the 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met with her . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the 
member says our department isn't telling the truth.  I take that 
as a deep offence, as a deep offence, Mr. Speaker.  They're not 
here to defend themselves, and I take that as a deep, deep 
offence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I initiated a meeting with the Liberal leader a 
month after I was appointed as Minister of Social Services.  We 
had just finished a cabinet retreat and we agreed to a strategic 
plan for Social Services, Mr. Speaker.  It had gone through the 
department as well. 
 
I sat down with her.  We spent two hours talking.  I didn't want 
to waste my time any more than she did.  If this was a waste of 
time, then she should have told me that.  I left her with a copy 
of that plan.  I invited her feedback, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
I went and invited her critic to sit down with me to be briefed 
and go over our plans, including our proposed Bills.  And Mr. 
Speaker, the next thing I know is they get up and ask me a 
question in question period. 
 
And now she says that she didn't come back to me because in 
her experience providing input and ideas and writing letters to 
Social Services doesn't result in anything.  And I find that 
offensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last thing I'll respond to in the Liberal leader's 
remarks . . . because she clearly didn't read the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think there's a couple of points I need to clarify.  
She says that . . . she quoted the Premier as saying when he was 
in opposition he said he could run the government on $4.5 
billion, and he's not doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proves that she did not read the budget.  
Because, Mr. Speaker, the government is being run right now 
on 4.187 or $4.2 billion.  It is being run on a lot less than 
4.5 -- 842 million of that is interest, Mr. Speaker, from her 
friends over there.  So the Premier is doing better than she 
realizes, Mr. Speaker, and I commend him for that.  I commend 
the government. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, she also quotes the 
Provincial Auditor out of context in many ways.  The 
Provincial Auditor is very satisfied on balance about most of 
the accounting by the provincial government and says in fact 
something to the effect that -- I don't have the direct quote in 
front of me but I did the other day -- that basically we're about 
the most accountable government in Canada at the current time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to job creation, is the Liberal 
leader saying that she does not support the 600 new mining 
jobs held by . . . 47 per cent of those held by northern people in 
the North?  Does she not support the development of those 600 
jobs?  Mr. Speaker, we're still waiting for her ideas -- one idea 
a week.  We're still waiting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she gave us no ideas around job creation today, so 
she doesn't have any solutions.  She even criticized us for being 
one of the first provinces to develop an infrastructure program 
with the federal government.  So we can't win, Mr. Speaker.  
She criticizes us when we don't create jobs and then she 
criticizes us when we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I would suggest to the Liberal leader is that she read the 
Conference Board of Canada's projections for Saskatchewan.  
Don't listen to our ideas. Read the Conference Board of Canada 
in terms of economic development prospects in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker.  They're recommending . . . they're suggesting 
that there will be a significant increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleading with the Liberal leader, who's from 
my home community, to join the chamber of commerce in 
Saskatoon and be optimistic about 1994, Mr. Speaker, to talk to 
home-based business people who are optimistic about 1994.  
Mr. Speaker, rather than being cynical, I suggest that she has a 
responsibility to be optimistic and positive.  She owes that to 
the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I'll move to the main comments in my text, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I would start out by saying, Mr. Speaker, 
that changes are occurring at a very rapid pace.  New realities 
are confronting us on a daily basis; issues are increasingly 
complex.  And, Mr. Speaker, simplistic solutions and quick 
fixes like we heard today are not the way to go, Mr. Speaker.  
The solutions are not easy for any government in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget speech made it clear that this 
government is prepared to continue addressing our major 
challenges, just as we did in the previous budgets.  Facing and 
meeting challenges and creating opportunities together is the 
essence of what we call the Saskatchewan spirit.  This 
government has demonstrated that it is prepared to provide the 
leadership necessary to move Saskatchewan forward.  This is 
being done with vision, plans, and actions which are developed 
in concert with, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province and 
being done in a 

coordinated and integrated fashion. 
 
Some might say that positive change and renewal are 
impossible under our current conditions.  We say that problems 
should be viewed as opportunities from which we 
learn -- growth and progress.  And we are doing this, Mr. 
Speaker, through consultation and partnerships with people and 
with communities.  We are working together, Mr. Speaker, 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The challenges have not been easy.  Some decisions have been 
heart-rending, but we must position ourselves and our children, 
Mr. Speaker, for the new realities of tomorrow.  This has 
required new thinking and new mind sets for all of us because 
tomorrow will be significantly different than today, and we all 
know this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also recognize that change is worrisome; change is 
uncertain.  And we all feel a bit uncertain, which is all the more 
reason why we should work together.  This year has been 
designated as International Year of the Family by the United 
Nations. 
 
Two of the principles underlining this special year are, one, that 
the family constitutes the basic unit of society and thereby 
warrants special attention; and two, that families assume 
diverse forms and functions within each national society and 
these express the diversity of individual preferences and 
societal conditions. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan recognize these principles, Mr. 
Speaker, because our own values are reflected there.  We 
believe that the family is important and that its welfare is 
crucial.  The International Year of the Family provides an 
opportunity for everyone to stop and to think about and to 
appreciate the important role of families and the important role 
of recognizing the various kinds of families in society. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan also recognizes and accepts 
these principles.  It has been working very hard to focus more 
effectively on the needs of families and children.  Working 
effectively means working in cooperation.  We have agreed 
that planning and decisions about the programs and services to 
be provided and the way in which they are offered will involve 
government working in collaboration with our communities. 
 
In the spirit of cooperation, the Government of Saskatchewan 
last summer released a paper called Children First: An 
Invitation to Work Together.  As part of the Saskatchewan 
child action plan, Mr. Speaker, this paper invited communities 
to work with us, to improve the well-being of children and of 
families. 
 
Details of the 1994-95 initiatives were announced this morning 
by the ministers of Health, Education, Justice, and myself, Mr. 
Speaker.  And I thank them and all of the other participating 
departments for their participation in this departmental-wide 
activity, integrated activity on behalf of children and families.  
Mr. Speaker, it is my intention at the end of my 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

remarks to table the document that was released this morning 
outlining all of those initiatives. 
 
(1615) 
 
The initiatives of over 4.4 million under the Saskatchewan 
action plan for children announced in the budget speech is a 
response to what these organizations and communities have 
identified as key priorities -- an increased focus on prevention, 
early intervention, and supports to vulnerable families. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Liberal Party says that 
there's nothing in this budget for Saskatchewan people and 
families, she's criticizing Saskatchewan communities, because 
these ideas came from Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Consistently, people and organizations called for community 
shaped and directed responses supported by government in a 
new role, Mr. Speaker, as facilitator.  They also highly endorse 
the need to work collaboratively, to work together across 
boundaries and across mandates to provide a more holistic 
service.  Through consultations, people have emphasized that 
we must move together to action. 
 
What has already been done under the child action plan, Mr. 
Speaker?  I know this will interest you, Mr. Speaker, because 
you have a 20-year history of being concerned about health and 
well-being of families and communities, having served as 
ministers of Social Services and Health. 
 
Let me outline several actions that have been undertaken both 
provincially and in our communities.  Firstly, people and 
organizations within communities have come together to work 
on integrated actions on behalf of children and families.  
Participating departments have used the policy framework in 
development of new legislation, policy, programs, and services.  
A children and family's agenda is part of each department's 
overall planning.  And, Mr. Speaker, all of the departments 
work jointly on children's initiatives for 1994-95, and I thank 
my minister colleagues, their departments, and my caucus 
colleagues for this. 
 
Let me provide a few examples of initiatives already introduced 
under the action plan.  One, the integrated school-based 
services strategy to better address the unmet needs of children 
in schools across the province.  Mr. Speaker, another report 
initiative: working with first nations people to develop and 
delivery their own services.  Agreements have already been 
signed by the province with three Indian and child family 
service agencies, and groundwork is being done with the Metis 
Society of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud of the fact that it was the Metis 
Society of Saskatchewan who I met as my first official duty as 
Minister of Social Services.  I am honoured, Mr. Speaker, that 
Mr. Morin, their president, indicated at a meeting last week that 
the openness and cooperation extended by Social 

Services that is a credit to myself as minister and to all of our 
staff, which is quite in contrast to the picture painted today by 
the Liberal leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, among the most exciting things that the 
Department of Social Services and the Government of 
Saskatchewan is doing, in my personal view today, under the 
action plan, is pursuing these agreements for Indian and Metis 
people to take over their own child welfare services.  These are 
historical events and this action is long overdue.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, we're proceeding as we should, and I commend the 
first nations people and the Metis Society members for their 
cooperation and leadership in this new partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further important initiative under the action 
plan, child action plan, is the La Loche and Prince Albert 
preschool pilot projects, Mr. Speaker, to support children and 
families in a preventive way. 
 
Another action, the provincial parenting initiatives supporting 
parenting education opportunities -- a big need in 
Saskatchewan today.  Support to the West Flats community in 
Prince Albert in developing a range of community-based 
programs and services for their children and families.  I have 
met with this group, Mr. Speaker, and this is a community 
development model for the rest of us to pattern. 
 
And there are some other good examples, Mr. Speaker.  The 
Saskatoon Riversdale community association is working very 
closely with P.A.(Prince Albert), and the La Loche community 
is working on a community development strategy.  And I was 
very impressed with the strength, commitment, and the 
dedication of the people of La Loche during my visit there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another initiative, the child care review where we 
consulted with stakeholders on legislation and program 
directions in the future of child care in Saskatchewan.  Mr. 
Speaker, challenges lie ahead in child care for all of us -- for 
single parent families, for rural farm families, for aboriginal 
people, and low income people generally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we're counting on the federal government to 
support us here in a national child care strategy. 
 
Another initiative, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's children's 
service integrated project to coordinate and provide services to 
high-risk children age 6 to 12.  The family connections 
program to link permanent wards of the Minister of Social 
Services with a lifetime family through adoption or return to 
the family of origin. 
 
Another initiative, the youth at risk strategy, developing sports, 
culture and recreational opportunities for youth at risk.  Review 
of the support by the legal system to families experiencing 
family breakdown.  Promotion of child safety on the farm, a 
very critical concern to rural Saskatchewan, one which is being 
acted upon by the government and rural communities. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

Mr. Speaker, two additional areas of program development: a 
parent awareness program focused on the behaviours of 
children using alcohol and drugs, and development of a new 
risk assessment and case management model for working with 
at-risk families. 
 
While we're developing well-defined protocols at the 
community level, enhancing staff training and assigning 
casework responsibility and accountability to make sure that 
we provide the best possible support to families who require it. 
 
Respite continues to be a high priority for families who have 
children with severe behavioural difficulties or who are 
medically fragile.  Enhanced respite pilot projects have been 
successful in both Saskatoon and Yorkton.  The government is 
working with community-based service providers to further 
enhance respite capacity in a number of areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These and many other initiatives under the action plan for 
children.  All the plans are being led by a particular department, 
are the joint initiative of several departments, or involving 
partnership between government as a whole and community or 
provincial organizations.  A full report, Mr. Speaker, of the 
consultations, strategies, and actions under the action plan will 
be made available this summer. 
 
I want to mention at this point that the government continues to 
work with the early childhood intervention program 
Saskatchewan incorporated, the provincial early childhood 
intervention program's council to develop and support 
home-based interventions to lessen the impact of disability on 
young children and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 25 spaces are being added to the early childhood 
intervention program . . . were added in 1993-94, and the 
government is going to continue with this work to add 
additional spaces in 1994-95 and eliminate the existing 
waiting-lists. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I'll briefly touch on the new initiatives in 
this budget with regard to the action plan for children.  The 
government is committed to the prevention of problems, Mr. 
Speaker.  The $2.08 million allocation in the 1994-95 budget 
will improve prevention and early intervention services that 
stop problems from developing in the first place.  Informing 
and educating to prevent problems from occurring, rather than 
treating them after the fact, is consistent with the goals of 
health reform. 
 
With our country's current economic situation and our complex 
social issues, we also have to recognize that many 
Saskatchewan families are facing serious difficulties and 
challenges.  We want to ensure that vulnerable families have 
access to the services they need to restore them to health and 
social well-being; $2.35 million is allocated under the action 
plan for supports to vulnerable families, Mr. Speaker.  So 2.08 
million for prevention and another 2.35 million for 

actual family supports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The departments of Health, Education, Training and 
Employment, and Social Services are setting aside $1.65 
million this year for community-based prevention.  Numerous 
community groups have put forth ideas on prevention projects 
and integrated activities.  Supports for vulnerable youth, 
promotion of healthy lifestyles, early childhood programing for 
vulnerable children, strengthening of children's problem 
solving and coping skills, and improved quality and availability 
of parent education opportunities are the types of programs that 
may be developed.  Three hundred thousand dollars will be 
used in support of school-linked service strategy announced 
last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The preschool projects in La Loche and Prince Albert, as I 
indicated, starting in 1993, are excellent examples of 
community-based preventive programs and integrated services 
where those communities identified those as their priority 
choices.  These two preschool projects will receive $98,000 
each for the year 1994-95. 
 
Three hundred and fifty thousand dollars is allotted to another 
preventive measure -- the establishment of the Children's 
Advocate, as we indicated today, Mr. Speaker.  The Children's 
Advocate will be associated with the Office of the 
Ombudsman, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I might just clarify the concern that the Liberal leader had 
with regard to the Ombudsman.  The difference between our 
model and other models is that the model in Saskatchewan will 
make sure that the child advocate is accountable to the 
legislature as a whole, not to the Minister of Social Services.  
That is the big difference.  So that member will have the 
opportunity to give some advice on the process and the 
individual selected. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I'm saying is that, give us some credit.  
We took into account what the other models were doing and 
analysed their experiences and took their advice on how to 
establish our model in a way that ensures that the 
accountability is to here.  We did that very deliberately.  We 
gave that independence very deliberately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The child advocate will engage in public education on the 
needs of children, youth, and their families; will be available to 
individuals, children, and youth in crisis; and will work with 
government systems to ensure their services meet the needs of 
children and youth.  Mr. Speaker, this will be a proactive 
office, a proactive role.  And, Mr. Speaker, we are very pleased 
with this initiative. 
 
And $81,500 is being set aside by the Department of Justice for 
yet another preventive initiative -- school liaison and outreach.  
Plans to prevent crime and victimization by building children's 
understanding and trust in the justice system will be 
implemented, including the pilot placement of school liaison 
officers.  And in cooperation with local communities, crime 
prevention and court orientation and support 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

programs for children, especially in rural areas on reserves, will 
be implemented. 
 
I've talked about the preventative initiatives, Mr. Speaker, the 
early intervention initiatives; what about the supports, the 
actual supports for vulnerable families in the budget?  Well 
$225,750 is being set aside by the Department of Social 
Services for child care and child crisis services.  Funds will be 
targeted to northern Saskatchewan, an area of the province with 
the highest rate of teen pregnancies.  Programs provide child 
care for children of teen parents attending high school and child 
care services for families experiencing temporary crises. 
 
Evidence demonstrates that young parents with access to infant 
care remain in school longer, thereby increasing their 
opportunities for financial independence. 
 
Funds will also be provided for child crisis services for families 
experiencing a temporary crisis.  This is prevention, Mr. 
Speaker; this is early intervention -- preventing problems 
before they become problems. 
 
Resources will be used to facilitate an aboriginal child care 
support network.  This will enhance delivery of aboriginal care 
services, and allow child care providers to participate in forums 
and workshops, sharing information and gaining peer support.  
As a result, aboriginal child care providers will have greater 
access to culturally appropriate programs and services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $599,000 is to be allocated by the Departments of 
Justice and Social Services, as well as the Legal Aid 
Commission for the Unified Family Court.  The approach and 
services of the Unified Family Court are being expanded across 
the province to ensure that the justice system deals with family 
breakdown and other family law issues involving children in a 
supportive and less adversarial manner. 
 
(1630) 
 
Having spent 15 years as a practising social worker in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this initiative alone will 
save families as the focus shifts to reconciliation and mediation 
rather than advocacy which pulls and tears families apart. 
 
In a complimentary fashion, legal aid resources are being 
enhanced to ensure the most vulnerable families have access to 
legal representation when family issues are dealt with in the 
court.  This is an important family law initiative. Mr. Speaker, 
$750,000 is being set aside by the Department of Social 
Services for family violence initiatives. 
 
Funding is allocated for 1994-95 for community-based 
outreach services, support to existing services and services to 
aboriginal families.  The government is working with 
communities on initiatives that will begin to provide services to 
victims of family violence in their communities. 

As only one example, Mr. Speaker, the government is working 
with the Weyburn-Estevan committee against family violence 
on the creation of services for that area. 
 
Funds will also be allotted for aboriginal services in northern 
Saskatchewan.  Both of these areas were previously 
underserviced for victims of family violence and sexual assault, 
as were some other areas of the province.  And their needs are 
being met as well, Mr. Speaker, to a significant extent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say to the residents of Saskatchewan that the 
government has met most of the family violence requests it had 
received from across the province.  This is an achievement; I 
know it will be recognized by families across Saskatchewan.  
Discussions about other projects supporting community 
priorities are under way and will be announced as they are 
finalized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because communities are defining their needs, 
developing their solutions, and determining their priorities in a 
community development manner, all of the decisions with 
regard to how the $750,000 will be spent have not yet been 
formalized.  The communities will make those decisions and 
choices. 
 
Seven hundred and seventy-seven thousand dollars and five . . . 
pardon me, $777,500 is being allocated by the Department of 
Justice for assistance to child victims and witnesses, another 
initiative under the child action plan. 
 
Several initiatives directed specifically to children are being 
pursued as a part of the range of services for victims of crime.  
Projects to coordinate effective early intervention and 
investigation in child abuse cases and to establish child friendly 
facilities to assist in integrating services provided during their 
investigation, prosecution, and treatment related to child abuse 
are being developed, Mr. Speaker.  This is a very significant 
development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Support for child victims during their involvement with the 
criminal justice process will be continued through expansion of 
crisis intervention services, court-based victim and witness 
service coordinators, and special victim and witness 
waiting-rooms.  These also are new initiatives, Mr. Speaker.  
The Government of Saskatchewan has announced new 
initiatives and continues to improve existing programs and 
services for vulnerable children and their families across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The focus of our action is to resolve existing problems and 
prevent new ones, as I've said earlier.  We want to improve 
access to help.  Mr. Speaker, communities tell me -- the 130 or 
so people I met with across the province during the pre-budget 
consultations -- tell me that this government is on the right 
track.  We are building with communities for the long term.  
There are no quick fixes, as the Liberal leader was suggesting.  
There are no magic solutions.  We had megaprojects and other . 
. . all kinds of other Liberal-Tory type solutions in the 1980s.  
They don't 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I mentioned at the outset, the importance of the 
International Year of the Family is important to this 
government.  The General Assembly of the United Nations has 
proclaimed 1994 as International Year of the Family.  The 
theme -- family resources and responsibilities in a changing 
world -- provides an opportunity to raise awareness on the 
importance of families and how they contribute to the 
well-being of our province. 
 
In addition to the initiatives announced out of the action plan, 
Mr. Speaker, several specific and important initiatives are 
planned in association with this year.  An information kit about 
the International Year of the Family has been distributed to 
assist the public in promoting awareness of the importance of 
families and strong communities.  And we've had very good 
feedback, Mr. Speaker, on this kit. 
 
A work and family conference is being sponsored in March by 
the Women's Secretariat, Saskatchewan Social Services, 
business, labour organizations, and community groups.  This 
will be held in Saskatoon and we look forward to it. 
 
International Year of the Family will be highlighted during 
Education Week, March 7 to 13, 1994.  Proposed legislation 
regarding the victims of domestic violence Act will supplement 
laws that respond to domestic violence.  The new Act focuses 
on meeting the needs of victims at a time of crisis and 
providing additional remedies for matters such as compensation 
for monetary loss, property issues, and restraining orders. 
 
Proposed legislation regarding The Labour Standards Act will 
be particularly beneficial to low income earners.  Labour 
reforms will benefit families by providing parents with 
alternatives to balance work and family responsibilities while 
contributing to the productive, stable workforce. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I might add that the Liberal leader 
could join the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour who says . . . or their release says: 
 

 The province's largest labour organization is encouraged by 
the emphasis on job creation in the Budget Speech. 

 
That's put out by Ms. Barb Byers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, everybody doesn't share the cynical view of 
the Liberal leader.  The chambers of commerce don't, the 
business people don't, and labour doesn't -- working men and 
women. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to promote, as I said, the labour 
reforms to ensure that parents have a balance to work and 
family responsibilities while contributing to a productive and 
stable workplace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government funds shelters for abused women and 

crisis counselling services in locations across the province.  As 
already mentioned, services to victims of violence will be 
enhanced under the family violence initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add that I'll be meeting in a few minutes 
with some of the Transition House people.  In fact we were 
supposed to meet earlier, and I thank them for their patience.  
But we will meet as soon as I finish speaking as we continue to 
have dialogue with those around the province who are involved 
in trying to deal with family violence. 
 
The government will continue to fund community groups and 
Social Service's safety net programs that provide child feeding 
programs.  One million dollars was allocated for this in 
1994-95, Mr. Speaker, so to say nothing is being done isn't 
quite fair, Mr. Speaker, by the Liberal opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government inherited a big problem here in 
terms of the massive food bank line-ups.  We're making a dent 
on that. The economic signs are positive that the situation is 
beginning to be turned around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the steps that I've outlined today -- thank you for 
your patience; I know it's been a long speech -- but the steps 
I've outlined today are of interest to communities in 
Saskatchewan; they're of interest to families and children. 
 
These steps are very significant, Mr. Speaker.  We're meeting 
our promise of deficit reduction without sacrificing children 
and families.  We believe that supporting children, families, 
and communities today will lead to a strong, healthy, and stable 
future for Saskatchewan.  And because of this, I again thank 
my colleagues and the Saskatchewan communities for doing 
such a fine job in the toughest of circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, we are still innovative 
pioneers.  Like Tommy Douglas was in the earlier years, we're 
doing the same thing in 1994 -- not only Tommy, but 
generations like him.  Mr. Speaker, they had challenges; they 
met them with courage, energy, and sensitivity.  And Mr. 
Speaker, this is what we're attempting to do.  And we're doing 
it with the cooperation, the input and the participation, and I 
would say support of the Saskatchewan public, and I would 
encourage the opposition to join in that positive process. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's indeed 
a pleasure and an honour to be able to stand in this Assembly 
today to make a few comments and to speak to the budget 
address as it's been presented by the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a quick review of the budgetary address 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

that was presented the other day by the Minister of Finance, 
one would have to say that the Minister of Finance probably 
deserves an A plus, and I say that very carefully, and 
suggesting that the reason I would give it an A plus is because 
it was a very politically astute and skilfully crafted budget. 
 
And I think we just need to take a look at some of the 
comments in the local media and how the media have almost 
fallen over each other to give the minister accolades for the 
presentation that was made. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, as I get into my speech I want to 
bring out some of the facts that the minister forgot to cover.  
And when I suggest the minister deserves an A plus, and the 
government, for their budgetary presentation, certainly the fact 
that they were able to cover up the real increases and the real 
impact on Saskatchewan people . . . and basically as one 
reporter has said, if this is good news, I'll take the bad, it 
certainly indicates to us that there are some people out there 
who are willing to take a look at the budget and look at what 
wasn't said. 
 
And even though I would give it an A plus for presentation, I 
would suggest it's probably below a five in the scale of one to 
ten as to the impact it's going to have on Saskatchewan people.  
In fact I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this budget on the 
other hand was a very devious, deceitful document. 
 
It reminds me of an iceberg just floating in the ocean.  And we 
all know of icebergs and the fact that 10 per cent of that ice s 
sitting out and is visible, and 90 per cent really is below.  An  
the member from Swift Current is suggesting that I suggested 
the last year's budget was an iceberg.  Well the fact is that this 
budget this year is just act two of last year's budget, so it reall  
hasn't changed.  And, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me the 
member from Swift Current would probably do well to really 
be a little more up front and honest with the people of his 
constituency and with the people of Saskatchewan. 

i 
d Basically what we have here is a budget that continues to beat 

up on the province.  It really is just an extension -- part two, 
if you will -- of last year's bad-news budget. 

y 

 
Because first of all, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at the budg t 
here.  What's the government trying to cover up?  What are 
they trying to hide?  They're suggesting that they're going to 
balance the books.  What books specifically are they 
balancing?  What deficit are they bringing under control, Mr. 
Speaker?  And that's the thing that people don't understand. 

e MacKinnon tells us there are no tax increases in the budget, 
"not even any tax-base broadening."  (Then he says) We 
should be thankful that the 10-per-cent deficit surtax on 
income this government introduced two years ago has not 
been increased.  We're expected to feel relieved that the 
nine-per-cent provincial sales tax, which the Romanow 
government hiked by 20 per cent over its last two budgets, 
was not hiked again. 

 
The Minister of Finance can glibly stand in her position and 
suggest she's finally got the deficit under control, when all she s 
doing is jigging the books, as the auditor has pointed out to u  
talked about transfers.  All she is doing is yes, she's balancing 
the Consolidated Fund but she hasn't touched the overall deficit 
that the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan still have to work with. 

' 
s, Then there is the "good news" for third parties that receive 

much of their funding from the province.  The various 
municipal councils, school boards, universities and hospitals 
should get in line to take their beating, and then show their 
appreciation because they were told it was coming. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that's one of the biggest problems we've 
faced in this province for years.  And that's why I called it a 
politically correct document, the fact that politics have come to 
play again and in the way the Minister of Finance has brought 
forward her budget. 

Let's look back to the 1982 budget brought forward by the then 
Blakeney government prior to their going to the polls.  They 
suggested at that time that there was a $139 million surplus, 
that the government was operating with a surplus.  The 
unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, that that was just one arm of 
government; the Consolidated Fund had a surplus.  But take a 
look at the Crowns.  Where were the Crowns? 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, the government of the day neglected to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan that they had a $5 billion 
overrun and underfunded pension liabilities. 
 
And just two years ago, the auditor brought that out again when 
he suggested that there's one thing, not only did the government 
forget to tell us where the total debt was in relating where the 
Crowns are, in relationship to the Consolidated Fund and the 
overall expenditures, but the government very craftily forgot to 
bring about the information showing the fact that there was $3 
billion of underfunded pension liabilities that the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are responsible for. 
 
(1645) 
 
One columnist I would just like to read a few quotes from, Mr. 
Speaker, it's Leader-Post article, February 18, 1994: 
 

 It is a testament to how far this government has lowered our 
expectations that Janice MacKinnon can call this a 
"good-news" budget and get away with it. 

And that's why I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, we can continue 
to refer to this iceberg budget, sequel no. 2. 
 
The writer goes on and says: 
 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if indeed the taxpayers of this province 
have something to really be happy about, I guess they can be 
happy in the fact that the Minister of Finance was able to stand 
in her place in this Assembly and very forcefully, and the 
member responsible for Gaming eloquently would suggest that 
she could say, no new taxes. 
 
But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if she was able to say 
it with a feeling of . . . or able to say it very freely in suggesting 
that there were no new taxes when in the back of her mind she 
knew that she'd already expanded the taxes into 1994 in the 
1993 budget. 
 
Going back to the article, it says: 
 

 As Janice MacKinnon says, "we have broken the back of the 
deficit". 

 
 Some would argue that's not all this government has broken. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I over the next few days are 
going to bring out some of the ideas and some of the facts of 
where we see the people of Saskatchewan have been led down 
the garden path.  And I noticed how some of the members on 
the opposite benches seem to be turning their back at the 
present time and suggesting, no, I shouldn't be relating this 
information.  But I think it's important that we bring forward 
that information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I go back to the spring of 1991 when my 
colleague, the member from Weyburn, the then Finance 
minister, the hon. Lorne Hepworth, brought his budget in, his 
budget at that time suggested that if passed and all projections 
were reached, there would be a $265 million deficit in the 
Consolidated Fund in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when you look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, if you took out 
all the jiggery-pokery that has taken place over the last two 
years, the government of today could indeed have met the $265 
million deficit in 1991 and in fact today we could be operating 
with a surplus in the Consolidated Fund, working at getting the 
total deficit of the province under control. 
 
But what did we see?  Mr. Speaker, we were looking at the 
books for Crown Investments Corporation, and that's why I 
suggest and my colleagues have suggested that some of the 
reforms of this House should have the chairman of  Crown 
Corporations should come from the opposition benches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is when we looked at the books, and the 
deputy minister of Finance was in Crown Corporations at the 
time, we looked back.  And I believe it was another editorial 
who brought out the fact that in 1991 after the October election, 
because Mr. Hepworth's budget wasn't allowed to pass. 
 
And I remember the debate at the time, back and forth, and 
how the members presently in government -- as 
opposition -- said, we will make this province ungovernable; 
we will not allow you to pass that 

budget.  And I wonder why. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, they knew in the reality that, as the 
Finance officials of the day had indicated, that the budget was 
coming closer than it had ever been to becoming a document of 
putting the numbers out so Saskatchewan people knew exactly 
where they were.  And yes, Mr. Speaker, that budget didn't 
pass. 
 
So what happens?  By the time we reach the spring of 1992, 
Mr. Speaker, we look.  And unfortunately it's a year and a half 
later when we finally got into the Crown Investments 
Corporation and looked at their documents.  And lo and behold, 
instead of a $250 million dividend from the Crowns to the 
Consolidated Fund in the budget of 1991-92, there is actually 
no dividend, but there is also a transfer of 500-and-some 
million dollars in debt write-off to the Consolidated Fund. 
 
And if you put that together with the $265 million deficit that 
Minister Hepworth was projecting, add on the $250 million 
dividend that wasn't transferred, the 500-and-some million that 
was transferred out of the Crowns -- all of a sudden, Mr. 
Speaker, what do we have?  As the Minister of Finance . . . and 
even at that time the government of the day had a hard time 
deciding where to put their budget, where to put their deficit, 
because it seemed to vary from one minister to the next.  
Minister of Finance appointed 1991 -- and unfortunately I can't 
think of the member's riding; Regina north-east I believe is 
what it is -- had indicated that the deficit now ballooned from 
500 to 800 million. 
 
And then the Premier was around.  He suggests that no, it's 
going to be a little higher than that.  And then at the end of the 
day what did we see?  A deficit of almost $1.2 billion that the 
government seemed to accumulate from the time they were 
elected in October of 1991 till March of 1992, which was the 
end of the fiscal year of the day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we listened to the budget presentation the 
other day, one has to wonder, when are politicians in general 
going to quit trying to manipulate the figures and become 
totally honest and open with the people that they serve? 
 
As I suggested earlier, the Minister of Finance, the present 
government, the Premier of this province could have accepted 
and gone with the numbers as they were presented in 1991, the 
spring of 1991.  Unfortunately the government was so intent 
that it was going to destroy and rub as much salt into the 
wounds of the Conservative Party as they could, that they 
weren't willing to read the numbers.  They weren't willing to 
accept -- I would even suggest -- the suggestions of the 
Department of Finance that these are true figures, these are 
honest figures; bring them forward, you can balance your 
budget, and you'll get the credit by 1994. 
 
Instead the then members -- the Premier, and his Finance 
minister, and the government -- decided to inflate the deficit.  
Inflate the deficit and now they . . . 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

what have they done?  Going back to the CIC reports, that same 
document indicated -- that same annual report indicated -- that 
in 1992, all of a sudden, the '92-93 budget year, the government 
transferred $179 million in dividends from the Crowns to the 
Consolidated Fund and only moved $45 million across in debt 
from the Crown Investments Corporation, for a turnaround of 
$139 million, plus the fact they'd already written off $500 
million. 
 
All of a sudden, Mr. Speaker . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I don't 
stand here as an accountant who really understands the 
accounting procedures totally in this province or who has a real 
understanding of all accounting.  But I stand here, Mr. Speaker, 
as an individual who's sat down with the auditor trying to get a 
better understanding of how we work the books in the province 
of Saskatchewan, how the books are made available and open 
to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that's why I would suggest, after having looked at what 
transpired in 1991-92, what took place in '92-93, and where we 
are today, for the sake of the electorate out there, it's time we as 
politicians got our heads together and came up with a policy 
that laid out the total debt and the spending of government from 
the Consolidated Fund, from the pension funds to the Crowns 
so that the people of Saskatchewan knew exactly where we 
were. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, the deficit is not as the government 
would like to claim, 14 or $15 billion.  The total debt owed by 
the people of Saskatchewan today and in the auditor's statement 
'91-92 is some $20 billion -- $20 billion that we as taxpayers 
must pay for.  Now whether we transfer it from the Crowns to 
the Consolidated or from the Consolidated Fund to the Crowns, 
it doesn't make any difference.  We as taxpayers are held 
accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me . . . That's why I find it 
interesting that the media would find it very easy to jump on 
the bandwagon and give the Minister of Finance a number of 
accolades before they have even taken the time to really get 
into the in-depth review of the budgetary process and spending 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Though I suppose maybe 
the media suggests that if the budget . . . if the Consolidated 
Fund is balanced at the expense of the Crowns, the Crowns 
should be able to carry themselves; therefore the debt sits with 
the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what's been happening over the past few years?  
What did we see even just this past winter?  What's coming up 
tomorrow?  The fact that the government is calling for another 
major dividend to be paid out of the Crowns to the 
Consolidated Fund in the 1993-94 budget, Mr. Speaker, 
indicates to me that you and I as taxpayers may not be paying 
directly but indirectly. 
 
We're going to see further increases in our telephone rates, in 
our power rates, in our energy rates, in our SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) rates.  In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't take you long when you start 
looking at all the bills that are coming due . . . even your car 
insurance, where is it sitting today to where it was two or three 
years ago?  Or to even just get your licence, what does it cost 
you today compared to what it was two years ago?  And Lord 
knows what it's going to be tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at that, yes, the Crowns can 
run on their own if the government's going to use them as a tool 
to generate revenue and then transfer it to the Consolidated 
Fund.  Is that fair?  Is that right?  Is that being truthful?  Is the 
government really being honest?  School boards, health care 
givers, municipal governments all across this province are 
facing the effects of what has taken place in the past few years 
and what has taken place even in this budget that was 
presented. 
 
I look at another article that was written and most of the media 
seem to pick up on this where they mention the fact: I think we 
can say very honestly is that the back has been broken of the 
financial problem, MacKinnon said, noting that the government 
remains on track for a balanced budget by 1996-97.  But that 
doesn't mean people won't feel a tax bite this year, thanks to 
more than 198 million in spending cuts last year that take effect 
in '94-95.  They include major cuts to third-party grants, rising 
from 2.8 per cent for hospitals up to 8.8 per cent for 
municipalities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the interesting part is, part of the balance, 
the budget approach that the government are looking at, they're 
praying -- and I'm not sure, maybe they all should be getting on 
their knees -- they're praying that Mr. Martin doesn't indeed cut 
more transfers, more of his federal transfers.  Because if there 
are cuts in federal transfers, which the government continues to 
suggest the federal government has no responsibility in doing, 
in cutting transfer payments, if there are cuts it's going to affect 
their budget. 
 
And might I suggest that if Mr. Martin should happen to cut his 
transfers that this government won't be far behind in cutting 
more transfers and passing it on to the people of 
Saskatchewan -- indirectly through taxation, through power 
rate increases, through telephone rate increases, everything that 
you and I touch and work with on a daily basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just talk to school boards.  Take a moment, 
talk to the . . . even teachers out there are becoming worried 
because their jobs are on the . . . jobs are affected, Mr. Speaker.  
The availability of teaching positions is being affected. 
 
And where are they being affected the most, Mr. Speaker?  
They're being affected in areas like the constituency I represent, 
the constituency of Moosomin.  The Moosomin school district, 
the Broadview school district, the Arcola school district, Mr. 
Speaker, are all facing the challenge of trying to balance their 
budgets, trying to spend their money efficiently and effectively 
to provide the best possible education to the youngsters in the 
area without going to the taxpayers again and asking them for a 
greater 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

increase, or going to the municipalities and asking them for an 
increase in taxes on their land base. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the sorest spots that you're 
going to find rural residents facing, is the fact that every time 
they turn around and they go down to pay their taxes that the 
greatest tax bite when they write out their cheque per quarter 
goes to the educational field, and then to health.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, for many people, for many people that means they're 
spending for something they have no control over and that they 
don't even have any involvement in.  Mr. Speaker, what I find 
most people complaining about is the fact that the feeling is 
that when the taxes are based strictly on property, that only 
certain people end up carrying the load. 
 
The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


