




















































Hansard: May 27, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2651 

 May 27, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petition has been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of residents of the village of Ebenezer praying that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to investigate the construction of 

chemical storage facilities within the village. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the House, a group of people who have joined the 

proceedings of today's legislature. 

 

I'd like to introduce Chief Roland Crowe, the chief of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  With him is Chief 

Barry Ahenakew, Chief Louis Taypotat, Chief Henry 

Neapetung, Chief Wayne Standinghorn, Chuck Thomas, 

Hubert Sand, Lyle Acoose, and Elaine Flamont.  And I would 

ask all of our guests to rise and be recognized in the legislature, 

and welcome you all. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my very great pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

legislature, the person whom I expect this Assembly will be 

appointing as the Ombudsman of Saskatchewan later this day, 

Ms. Barbara Tomkins. 

 

I would like to also introduce her family who are all here and 

who play a very important part in her life -- her husband Kirk, 

Kirk Rondeau; her children, Meaghan, Andrew, and Anna; her 

parents, Robert and Gerry Tomkins of Regina; and her 

parents-in-law, Malcolm and Lucille Rondeau. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of the Assembly to 

sincerely welcome Barbara here today, as well as her family. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the official opposition, we too would like to extend a warm 

welcome to Barbara and her family today, joining us in the 

Assembly.  And we look forward to working with her in her 

new role, as it would appear she will be appointed the 

Ombudsman of the province of Saskatchewan.  We appreciate 

that and we welcome them. 

 

And also on behalf of the official opposition, I extend our 

welcome to the Indian leaders across our province who have 

joined us this morning.  Thank you. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well it's a privilege 

to welcome some guests to the Assembly from the north-west.  

I'd like to introduce to you and through you the chief from 

Sweetgrass Reserve, Chief Wayne Standinghorn, who is here 

today, and say welcome. 

 

And also I have the privilege of having 22 students and some 

chaperons and the teacher from Lashburn School.  We have in 

your gallery, Val Thackeray, who does this on an annual event.  

She tries to get some students down to Regina, which I think is 

just great.  And I will be meeting with them and answering 

questions.  And we have chaperons too: Kay, Wayne, Linda, 

Marilyn, and Karen. 

 

So I'd like all the members of the Assembly to join in 

welcoming the chief and the students and the teachers and 

chaperons. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is our 

pleasure today to welcome a significant number of visitors 

from out of province from our sister province to the east, 

Manitoba. 

 

Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, on the east side, are 33 

grade 7 students from Douglas School in Douglas, Manitoba.  

They're accompanied today by their teacher, Ms. McInnes, and 

five chaperons.  They will be experiencing a tour of the 

Legislative Assembly from 10:30 until 11 later this morning. 

 

We want to extend them a very warm Saskatchewan welcome, 

Mr. Speaker, and also I ask members to join in, in wishing 

them safe travels and an enjoyable summer.  Welcome to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to, along with 

the member from Prince Albert, welcome our special guests 

today.  And, Mr. Speaker, I'll do it, with due respect to all 

languages, Indian languages, you know, in this nation. 

 

Mistuhi tugageneetagun ootu e pe n'dootumagehek.  Oomu 

wunusowehin ka wee peetiguchigatek tu weechihigo 

keechanisineenuw.  Pogeespeehk Ogimahin usichi Ogimagan 

ka weetutoskemitot . . . ewugo kistenimitowin.  Tuwaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in translation: it is indeed a tremendous pleasure 

to have the chiefs and their representatives welcomed here, and 

to come and listen to the Legislative Assembly.  In the time that 

legislations are introduced in this House to help people, it is 

extremely important.  Whatever government works with Indian 

people and they work together, it is a sign, an historical sign, of 

respect. 



2652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

And I welcome them again in this House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Association on Human Rights 25th 

Anniversary 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, this weekend in Saskatoon the 

Saskatchewan Association on Human Rights and the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour are co-sponsoring a 

conference on erasing racism. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association on Human Rights was founded 

to promote and expand the principles in the United Nations' 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  That declaration was 

created to ensure that dignity, justice, and equality are available 

for all.  Over their brief history, this group of dedicated 

volunteers have worked and lobbied for aboriginal and Metis 

rights, for pay equity, and for a charter of rights.  In general, its 

mandate is to promote and preserve the rights and dignity of 

each individual in society. 

 

As we congratulate this organization for its quarter-century of 

necessary work, we should as well ask ourselves why during 

the last years of this century a group such as this is necessary.  

The denial of human rights is quite simply a vestige of 

narrow-minded tribalism with no place in our world.  We no 

longer have time for verbal or physical attacks on individuals 

because of their race, creed, colour, or -- yes -- their sexual 

preference.  There are more pressing problems to resolve in this 

world. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TWC Financial Corporation 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take 

this time to inform the House about TWC Financial 

Corporation and its exceptional success in Saskatchewan and 

western Canada.  TWC Financial Corporation was incorporated 

as a mutual fund dealer in 1986. 

 

The head office of this corporation is in the town of Radville, 

Saskatchewan which is within my constituency.  Today TWC 

can proudly boast itself as Saskatchewan's largest independent 

mutual fund dealer.  In addition to its success in Saskatchewan, 

this corporation since 1990 has also been registered in Alberta, 

Manitoba and British Columbia. 

 

The success of TWC Financial Corporation has brought great 

economic and employment opportunities into Saskatchewan.  

In Radville alone, TWC has hired 31 head office employees.  

The business processed at TWC Financial Corporation has 

doubled every year since 1989.  In order to facilitate this 

growth and the expected growth of the future, a new building 

was built in 1992. 

Furthermore an addition to this will be added later this year 

because of even more growth.  Presently over 190 independent 

representatives are licensed within TWC Corporation at this 

time, with 100 in Saskatchewan; 33 in Alberta; 25 in Manitoba; 

and 34 in British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Saskatchewan success story and I would 

like the House to join with me in congratulating TWC 

Financial Corporation on their success and to wish them just as 

much success in the future.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Nipawin Licensed Practical Nurses Chapter Award 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to take this time to announce to the House that the 

Nipawin and district chapter of the Saskatchewan Association 

of Licenced Practical Nurses has been chosen for the chapter 

award for 1994. 

 

This award is presented annually on the premiss of chapter 

activities and community involvement.  The Nipawin and 

district chapter have been involved in numerous activities over 

the years.  Over the last year particularly many chapter 

members have been involved with a program for LPNs 

involved with administration of medicine. 

 

They've also completed a number of specially designed clinics 

on foot care.  These clinics were such a success that the chapter 

set up a booth in the health fair last year.  But Nipawin and 

district chapter is currently raising funds for various other 

educational workshops for the members. 

 

A licensed practical nurse or an LPN works under the direction 

of a medical doctor or a registered nurse or a psychiatric nurse.  

There is a required one-year training program which must be 

completed, the most of which is hands-on nursing care. 

 

I know most of the nurses in Nipawin, and I'm not surprised 

that they were selected to receive the 1994 award, Mr. Speaker.  

And I would like to once again publicly congratulate them and 

commend them on winning this award. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tower at Prince Albert Penitentiary 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, Italy has its leaning tower of 

Pisa which tourists have visited for centuries.  The tower was 

also supposedly the site of some of Galileo's famous 

experiments having to do with gravity and with motion. 

 

And not to be outdone, and only a few hundred years later, the 

city of Prince Albert now offers to the tourists its own tower 

with its own distinct history and with its own scientific 

possibilities.  The north tower at the Saskatchewan penitentiary 

was built in the mid-1920s 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

and was an important part of the penitentiary security until 

1962. 

 

During that time there was only one recorded incident of a 

guard firing a warning shot toward a suspected escapee.  Now 

the tower, with its winding staircase leading to the guards' 

walk-around, has been restored as a tourist attraction.  As well 

on the bottom there's a collection of prison artefacts.  After all, 

the prison has always been one of Prince Albert's tourist 

attractions, consistently attracting visitors from all parts of 

Canada. 

 

As for the science, I invite the Tory Party to imitate Galileo by 

taking to the top of the tower the large leadership candidate 

from Rosthern and small one from Kindersley.  And then the 

two should leap without bungees at the same time to see if they 

can both hit the ground running simultaneously -- in the 

interests of science, of course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

District Health Board Elections 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this morning are for the Minister of Health or her 

designate.  Madam Minister, another group has added its voice 

to those calling for district health board elections this fall.  This 

time it is a group who would normally be expected to be 

supporting your party. 

 

Madam Minister, we received a letter from CUPE (Canadian 

Union of Public Employees) local 176 which represents the 

employees of the Regina General Hospital.  They say, and I 

quote: 

 

 We believe it of the utmost importance that these elections be 

held as soon as possible (the health board elections, Madam 

Minister). We strongly urge the Government of 

Saskatchewan to hold health board elections this fall in 

conjunction with the civic and school board elections. 

 

Madam Minister, local residents want the elections this fall.  

Municipalities want the elections this fall.  And now we see 

hospital employees want the elections this fall.  Madam 

Minister, will you commit to holding health board elections this 

fall, as all of the people of Saskatchewan are requesting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, the member opposite knows full well that all of the 

people in Saskatchewan are not requesting elections this fall.  

In fact the people who are involved in the very difficult work of 

reforming the health care system -- and I might add, doing a 

very good job at their community levels -- are telling us that it 

would be premature at this point to move to elections.  The 

member opposite realizes that. 

Now the member opposite also knows that the whole issue of 

elections isn't simply a question of when we are going to have 

elections, whether they be this fall, later this fall, next spring, or 

next fall.  There are many other issues that have to be sorted 

out surrounding elections.  And so we are working towards 

dealing with these issues in a methodical way because we want 

to do this right, not just to do it because the members opposite 

have chosen to politically grandstand on the issue of elections. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  We keep hearing 

from you and from Garf Stevenson about the people who are 

telling you to delay the health board elections.  But every letter 

we have received, every single one, from municipalities, from 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 

from local residents, from hospital workers, and now even from 

CUPE, every letter we have received has called for elections 

this fall. 

 

In fact, Madam Minister, the only people we have heard calling 

for the elections to be postponed are you, Garf Stevenson, and 

your politically appointed health boards, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, can you show us evidence of all of the people 

you say want the elections postponed by tabling letters to that 

effect?  Other than the health boards, your politically appointed 

health boards themselves, who exactly in this province wants 

the elections delayed, other than yourselves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, the SAHO, 

which is the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, which represents far more than the district 

health boards who were nominated from their communities -- it 

represents other health care organizations as well -- has put out 

a press release saying it would be disruptive. 

 

I have asked Mr. Stevenson to consult with the public at large 

on a number of issues.  One issue being when people feel 

would be the most appropriate time.  I will wait to hear from 

Mr. Stevenson on that issue. 

 

I want to point out that elections will be done when it is 

appropriate for health care, not when it is politically 

appropriate for the Tory Party.  We will hold elections, as we 

are committed to do, when it is appropriate for health care.  The 

members opposite had nine years to have elections with health 

boards and they chose not to.  They had no democracy in their 

health care system -- nine years and they didn't do it.  We've 

committed to it in legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, it's 

interesting you speak of it being 



2654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

politically appropriate, the timing of the elections and why 

you'd want that.  Because in the letter from CUPE they suggest, 

Madam Minister, that you have a hidden agenda and that is to 

hold the elections off until as late as 1997, after the next 

provincial election.  That's what they suggest in their letter to 

us, Madam Minister. 

 

And that's because you know how much damage your so-called 

wellness plan has caused and you don't want to open up the old 

wounds and expose your government to criticism until after the 

next provincial election.  Isn't that right, Madam Minister?  

Your whole strategy and Garf Stevenson's phoney commission 

have more to do with preserving the NDP's (New Democratic 

Party) political wellness than the wellness of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, the clear position of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party is that the elections should be held this fall, 

and we've presented a piece of legislation in this legislature to 

that effect.  But given that you have now ruled out that . . .  

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member has gone on long 

enough.  I want him to put his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now that you've ruled 

out that option, will you at least today guarantee, Madam 

Minister, that health board elections will be held prior to the 

next provincial election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

indicated that we don't want the public to know how horrible 

our health reform is.  Well clearly, the member opposite's 

statements, his whole agenda, is political because he's 

obviously uninformed about the fact that Saskatchewan is 

perceived, not only nationally but internationally, as leading the 

way in health reform. 

 

Michael Rachlis and Carol Kushner, the authors of the 

Canadian best seller Second Opinion, have recently written a 

new book called Strong Medicine which says -- and talking 

about health reform across Canada, comparing all the systems 

-- he clearly indicates that Saskatchewan's in the forefront.  

And both Rachlis and Kushner say and I state:  something 

wonderful is happening in Saskatchewan again; the country 

watches with awe. 

 

Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, have fought health 

reform from day one.  They don't want it to succeed because 

their agenda is political.  They do not care for the health of the 

people of Saskatchewan or for future generations, and the need 

to make the system more effective, more responsive, and 

affordable for future generations. 

 

That is their agenda, pure and simple, Mr. Speaker.  And that's 

why we continue to hear from a party that has attacked labour 

from the time of their inception. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Health Boards' Purchasing Policy 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, that's 

one of the most blatant non-answers that I have heard in a long 

time and you, not even skilfully, evaded the question.  You did 

not answer the question at all, Madam Minister.  It just boggles 

the mind that the government opposite is so blatantly engaged 

in politically motivated stalling tactics as far as the health board 

elections are concerned. 

 

You people simply do not want anyone on those boards that 

may not be in complete sympathy with your objectives.  

Madam Minister, we need accountability on those boards and 

for those boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a series of questions that is going to try to 

accomplish that fact.  Madam Minister, I understand that part 

of the savings that taxpayers were supposed to realize from 

your health cuts were to be used as a result of . . . were to be 

realized as a result of volume buying by the new health boards.  

Can you, Madam Minister -- this is the question -- can you 

articulate the new policy with respect to this new purchasing 

arrangement, and would you table copies of that policy so that 

everyone can see it precisely? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the health boards are 

looking for all sorts of ways of reducing costs in terms of 

health expenditures.  On specific details with respect to the 

matters the member opposite has raised, I will certainly ask the 

department to provide him with the information that is 

available. 

 

The members opposite however, I should say, Mr. Speaker, are 

far more interested not in helping the public in Saskatchewan 

but in grandstanding for the upcoming Tory leadership 

convention that soon is going to take place . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The big one and the little one. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The big one and the little one, I'm 

advised, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite, if they were truly concerned about 

improving the health system for future generations and for the 

people of Saskatchewan, would have come to this legislature 

with suggestions for their communities and their district boards 

to implement new programing that we have said will be made 

available to the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Instead they have been here simply belabouring certain issues 

that they feel they can politically grandstand on that do not lead 

to a higher quality health care system, but will simply serve 

their political purposes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say once and for all for 

the member opposite that the big guy from Rosthern has no 

political aspirations.  I've mentioned that; I've concretely said 

that.  So having . . . 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

The Speaker: -- Okay, now that we've got that out of the way, 

the member may want to direct his attention to a question.  

Order, Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And since my time 

starts as of now, I'll direct the question to the Minister of 

Health once more.  And quite frankly, Madam Minister, you 

are the one here that is politicizing the issue.  I have not said 

anything political other than ask you for your policy.  I want to 

know what your policy is in so far as tendering is concerned.  

And apparently there is no such policy from your answer, 

Madam Minister. 

 

It's also evident from a letter that I received from the medical 

division of Liquid Carbonic -- Liquid Carbonic, Madam 

Minister.  This company has been supplying hospitals with 

medical gases for many years.  Now recently four hospitals 

have notified Liquid Carbonic that they have unilaterally 

cancelled the contract and have signed arrangements with a 

different company.   And as the letter points out, and I want to 

quote here: 

 

 Liquid Carbonic, and perhaps other suppliers in the industry, 

were not given any opportunity to quote for that future supply 

of gas.  It is very possible, if not probable, that had we been 

given the opportunity to quote, our price would have been 

significantly lower than Canadian Liquid Air, that got it.  It is 

difficult to see any rationale or sound business purpose 

behind the hospitals' conduct. 

 

Madam Minister, perhaps you can explain why health boards 

would not be asking for tenders for hospital supplies, especially 

in light of their tight financial situation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite want elected boards but they want us to 

dictate to these boards.  I find that position rather inconsistent. 

 

On the issue of the Liquid Carbonic situation, Mr. Speaker, this 

has been brought to my attention in the last few days and the 

Department of Health is going to be discussing with district 

boards what the process is and how we will be proceeding in 

this regard.  So these discussions are taking place at this time 

with respect to that particular issue. 

 

However, district boards have a need to look at ways that they 

can reduce their costs to the system and do what they feel is 

most effective for their district.  And so many district boards, 

being motivated by this, will be changing some of the things 

that have happened in the past.  If they weren't changing 

anything, obviously we wouldn't receive any correction of 

some of the problems. 

 

On this particular issue, however, I have asked the Department 

of Health to look into it.  They are reviewing the matter with 

the district health boards and so there will be further 

information on that when 

that review takes place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you have just confirmed two things.  First of all, that you have 

no policy.  And secondly, that there is no accountability of 

taxpayers' money that go through the district health boards.  

That's precisely what you have just said. 

 

And the letter points out further, Madam Minister, and I quote 

again: 

 

 If the hospitals wish to obtain the lowest price available in the 

market, surely they must canvass the market to determine the 

lowest price at which the various suppliers are willing to 

contract. 

 

Madam Minister, the conduct is even more puzzling given the 

fact that Liquid Carbonic is the only manufacturer of medical 

gases in this province.  It appears that the health boards have no 

guidelines for fair and open tendering for bulk buying.  The 

medical sales manager for Liquid Carbonic has been phoning 

all over the province trying to find answers, but no one seems 

to be willing to take responsibility. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you that you take responsibility for this 

inquiry, and further I suggest you immediately move toward 

holding elections for health boards such that everyone in the 

health care field can be held accountable for whom they serve.  

Would you do that today, Madam Minister -- make that 

commitment that you will do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- On the member's question, Mr. Speaker, I 

had pointed out to him I've already asked the Department of 

Health to look into the matter far before he ever raised the 

question, and it is being looked into and under review. 

 

The matter is not as simple as the member opposite paints it.  

There are a number of issues that have to be resolved in this 

regard.  And so I am waiting to hear from the Department of 

Health how it will be resolved.  It's not a question of . . . as 

simple as they put it. 

 

He says there's no accountability in the system and he is wrong.  

The member opposite sat in this House, the member opposite 

sat in this House when we pointed out how, along with the 

Provincial Auditor, we have discussed accountability.  He was 

provided with reams of information on accountability.  Not to 

mention the fact that district boards, unlike when they were in 

government, have to have at least two public meetings a year.  

And in this sense, in this fashion, are accountable to the 

members in their district. 

 

Health care boards in the past have never had to do that.  The 

Tory opposition had nine to ten years to make health boards 

accountable; they did not.  We 



2656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

have made them accountable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, that is a bunch 

of nonsense.  And that is precisely where your accountability 

falls down.  The Provincial Auditor is not able to audit the 

district health boards and there's a very good reason for that, 

Madam Minister, because you have seen to it that he can't.  He 

cannot because you're not supplying him with the funds 

necessary to do that.  And that's a conscious effort on the 

Treasury Board part and cabinet's part who dictate to the Board 

of Internal Economy, don't give the Provincial Auditor enough 

money that he will be able to do that. 

 

And the Provincial Auditor is telling us right now, Madam 

Minister, that almost half, almost half of the public taxpayers' 

money that is going to be spent, he will not be able to audit 

because he doesn't have the funds available, Madam Minister.  

That's accountability, that's accountability.  And the money that 

these boards now are going to be spending are done so by 

appointed boards, they're not even elected, Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I want the member to put his question, please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I thought I was 

doing quite well in making the point.  Madam Minister, will 

you, will you commit to fall elections for the health boards so 

the people of this province will have accountability and that 

they will be satisfied that indeed these health boards are 

representing them, instead of the Garf Stevensons of this 

world? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, for a man who has chalked 

up a $15 billion debt in this province -- 15 billion for our 

children and our grandchildren to pay off -- for him to rant and 

rave here about accountability, I'll tell you, that is very shallow.  

Ranting and raving about accountability when he's chalked up a 

$15 billion debt in this province, personally, as he sat on 

cabinet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to auditing of health boards, let me 

say this:  when the members opposite were in government, 

those hospital boards were not audited by the Provincial 

Auditor.  The Provincial Auditor didn't audit the home care 

boards, he didn't audit the special care home boards; and now 

the Provincial Auditor has worked out a process with the 

government whereby auditing will be more accountable to the 

Provincial Auditor than what it was in the past.  In fact he does 

audit a number of these boards, although not all of them.  The 

rest are audited by private auditors; they're accountable to the 

department and the department's accountable to the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

For them to suggest there's no accountability is false, it's not 

true, it's misleading, it's misinformation, it's typical Tory tactics 

of misinforming the public. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trade Union Act Amendments 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

this morning are for the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, 

section 37 of The Trade Union Act ensures that labour costs at 

all levels of government, including Crown corporations, 

schools, hospitals, universities, and even municipalities, will 

continue to be protected by the status quo.  That means all 

levels of government will be prevented from contracting out 

certain services. 

 

Mr. Minister, what happens to the freedom of those responsible 

for running taxpayers' institutions to reduce costs, when what in 

fact you are doing is legislating that they will lose their 

freedom? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've repeatedly 

pointed out in the past, the group of workers to which section 

37 applies, those cafeteria workers, security workers, cleaning 

services, are ones that are frequently tendered out.  They are 

usually at the bottom of the barrel . . . at the bottom of the 

ladder in terms of salary.  It is enormously difficult for them to 

get any rights because their employer keeps changing.  As soon 

as they organize to present some minimal demands for 

protection, their employer changes.  And they often go.  This is 

an attempt to provide those people who are on the bottom rung 

of the ladder with a little protection. 

 

And we really would ask the opposition members to give some 

consideration to the workers in addition to other considerations 

which perhaps legitimately occupy your attention.  Do give 

some thought as well to the workers who have had such a 

difficult time in this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, workers in 

Saskatchewan are taxpayers too and your government's new 

labour laws are going to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers money.  

Your laws guarantee that no public sector union will ever have 

to settle for anything less than the status quo.  And some 

government services will be protected from competition, 

eliminating all the possibilities of lowering costs by contracting 

out services. 

 

Now there are municipal leaders who have asked me to ask you 

this question, Mr. Minister.  What advice do you offer to 

municipal leaders who now feel that your provincial 

government has limited their options in being able to 

responsibly represent the taxpayers who elected them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The suggestion emanating from the 

Leader of the Third Party, which I've heard from a number of 

people, which suggests that these wages can never be lowered, 

it's just not accurate.  There's nothing to prevent them from 

being lowered.  It simply means that if they are you've got to 

discuss that with the workers, and you can't do it through the 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

back door by retendering out and therefore getting rid of the 

workers. 

 

What is wrong with involving workers in the discussion?  

There are any number of progressive governments and any 

number of progressive businesses which have carried on 

successful discussions with workers and have been able to 

agree upon a lower wage of workers, a lower level of wages.  

And there's any number of examples where this has been done 

successfully. 

 

That's all this requires, is that it be discussed with the workers 

and negotiated with the workers.  And I do not see why people 

find it so offensive to involve the workers in the discussion, 

when their very livelihood is involved.  I don't know why 

people find that so offensive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

what we're wanting to talk about here is what are of genuine 

concern to municipal leaders who have been elected, people 

who are trying to make decisions in the best interests of all the 

people that they are elected to represent.  Now that represents 

everybody, including workers in the province of Saskatchewan.  

What a lot of people are saying, including those who are in 

charge of human resources, including those, as I mentioned this 

week, who were involved in helping you establish your 

occupational health and safety legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is that you are creating an unlevel playing-field. 

 

And this is going to introduce all sorts of difficulties for people 

who are trying to deal with extremely restricted budgets.  What 

I ask of you today, since it is your responsibility as part of this 

government to spend tax dollars as efficiently as possible, and 

to do so by whatever means possible without doing away with 

essential services, how can you then in your own government 

cut costs when you are restricted for overall consideration of 

how to do so by your very own legislation?  How are you going 

to be able to deal with this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I hear what the member of the third 

party asks of me.  What I ask of you is that you show a fraction 

of the compassion for these workers that you showed for the 

judges, or show a fraction of the compassion for these workers 

that you've shown for the office of the Leader of the Third 

Party. 

 

These are the workers at the very bottom of the ladder.  Surely 

they are entitled to some passing consideration, even by 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it 

is always humorous for people to listen to someone who indeed 

took an 80-some per cent increase in his own salary when he 

became a cabinet minister.  It's also interesting how what you 

do is you 

make decisions to talk about workers in such a way that they're 

the lowest on the totem pole, when many people who are public 

sector employees in the province of Saskatchewan do better 

than small business people in terms of their own salaries, their 

benefits, the securities that they have. 

 

What we are wanting from you is to ensure that the people who 

have been elected by the people and for the people are allowed 

the option of being able to do their job on behalf of the people.  

They want to know why it is you're removing from them, 

through legislation, options -- options to contract out, perhaps 

getting far better deals for the people that they were elected to 

represent. 

 

Will you answer that question, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member opposite made some 

passing reference to the salaries of members of the treasury 

benches.  We took a 5 per cent pay increase, and you?  And 

you?  A 37 per cent pay increase. 

 

What is asked of you is that you give some thought to the 

position these workers are in.  They are people with the lowest 

salaries, with no protection, and very limited ability to get any 

protection because as soon as they begin to do what every 

worker has the right to do, which is to organize, they're 

thwarted because their employer changes.  It's an attempt to 

deal with a problem.  I just ask the member opposite to give a 

fraction of the consideration to these people that you've 

showered upon judges and the Office of the Leader of the Third 

Party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House to 

move an address recommending the appointment of a new 

ombudsman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of New Provincial Ombudsman 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move an address recommending that Barbara Tomkins of 

Estevan be appointed as Saskatchewan's new Ombudsman. 

 

The Ombudsman's office has become a key part of the way 

Saskatchewan people can seek redress when they feel their 

government has not dealt with them in a fair and equitable 

manner. The office has played an important role in 

investigating and determining grievances brought by citizens 

against the government.  Because of its non-binding role, its 

true importance is in mediating disputes and, when necessary, 

writing reports that fairly assess whether government action has 

been appropriate. 

 

It is essential that any candidate for this position demonstrate 

an understanding and an empathy for the 



2658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

rights and needs of disadvantaged people. As well, the person 

must be able to act in a non-partisan and independent manner 

as an officer of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I'm very pleased to be able to say that such a candidate has 

been identified to fill this difficult position.   Barbara Tomkins 

is an extremely bright, articulate and determined person who 

has long been a strong and passionate advocate of the 

disadvantaged. She brings to her job a keen interest in 

mediation and sees mediation as a large part of the 

Ombudsman's role. 

 

Ms. Tomkins has practised law for 18 years, Mr. Speaker, 

beginning with a term in private practice, then as corporate 

counsel for the SaskPower Corporation for two years.  She 

worked with the Regina office of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission for three years, then followed by a six-year period 

again with SaskPower.  She currently serves as legal director at 

the south-east area office of the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 

Commission where she has worked for six years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Tomkins has been identified following an 

extensive public search.  Advertisements were placed in the 

daily newspapers and applications were received by the Clerk 

of the Legislative Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, 73 such 

applications were received.  A review panel consisting of the 

Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, the chair of the Public 

Service Commission, and the assistant clerk of the Executive 

Council, developed a short list from which Ms. Tomkins has 

been selected.  I met Ms. Tomkins this morning, Mr. Speaker, 

and I was charmed to learn that as a student in school, before 

there had been a single ombudsman appointed in any 

jurisdiction in Canada, Ms. Tomkins read of the office as it 

existed in Europe and developed an ambition at that time to 

some day become Saskatchewan's Ombudsman. 

 

We are seeing today the realization of a dream that she's had 

for most of her life.  It is important for me to note, Mr. Speaker, 

with appreciation, the role of the Leader of the Opposition and 

the Justice critic, the hon. member from Moosomin, as well as 

the Leader of the Third Party, who have been consulted on the 

results of the selection committee's report and whose views and 

comments have been very valuable to the government in 

deciding upon the appointment of Ms. Tomkins and presenting 

it today to the Assembly. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure therefore that I move, 

seconded by the hon. member from Moosomin: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, recommending that Barbara J. 

Tomkins, of the city of Estevan, be appointed as Ombudsman 

for the province of Saskatchewan pursuant to section 3 of 

The Ombudsman Act. 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure to be able to rise in this Assembly and to join with the 

minister and to second the nomination of Barbara Tomkins to 

the position of Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Just from looking through the résumé and certainly the 

consultation process and the discussions we've had with the 

minister, I can see where the panel may have had a difficult 

time choosing between all the applications that came in and 

finally arriving at the choice of Ms. Tomkins for the position of 

Ombudsman. 

 

But we believe that certainly Ms. Tomkins has the capabilities.  

Certainly her résumé would indicate that she has worked in a 

lot of fields that would really create the avenue with which she 

will be approaching the position of Ombudsman, and we're 

pleased to be able to stand and second the appointment of Ms. 

Tomkins to the position of provincial Ombudsman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

very pleased to rise today on behalf of the third party to 

congratulate our new Ombudsman, Barbara Tomkins, on her 

appointment.  And I offer my congratulations to Kirk Rondeau 

as well, her children, and other members of her family who 

must be very proud today. 

 

I understand that there were many excellent candidates who 

applied for this position, and the task of selecting one was not 

an easy one.  All who applied I believe should be 

acknowledged and thanked for their interest in public service to 

this province. 

 

The level of quality of competition merely points to the 

outstanding capabilities of Ms. Tomkins, to be chosen from 

such an illustrious field.  And as the Minister of Justice pointed 

out, she has a very varied legal background of more than 18 

years, and she's had a substantial background as well in 

working within government departments and corporations 

which will prepare her very well for her new duties. 

 

Additionally, her most recent employment with the 

Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission has provided her with 

obvious years of very obvious hands-on experience. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of 

Justice for keeping the third party caucus informed throughout 

this process -- the process of advertising, screening, and the 

selection of the new Ombudsman.  And we are most 

appreciative of the fair manner with which all applicants were 

treated, and through which all political parties were apprised. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, and to Ms. Tomkins, we offer you our 

heartiest congratulations on your appointment.  I'm very 

confident that she will serve this Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan very well. 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Investment Corporation and to enact certain Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It is with great pleasure that I stand to move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation Act. 

 

Gaming has been a long part of Saskatchewan's history.  From 

the games of sticks played by Saskatchewan's first nations 

before the advent of European settlers to the church bingos of 

the early 20th century, gaming has been a part of Saskatchewan 

life. 

 

It was the federal Liberal government that decided to legalize 

and ultimately popularize gaming with its Criminal Code 

amendments in 1969.  In that year pari-mutuel betting became 

legal in Saskatchewan, and the exhibition associations first 

started profiting from gambling.  By 1971, their gambling 

operations included small-scale casinos. 

 

In the mid-1970s federal and provincial governments began to 

run lottery schemes for profit.  As this form of entertainment 

grew, the governments of the day, faced with robust treasuries, 

turned the profits from this form of gambling over to the 

charities through funding networks of sports, recreation, and 

cultural organizations. 

 

The 1980s saw the advent of large-scale casinos for profit that 

brought in millions of dollars for private business.  This 

gaming trend continued to grow in popularity and proliferated.  

The 1990s have seen the introduction of video lotteries in 

age-restricted businesses with profits going to provincial 

treasury to support health care, education, and deficit reduction. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, I was sworn in as minister 

responsible for Gaming in March of 1993.  I am the fourth 

minister to hold that position in this administration.  And like 

my predecessors, my role has been to provide for effective and 

responsible regulation of Saskatchewan's gaming industry.  My 

term as Gaming minister has seen many changes and many 

challenges. 

 

It was only a matter of weeks after I was sworn in that we were 

faced with perhaps one of our most difficult issues.  For a 

difficult four weeks, Saskatchewan people watched as we were 

drawn into an emotional and trying debate over the seemingly 

inconsequential 

issue of casino development, and the complicated issue of 

jurisdiction and the inherent right to self-government by 

Saskatchewan first nations.  These four weeks were perhaps the 

most trying time of my ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember daily briefings with my staff and with 

my officials on the issue.  And I remember us being forced to 

reconcile the conflicting desires of Saskatchewan people to 

provide for strict control of gaming, and on the other hand the 

desire to recognize the right to self-determination and 

self-government.  And I remember debating how we would 

bridge these two competing views without permitting it to 

escalate into the situation that has been etched into our 

memories of another debate over the issue of a golf course in 

Oka, Quebec. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say this sincerely, that it is by the courage 

and the leadership of people like my colleague, the Minister of 

Justice, and Chief Roland Crowe, that we were able to avoid an 

Oka.  Mr. Speaker, I raise this issue because I think it is 

important that this Assembly understand the significance of the 

Bill that I am introducing today and that I am addressing today. 

 

Over the past 14 months I have been meeting with Chief Crowe 

to reach an agreement that is acceptable to all people.  It's an 

agreement that builds on the mutual respect of two peoples and 

provides for mutual benefits.  As you will recall, on January 17 

of this year Chief Crowe and I announced that we would be 

entering into negotiations to form a partnership for operating 

two Saskatchewan casinos. 

 

In undertaking these negotiations, Saskatchewan people have 

told us that they want tightly controlled expansion and a 

provincially regulated gaming industry, that they want all 

Saskatchewan people to share in the benefits of expansion, and 

that they want a peaceful resolve to an issue that has been a 

source of dispute between governments and aboriginal people 

across Canada. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to be joined by Chief 

Crowe to announce that we had indeed reached an historic 

agreement that accomplished these objectives.  Mr. Speaker, it 

is a result of that agreement that I stand today to endorse this 

legislation to create a new Crown corporation to establish, to 

operate, manage, and conduct casino operations in 

Saskatchewan under the full legislative authority of this 

Assembly. 

 

This legislation provides for tight regulation of the casinos by 

the province and it ensures the historic revenue-sharing formula 

negotiated with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations) is accountable to the legislature. 

 

Further to this, Mr. Speaker, this legislation provides for the 

new Crown corporation to be regulated at arm's length by the 

Liquor and Gaming Authority while ensuring provincial audit 

standards are met in its financial operations.  The corporation's 

board of 



2660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

directors will consist of seven people appointed by cabinet, 

three of whom will be nominated by the chiefs of the 

Legislative Assembly of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations.  The remaining four will be nominated by the 

province. 

 

It provides for the establishment of any casino and its location 

to require cabinet approval, and it will be subject to regulation 

by the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation and the agreement with the FSIN 

does not resolve or prejudice the respective positions of the 

province and the federation on the issue of jurisdiction over the 

on-reserve casinos.  However, it's generally agreed that the 

Saskatchewan casino market will be near full capacity with the 

development of these two casinos.  While other small-scale 

casinos may open, and the courts or federal government may 

provide first nations with the ability to operate casinos outside 

the provincial jurisdiction, it is these two flagship casinos that 

will provide the greatest benefits to both peoples. 

 

Apart from the ability to ensure tight control and provincial 

regulation, there will be significant economic and financial 

benefits arising from these two projects.  This legislation 

ensures that these benefits will be fairly distributed and will be 

fully accountable to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Specifically, this legislation establishes the first nations fund 

and guarantees, under the authority of law, that 25 per cent of 

profits from these ventures will be directly reinvested into our 

first nations.  It ensures that this money will be used for the 

purposes of economic and social development on reserves.  

And it provides secure funds to enhance the educational, 

recreational, and cultural development of Indian people by 

Indian people.  And it provides for a capital pool to build and 

renew the infrastructure that has been sadly ignored by 

governments since treaties were signed over a hundred years 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fund is fully accountable to the legislature 

and will be audited and examined using the normal procedures 

of this Assembly.  But more important, Mr. Speaker, this fund 

provides a base for funding Indian people to secure their future, 

based on their priorities and based on their self-reliance. 

 

(1100) 

 

A second directly accountable fund will be set up by this 

legislation to provide security to associated entities -- entities 

such as hospital foundations, exhibition associations, and the 

Metis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that increased gaming opportunities 

may cause some Saskatchewan people to change their game of 

choice.  We have seen this happen in Saskatchewan hotels as 

people choose to play the VLTs (video lottery terminals) rather 

than the break-open tickets that fund the hospital foundations in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

We believe that charity is an important part of Saskatchewan 

heritage.  That is why we will ensure that money is available to 

provide an offset for those charities that have become 

dependent on gaming revenue and may find an effect from the 

expanded opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that the exhibition associations 

have relied on casino revenues to fund many of their programs.  

And they too will receive compensation if they're not involved 

in the management of casinos. 

 

And Metis people will also be direct beneficiaries of this 

program.  Money will be available to them in support of their 

social and economic growth, as they too are an important part 

that has been excluded in the past from the wealth that this 

province has to offer. 

 

The exact division of the associated entities fund will be 

negotiated with the respective partners over the next year.  Mr. 

Speaker, these funds will be subject to review by the 

Legislative Assembly.  They will be subject to audit and they 

will be subject to scrutiny by this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that this is historic 

legislation that is important because it formalizes for the first 

time a real partnership, a true partnership, between the province 

and Saskatchewan's first nations.  It provides an alternative to 

paternalism, and it recognizes the mature nature of 

Saskatchewan Indians and Saskatchewan Indian governments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it does more than that.  It provides for an 

open and accountable operation of casino gaming in 

Saskatchewan that is subject to tight regulatory controls and the 

responsibility of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan.  It 

is a responsible approach to gaming expansion that has looked 

at the mistakes of the 1980s and has acted to correct these. 

 

This legislation itself is marked by a commitment to legislative 

accountability, tight control, provincial regulation, public 

scrutiny, and inherent fairness to all Saskatchewan people.  

This legislation builds on our strengths as a province and as a 

people.  It provides for increased economic opportunities for all 

Saskatchewan people, and in particular for Saskatchewan 

aboriginal people.  And it provides for a real and lasting 

partnership with Indian nations who jointly share the 

responsibilities and the benefits that accompany this economic 

opportunity. 

 

In closing, I want to thank Chief Crowe and those who have 

preceded me in this portfolio for their leadership and their 

vision in helping to ensure that this policy benefits all 

Saskatchewan people and promotes a lasting peace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I move second 

reading of this Bill, An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Investment Corporation and to enact certain 

Consequential Amendments arising from the enactment of this 

Act. 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's with 

some pleasure that I stand to address a few comments before 

moving adjournment of this motion to the Bill No. 72, An Act 

to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation 

and to enact certain Consequential Amendments arising from 

the enactment of this Act. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when the minister talked about an 

ongoing heated debate in this Assembly and throughout the 

province, it's something that he spoke very truly of; and the fact 

that the people across this province have certainly established, 

in their minds, their principles, their ideals, and their feelings 

regarding gambling and expanded gambling in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that no doubt as we enter the debate, there 

will be more debate take place in this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition party we have appreciated 

the information and the calls that have come to our office 

regarding the Bill.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are calls 

from individuals who are quite supportive of gambling.  There 

are applications being made from individuals and groups as 

well who have some major concerns. 

 

And I'm appreciative to see that Mr. Crowe and a number of 

our native leaders from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations are with us this morning.  Because I'm sure that in their 

discussion with the minister and with the government they're 

not only pleased with the opportunity for some economic 

activity for their people and for the job opportunities that are 

going to be created, but I'm also aware of the fact that they're 

very strongly aware of some of the implications and the 

problems that can arise.  And I appreciate the suggestions and 

the fact that they're willing to take a look at some of those other 

problems that can arise and offer suggestions. 

 

And I would invite Mr. Crowe and our native leaders to 

certainly consult with our office as well and give us their 

viewpoints on this piece of legislation as we debate it in this 

Assembly.  As I believe it's only fair that the opposition, in 

addressing the concerns that arise, that we represent . . . and I 

believe my colleagues and I have over the the process of this 

legislative session and as opposition members, have looked at 

ways of representing all people and all pieces of legislation that 

have come to this Assembly.  And our door has certainly been 

open to all interest groups and individuals. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to consultation with 

Chief Crowe and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations.  We look forward to some consultation with the Metis 

association.  We're also looking forward to consultation with 

other interested parties and groups. 

 

In light of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we feel that it's 

only appropriate that this consultation process be given some 

time to work, I therefore at this time move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program 

Vote 68 

 

The Chair: -- Before we commence I would ask the minister 

responsible, the Provincial Secretary, to please introduce the 

officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm 

pleased to introduce to you and to the House, the officials who 

will be assisting us today.  Behind me and to the right is Mr. 

Howard Leeson, who's the Deputy Provincial Secretary; to my 

immediate right is Mr. Dickson Bailey, who is the executive 

director of the infrastructure program; and behind me directly is 

Cathy Dermody, who's the director of administration in the 

Department of Provincial Secretary. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials.  I just have a few questions this 

morning on the infrastructure program, which we'd like to have 

you attempt to answer for us. 

 

Mr. Minister, the infrastructure program was originally 

proposed by the current federal Liberal government during the 

last election as a municipal infrastructure program.  It was to be 

cost shared by all three levels of government.  Apparently, Mr. 

Minister, Saskatchewan is the only provincial government in 

Canada that is not putting up a full one-third of the money.  

Could you please explain why this is so? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm having some specific numbers 

sought out for me here, because I think the member's 

suggestion that this is not the way it is being done across all of 

Canada is not totally correct, because every province is using a 

different way to allow for the expenditure of this federal 

money. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan we have worked out, in 

cooperation with the municipal organizations, a distribution of 

the funding of the federal allocation.  And we have added some 

provincial allocation as well, on a per capita basis, so that the 

municipalities will have access to federal infrastructure money 

and to provincial infrastructure money as well on a per capita 

basis. 

 

And it works out in this way.  For municipal projects there will 

be $32 million of federal money and $10 million of provincial 

money.  For projects which are designated by the province, 

there will be $25.71 million of federal money and $57.71 

million of provincial money.  So if you take all of that and put 

it 



2662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

together, we get a total amount from the federal government of 

$57.71 million.  And there will be a contribution from the 

provincial level of $67.71 million and from the municipal level 

of $47.71 million. 

 

Now just to give you an example, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

member opposite, for his information, how in Saskatchewan 

the program is different than it is in other provinces -- and in 

each province it's different -- we have tried to be very careful in 

making sure that one, municipalities, on their portion of the 

allocation, pick the projects that they think are important to 

them, rather than having somebody at the provincial 

government level oversee and decide for them what should be 

the priorities in the municipalities.  Now that's far different in 

some places and I don't want to do this in a partisan way, but 

for example, in New Brunswick in Moncton, the city of 

Moncton, for example, the city had put together its priority list 

and because the money there has been allocated on the basis of 

federal constituencies, that list has been totally ignored and the 

allocation of the money has been decided by some politicians 

connected to the government of the day both at the provincial 

and the federal level. 

 

We have decided that that's not the appropriate way to do it.  

The municipalities of this province have appreciated that and 

have indicated their support for this process and I think that it's 

working very well.  We are ahead of most provinces in the 

allocation.  We are ahead of most of the provinces in the 

announcements, programs off and running. 

 

We appreciate the cooperation and the assistance of the federal 

government.  The municipalities appreciate the cooperation and 

assistance of the federal government and the provincial 

government and it's helping to create some very badly needed 

jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I appreciate the answer, Mr. Minister, 

and if your officials could provide me with global numbers 

from other provinces and how things are being done, I would 

really appreciate that because we'd like to make sure that you 

are telling us the straight goods on these things. 

 

The problem, Mr. Minister, you identify some fairly large 

numbers here.  But as I understand it, half of the money which 

you supposedly are contributing, were on existing provincial 

projects.  In other words, you've designated things that you 

were going to create anyway before this program came along 

and you're throwing those in the hopper and you're saying this 

is part of our contribution. 

 

Now these are capital projects which we had undergoing.  And 

now we're going to take money out of this program and we're 

going to use that as our contribution.  And I don't think that's 

quite fair, Mr. Minister, to tell Saskatchewan people that that 

contribution is whole, because it isn't. 

Now can you explain to me -- and I know municipal 

government were unhappy with this -- why you'd consider 

existing projects which you already had ongoing to be a 

credible part of this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, here is where indeed 

there is some similarity between what Saskatchewan's approach 

and many of the other provinces, although . . . and certainly I 

will undertake to provide the member opposite all the 

information we can from other provinces because I think it's a 

useful comparison. 

 

All of the projects that have been announced so far are not 

projects that were ongoing.  They are either new projects or 

projects that have been accelerated, which would not have been 

done for the next two, three years, so it is truly an increased 

amount of expenditure which is creating jobs that would 

otherwise not be taking place in this year.  It is true that there 

will be, throughout the year, some of the allocation for the 

money for projects, if they come to pass, which the . . . the 

money for which has been allocated in the budget. 

 

But we tried to anticipate in the budget some of the things that 

we might be able to do if the agreement was signed and if we 

can get the approval of the federal government.  But none of 

the projects that we have approved so far, and I hope that we 

approve in the future, are those that have been already ongoing.  

These will be new; they will be accelerated from years into the 

future so that we bring them back forward to this year and to 

1995.  That's useful from the point of view of job creation, but I 

think it's also very important to note that it's useful from the 

point of view of getting some very badly needed projects done 

which otherwise wouldn't have been done. 

 

I think the Cumberland bridge is an outstanding example of a 

cooperation between the federal government, the local 

community, the provincial government, on a project which the 

people of Cumberland House have been lobbying for for as 

long as I have been a member of this House -- and that's now 

20 years -- and they were lobbying before that.  Finally they're 

going to get the bridge.  And I think we all should be happy for 

them, and quite frankly, the infrastructure program and this 

cooperative spirit that has been around is making all that 

possible. 

 

So I want to assure the member, none of the projects are 

projects that are ongoing now.  They are projects that are 

accelerated. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you and I both know that 

I wasn't referring to the Cumberland House bridge.  That was . . 

. but that's a very poor example, Mr. Minister, and you should 

talk about some of the health and educational facilities and 

other things around the piece that you are going to put some of 

this money in over the next two years which I suggest to you 

would have been done anyway. 

 

And that's the problem that people have with your program, is 

that this particular program was identified 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

as a way to create new employment opportunities and repair 

infrastructure in a lot of our municipal jurisdictions.  You have 

now taken it, and you do have the agreement of the federal 

government -- I'm not discounting that -- but we should not 

pass this off to the people of this province that some of these 

projects weren't on the drawing boards.  Some of those 

projects, Mr. Minister, were on the drawing boards when I was 

on the treasury benches and they will be ongoing. 

 

Now you're trying to tell the people that no, that would have 

never occurred and that's why we had to grab the cash out of 

the program and put into our programs.  And I suggest to you 

that isn't going to create the level of employment that people 

were expecting in this province from your program.  And that's 

the problem with it and that's the explanation that you have to 

give. 

 

Now are you going to give me an absolute assurance that by the 

end of 1995 that none of the projects which have been on the 

government's drawing boards will have any money put in out of 

this program at all, absolutely none? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All the projects that we will be 

getting approval for . . . because it's not simply a provincial 

government approval, it's a joint approval between 

municipalities if it's a municipal project, the provincial 

government and the federal government.  And if it is a 

provincially designated project, it has to be joint approval 

between the provincial and federal government. 

 

There will be no projects approved that have been started.  

There have been no educational facilities approved at the 

present time.  We certainly are quite willing to look at 

educational facilities that are not in the process of being in the 

construction portfolio at the present time.  Because in the 

announcement of the federal government, they made it very 

clear that their programs -- it's not our program, it's their 

initiative -- their program was not going to be the same as that 

of the national municipalities association. 

 

They said the projects would be for municipal infrastructure, 

for educational needs, and other kinds of needs.  I have heard 

federal ministers talk about, we should spend some of this 

money on the information highway.  It's hardly a municipal 

infrastructure.  So all we're doing is living within the terms of 

what the federal government has provided. 

 

And, for example, so are other provinces.  In New Brunswick, 

there has been $3.6 million dedicated to the Atlantic Bible 

College, a private school.  In Alberta, there has been money 

allocated for the purchase of a street sweeper, $170,000, and a 

snowblower.  Now we're not approving those kinds because we 

want to make sure that the projects we approve are going to 

create jobs.  The purchase of a snowblower, I'm not sure how 

many jobs that creates that would not have already been there.  

But we're trying to be very careful that we do that. 

But just not to take a great deal of time, directly answering the 

member's question, Mr. Chairman, the programs or the projects 

which have been approved and which we will be approving are 

not projects that are already in the process of proceeding.  They 

are going to be projects that are going to be accelerated.  And 

they will be projects that I think are going to do a lot of good 

for the communities of the province of Saskatchewan as well as 

create jobs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I hope when we review this program 

next year, Mr. Minister, that we haven't seen a significant 

amount of slippage there.  So we'll watch very carefully to see 

how you administer this. 

 

Now you maybe have already answered this, but I would like 

you to repeat for the record.  I believe on the news release of 

April 25, '94, it states that 30 million over the next two years 

will go toward upgrading Saskatchewan rural roads -- rural 

roads, not urban roads. 

 

Could you tell me how much of that 30 million is provincial 

money, and how much comes from the federal government and 

how much from the municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Ten million dollars because there's 

a one-third component.  The federal is going to be coming from 

the federal government under the infrastructure program, and 

the other $30 million are going to come under the 

revenue-sharing program which already exists in the provincial 

government.  There is more money in that this year, for 

purposes of road construction, by four and a half million 

dollars, than there was last year.  And that's how the money is 

going to be allocated. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Was I reading the release wrong? Because 

you've given me about $44 million total here.  You said 10 

from the provincial . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Ten million dollars from the federal 

level because of the infrastructure program and $20 million will 

come under the normal funding that comes from the 

revenue-sharing program that the provincial Department of 

Municipal Government has ongoing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, and on top of that then there is another 

four and a half this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I was confusing, I think, the House.  

I just used the four and a half million dollars as an example of 

some additional money that's in that revenue sharing for the 

purposes of roads that wasn't there last year.  But that's part of 

that $20 million that I talked about. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- All right.  But the commitment to $30 million 

in total is still there.  Now you haven't answered me, how much 

of the 20 million then is provincial government money, and 

how much is municipalities putting up money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's difficult to answer that 



2664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

question.  I can provide the formula for the member, and we'll 

do it in writing.  But there's a formula in the revenue-sharing 

road construction account which provides different amounts for 

different municipalities, depending on how the formula applies 

to them.  The Minister of Municipal Government could 

probably speak more to this than I can.  But if the member 

wants us to provide him with the formula and how it applies, 

we can do that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'd appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.  It's very 

important that, as these monies are allocated, that we 

understand who is putting up the money because a lot of rural 

ratepayers are wondering what portion of this they are going to 

get stuck with on the tax rolls of their municipalities, and it's 

very important for us to understand that formula in talking to 

them. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in Manitoba we understand a portion of the 

infrastructure work program is going toward a program similar 

to Sask Works that we have here, and I think you know the 

details of that program.  Is there any way that that is possible 

with the existing Saskatchewan program, and if not, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the member refers to the 

program that's under New Careers.  The money will be 

appropriated according to the project; but in some projects, if 

there is an opportunity for the employment of New Careers 

people, that's certainly available.  And I don't know whether 

any of that has been so determined but we will be certainly 

more than willing to encourage where it is appropriate and 

possible, to involve people under Sask Works on some of these 

projects.  We'd be more than happy to accommodate that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well this is important, Mr. Minister, because 

that program deals with a lot of people who have been falling 

to the wayside in our employment rolls and they have a very 

successful record of giving people 14, 16, 20 weeks of 

employment which then allows them to move back in the 

workforce and I've seen examples of it in the city of Moose Jaw 

with New Careers, very successful. 

 

Can you tell me who is designated with this program?  If 

people wish to approach government with a concept towards 

using people that currently are in that category, who would . . . 

what would be the approach that we would use in coming 

forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Certainly the office of the director 

of the infrastructure and the Provincial Secretary is where any 

ideas should go.  But I should tell the member that we have 

already undertaken, through Mr. Bailey, to have discussions 

with the New Careers office to make sure that they are aware of 

this and ask them for their assistance, because I agree with 

what the member from Thunder Creek said at the beginning of 

his remarks. 

 

And I fully say that this program, New Careers, was begun in 

the 1980s.  It was an excellent program.  It has provided all of 

the benefits and the training that the member opposite has 

talked about. 

When I was briefly in charge of it this summer as Minister of 

Education, I asked for a report on the success rate of people 

who then come out of this several weeks of employment who 

then get into the workforce.  The numbers were very 

impressive, and we're trying to encourage that. 

 

So we've already begun to make the contacts with the New 

Careers organization to alert them to this, and get them to help 

steer any potential employment to us so that we can 

accommodate it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you're telling me, that 

as far as the provincial government is concerned, that there is 

still money that is allocatable, that the federal government and 

municipalities would be willing to buy into this particular idea, 

and that there is money available, that we won't be out on our 

own here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We would do this in the projects 

which have been applied for and which have been or may be 

approved in the future.  The only projects . . . not only, because 

they have been substantial.  There have been some municipal 

projects that have been announced, including the city of 

Saskatoon and several other municipalities. 

 

I believe that on Monday there will be another announcement 

on some municipal projects.  There is the Cumberland bridge 

project.  Did I miss anything?  Oh, there's the municipal roads 

project.  And there will be others.  But within all of those 

projects opportunities for the New Careers people to be 

involved are going to be there. 

 

(1130) 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome to 

you, Mr. Minister, and your officials. I'm very pleased that the 

infrastructure program was delivered to the provinces as 

promised.  I'm not quite as enthusiastic as how it has shaped up 

in its application.  Mr. Minister, how many applications have 

you had in the province for projects under the infrastructure 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am told that . . . and first of all let 

me comment on the member's comment about not being 

pleased about how it's going because really I don't know where 

she's coming from on that.  She'd have to be the only citizen in 

Saskatchewan, I think, who would be so displeased because the 

program is going exceptionally well. 

 

The federal government has been cooperative.  The province 

has been cooperative.  Municipalities are happy and satisfied 

that it's going very well.  And the projects that have been 

announced and those that will be announced in the future are 

going to be legitimate projects that are going to be fulfilling 

some very important needs. 

 

They're not going to be projects, as have been the case in some 

provinces like New Brunswick where there is 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2665 

a Liberal government, where they're making the decisions on 

strictly partisan basis.  We're not going to do that in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So if the member is displeased about how the program is going, 

let her put on the record what she's displeased about so we can 

have a little debate about that because I'd be more than happy 

to have that kind of a debate. 

 

Now if the member wants to ask us some legitimate questions, 

as the one dealing with the question of how many applications, 

I am told, and we don't have, because it's a running  number but 

there is something in the area of 100 applications that have 

been made, 100 applications, and we are considering all of 

them. Obviously we're not going to be able to accommodate all 

of them because there is . . . the federal government has only 

provided to Saskatchewan $57.7 million, which is about $10 

million less than we think we should have been eligible for. 

 

But because the formula is based on unemployment -- where 

we have the lowest unemployment in all of Canada -- and 

because it's based on population and our population is small 

compared to some of the other provinces in Canada, such as 

Quebec, Ontario, and British Columbia, and Alberta, we were 

allocated $57.71 million and I think that those dollars are going 

to be wisely spent.  The provincial money that is going to be 

put in is going to be wisely spent.  They're going to create 

long-term benefits because of the facilities that are created and 

is going to create jobs for the short term while the projects are 

under construction. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Can you give me 

a general idea of how much both federal and provincial funding 

will be spent on projects which involve the traditional types of 

infrastructure -- roads and sewers and upgrading of those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A little earlier I outlined for the 

member from Thunder Creek the allocation of the money and 

you will see that -- here it is -- that we have allocated that there 

will be an expenditure with municipal, provincial, and federal 

money, $89.71 million on strictly municipal projects because 

the municipalities will decide what those projects should be, as 

the city of Saskatoon has already decided and it's been 

announced. 

 

There were going to be $83.42 million in total spent by the 

provincial and the federal government on projects that are 

going to be related to infrastructure needs of various kinds in 

the province such as the Cumberland bridge which was 

announced just the other day.  In the forthcoming days and 

weeks you will see similar projects announced but the member 

will understand that we don't approve these projects on our own 

-- it's a joint approval process -- and we don't announce them 

on our own. 

 

We feel it's important for the projects, because there is 

provincial and federal money, should be announced jointly at 

the appropriate time.  But that's the 

breakdown.  All of the projects are going to be projects that are 

going to be important to either the municipal or to the 

provincial infrastructure in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The Leader of the 

Opposition was speaking about the Manitoba project which 

will create 2,300 direct and indirect jobs.  Now that was in total 

on the ones they announced in April.  One of the programs that 

he was talking about will provide $10 million to employ more 

that 1,800 welfare recipients, and that program will save the 

public $3 million in welfare payments. 

 

And when you were discussing it, you spoke of using the New 

Careers program and integrating it into the employment force.  

Have you done an examination to determine the potential 

savings from such a program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the project that 

the member opposite talks about is not a Government of 

Manitoba project; it's a city of Winnipeg project.  And I don't 

know all the details of it, but generally the way the member 

describes it, she is correct. 

 

We have not done an evaluation of the money that's going to be 

saved because you don't save money in this program.  I'm not 

saying that it's costing excessively; the same amount of money 

would be spent no matter how you do it because there's only so 

much money to be spent. 

 

But the benefit of trying to access some of the potential 

employees through the New Careers program is that it will 

provide jobs for people who badly need those jobs, who need to 

get back into the workforce, who gives them an opportunity to 

get some training and experience in the workforce.  And as the 

statistics over the years under New Careers show, people who 

go through this, by and large in quite a large, significant 

number, stay in the workforce because they've had the 

experience on how to do the work.  They've had some training, 

but they've also had some experience about how to go out and 

seek employment. 

 

So there's some benefits there.  And to the extent that we can 

enhance the New Careers through this program, we're quite 

happy to do that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I guess what I was asking, the $3 million 

that would be saved in Winnipeg, as you rightly put it, would 

mean that these people would no longer be on welfare during 

the time of their employment.  And that's basically the question 

I was asking. 

 

A number of other jurisdictions are using the infrastructure 

program for some rather innovative projects rather than 

mainstream public works projects.  Is it your objective to 

implement any innovative projects through this program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, we're looking at a wide range 

of potential projects, with that long list that I mentioned to the 

member opposite.  And I think we're going to be able to 

achieve that.  I don't know . . . 



2666 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

I mean, innovative is really in the eyes of the person who 

defines innovation.  I prefer to define it as projects that are 

going to be of some important need and of long-term benefit 

for whatever community they are built in and in some cases for 

the province as a whole. 

 

I guess you could in those terms define the Cumberland bridge 

as an innovative project.  It's not something that was going to 

be built, certainly hasn't been built for the 30 years of the 

community of Cumberland House under various 

administrations -- Liberal, Conservative, NDP.  But they've 

lobbied during that time.  It's under this particular 

administration -- which just happens to be a New Democratic 

Party administration -- with money from the federal 

infrastructure program, that we're finally going to get that done.  

I think that qualifies under the definition of an innovative 

project. 

 

But there are other things we're looking at as well.  I mean I 

don't want to be critical of how the money is being expended in 

other places.  But for the purposes of the debate, I want to raise 

some of the things that are happening in places like New 

Brunswick where the municipality is being told by -- 

unfortunately in this case -- the Liberal Government of New 

Brunswick and the Liberal government in Ottawa, you've got 

no say in where the money is going to be spent.  We've got our 

list, and the federal members of parliament are going to pick 

that list. 

 

Well I want to say, to the credit of the minister from the federal 

government here in Saskatchewan and to the credit of, I think, 

the way we're operating it and running this program, that's not 

going to happen here. 

 

We're going to pick projects.  We're going to let the 

municipalities pick the projects on the municipal program 

because they know better what they need.  And we're going to 

designate provincial projects which are legitimate and create 

jobs.  The announcement that came out of Alberta recently 

from the community of Rocky Mountain House where they're 

going to spend $170,000 on a street sweeper and snowplough 

and $52,000 on a snowblower, those are probably very 

important expenditures for the community, but they aren't 

going to create one job in that community.  And that's not what 

the project was intended to do. 

 

So please understand -- and I can assure you -- that we're not 

going to adopt that kind of approach.  We want to make this 

program work as best as it possibly can. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I can understand your enthusiasm for doing 

so.  The program will employ people, and that's true.  What is 

the province doing to use this program to create new, 

permanent jobs? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm sorry, I was preoccupied. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- No problem.  The program will employ 

people.  What is the province doing to use this program to 

create new jobs that are permanent? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A good infrastructure in any 

economy allows for and enhances economic development.  

This program was not developed for long-term employment.  

This program was developed and stated by the federal 

government to provide short-term employment, kick-start 

employment, as some federal politicians have described it; 

that's a fair description. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan, we're not relying on the 

infrastructure program to be the sole economic development 

vehicle.  We're going to use it to develop the kinds of 

infrastructure as best we can to enhance economic 

development. 

 

But the province itself has a long-term economic development 

strategy under the Partnership for Renewal strategy which the 

Minister of Economic Development and the Premier have 

spoken to many times.  But to the extent that . . . And we're 

doing it through regional economic development authorities; 

we're doing it with targeted tax measures such as the fairly 

significant reduction, I think about 20 per cent, in the 

small-business tax rate which we have implemented over the 

last two years; such things as the reduction of the sales tax for 

manufacturers for things that they have to buy which they use 

in the manufacturing but which they have to replace from time 

to time; that's a long-term economic development strategy 

which the province has put together. 

 

But going back to the infrastructure, you cannot, whether it's 

roads or bridges or the electronic communications 

infrastructure, unless you are up to date in those things, you're 

not going to be able to see or maximize the long-term economic 

development strategy. So to that extent, the two do tie together. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- And I agree with you; that was the aim of 

the infrastructure program as the federal government outlined 

it. 

 

How many jobs will be targeted to people -- young people or 

people who have never had jobs before?  Is there any effort to 

make sure that applies to them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There's no way, there's no way to 

know that because when . . . this is not . . . I don't want to 

designate anything.  Let us assume the city of Regina, when 

their projects are approved, they will do the hiring, they will do 

their tendering process; so we can't say how many jobs of a 

gender or age are going to be employed in those kind of 

projects.  I don't know how you would be able to make that 

kind of an accurate statement.  So I can't answer that question. 

 

If people are unemployed, they're seeking a job, there's a 

construction job available, everybody will have access to it and 

depending on who the project managers are will determine 

who's hired there.  I hope a lot of young people and students are 

able to access these jobs, those jobs.  I think there's some 

promising signs in Saskatchewan from the point of view of 

young people employment. 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2667 

There's an article in I believe the front page or the third page of 

the Regina Leader-Post today, which has officials of 

Employment Canada saying that the number of jobs for 

students and young people this year has increased quite 

significantly over the number available last year.  That is not to 

say that it's as good as anybody would like it to be.  I think 

there's a lot that needs yet to be done, but I think there's 

certainly clear signs that there is movement in the right 

direction.  And to the extent that we can encourage and it can 

happen that young people are employed in infrastructure 

projects, that would be a plus. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In northern 

Saskatchewan, families with income under 20,000 is double the 

rate in the South so getting a job is of major importance.  There 

are 19,700 people ready and able to work but only 40 per cent 

of them in the North have a job.  How much of the job creation 

in the program will be directed to the North? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All of that has yet not been decided 

or announced but I can tell the member from Regina North 

West that in the Cumberland bridge project, for example, with 

agreement with the community at least 50 per cent, at least 50 

per cent of the jobs on that project are jobs that are going to 

have to be made available to Northerners.  So we're making an 

effort to make sure that Northerners are employed in northern 

projects and if they can come down in other projects, that fine. 

 

(1145) 

 

But the only northern project that has been announced so far is 

the Cumberland bridge.  But because I have already said it 

publicly and therefore I don't think it's going to break any 

protocol with the federal government, we are seriously looking 

at doing some water and sewage projects in northern 

communities which will provide northern employment. 

 

But as to the full amount of this money that we'll spend in 

northern Saskatchewan, I can't say because all the approvals 

with the federal government have yet not been made.  And 

when that's made, certainly we will be publicly announcing it 

and the information will be available not only to the member 

from North West but to everybody in the province. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  I'm glad to hear that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Now I have one more somewhere here . . . What is your 

government's plan to repair the infrastructure that breaks down 

after the money for the infrastructure money has been spent?  

Have you discussed that -- the future?  After some of this work 

has been done, what is the future of infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess the answer 

to that is the infrastructure will be there.  It will be maintained 

in the same way as it would be maintained under any 

circumstances.  If it is municipal streets and roads and sewer 

and water, the 

municipality would be responsible for the maintenance of those 

projects, the way it is now.  If it is a provincial project such as a 

bridge or whatever it might be or some other facilities, then the 

province would maintain those projects under normal budget 

appropriations as we do all the time.  And that's . . . I don't 

know what more I could say to that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- One last question.  With respect to the trade 

and convention centre in Saskatoon, has that funding been 

approved; what stage is it at; and it is contingent upon the city 

building a casino in any particular location? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We have had no application for a 

trade and convention centre from the city of Saskatoon, so I 

can't really say much on it.  It's really a responsibility and the 

decision of the city of Saskatoon as to what they want to do 

with this. 

 

And I can tell you now that any project that may come will not 

provide any money as is part of our casino policy.  There will 

be no provincial money going to any casino project.  If there's a 

casino project that happens to be in the vicinity, that's going to 

be somebody else's business.  There will be no infrastructure 

money, assuming that this comes, to be going for a casino. 

 

But I guess the bottom line is we have had no application for a 

trade and convention centre in Saskatoon so therefore it's not 

been considered to date. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, to you and your 

officials for answering my questions. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 68 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I would like to thank Mr. Bailey, 

the director of infrastructure program, for his assistance here 

today.  And we appreciate the fact that I was able to answer the 

questions because of his presence here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also would like 

to offer my thanks to the officials for coming in today and for 

the minister's answers, and we look forward to much dialogue 

in the future. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And to the minister, 

welcome to you and your officials. 

 

Mr. Minister, we've been looking forward to this debate for 

some time with bated breath.  We've been anticipating the 

debate with the highest-paid secretary in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we indeed accept the challenge with some 

delight.  But we're pleased to be here. 



2668 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

Now, Mr. Minister, I think you did hold up a volume of 

information and asked if you'd send it over.  I'm not exactly 

sure what you had, whether it was the global questions which . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, yes.  We've received those, 

and we certainly appreciate that.  And thank you and your 

office and your department for having forwarded those answers 

to those global questions.  We have a few questions that are 

arising out of the global questions that we have brought 

forward. 

 

But before I get into the specifics of Provincial Secretary, Mr. 

Minister, I'd like to ask a question regarding SaskTel.  I 

understand you're the minister responsible for SaskTel.  And 

the question has . . . and it's been an ongoing concern and 

complaint that has been coming in to SaskTel -- certainly was 

there when our government was in office, probably was there 

back in the '70s and the '60s -- and that's regarding phone 

districts in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we still have some little districts, and I was just 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if your office or as minister, if 

SaskTel is taking a serious look at ways in which we can come 

to more workable arrangements in helping some of these small 

communities where basically most of their phone calls are long 

distance, and the 40/40 really doesn't do much to address those 

concerns.  And I'm wondering if you could give us any 

indication of what might come and whether there is any change 

under way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't want to engage in a debate 

on SaskTel because I don't have SaskTel officials here.  That's 

a Crown Corporations matter. 

 

But to that question, in order to be of some assistance, I can 

simply say that that is an issue that's always under constant 

review.  I can't say what may come out of it, but I remember in 

the 1970s when efforts were started to consolidate some of the 

districts.  In the 1980s that happened under the former 

administration.  And that's something that SaskTel is going to 

have to and in fact is reviewing now as part of its overall 

strategic business plan into the future, as we get into the 

competitive world. 

 

The member, I'm sure, understands that SaskTel is no longer 

the kind of Crown corporation that it at one time was where 

there was a monopoly.  It is now in the competitive business 

with other private sector companies -- Mobility Cellular for 

example is one of those examples.  There are many other things 

-- the products they provide, they're competing for. 

 

And I have indicated earlier that the government will soon be 

releasing a White Paper addressing the question of 

long-distance competition.  We do have, and fortunately so, a 

moratorium from CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission) until 1998. 

 

I understand that the government of Quebec has asked the 

federal government for a reconsideration of the policy so that 

there is some provincial 

involvement in some of these decisions with regard to 

communications, telecommunications.  And we have indicated 

formally with a letter to the federal government we'd be very 

much interested in that discussion because we think there 

should be some provincial involvement in this. 

 

But I'm going off to some other topics . . . but going back to the 

original question, yes, that is a review that's taking place.  

What's going to happen I can't say at this time but when some 

decisions are made, SaskTel will be making the announcement; 

and if the member is able to bump somebody else off from the 

Crown Corporations Committee and attend when they were 

before the Crown Corporations Committee, we can give him 

more specific answers. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, I 

would be pleased to have the opportunity to sit down with 

yourself and maybe someone in your office to discuss some of 

those questions rather than taking up time in the Assembly 

today and address some of those matters as SaskTel does its 

review and I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a number of questions here, and I think a 

number of these questions I'm going to basically probably give 

you two or three or four questions at a time rather than one 

question and specifically just getting up to ask each individual 

question.  And maybe in that matter we could facilitate the 

process of the committee a lot more smoothly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to know if you can tell us what the 

mandate of your department is.  What does the department 

basically do on a daily basis?  Are there any previous 

government functions that it performs?  And what new 

functions has it developed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the mandate of the 

department is more than being the Provincial Secretary.  

Nobody would ever expect me to ever be a secretary.  That 

takes a special kind of skill which I never hope to have. 

 

Members, anybody who's been in any administrative offices 

knows that a minister or a president or a director survives 

because of the secretaries that work there.  I'm not sure I could 

ever fulfil that function.  But the mandate of the Department of 

the Provincial Secretary, it is a central agency; it is not what 

one would call a line department in the same manner as a 

Department of Health or a Department of Education.  But our 

role is to coordinate and manage intergovernmental affairs, to 

telecommunications policy and broadcasting issues.  In the 

Provincial Secretary is located the protocol services for the 

government, the French-language services.  We're responsible 

for the funding and whatever support is provided for the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

And in recent months since my appointment, probably the most 

significant role, although the rest are important too, has been in 

the area of intergovernmental affairs.  And this area will 

certainly become even much more involved as the myriad of 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2669 

reviews and studies and negotiations between the federal and 

provincial governments begin to take place on social policy 

issues, on a whole wide range of things.  And I suspect that this 

is going to be a considerably busy time because of what's 

coming. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, possibly 

one other position that could be added to that is political 

watchdog, and to just maintain the good, smooth operations of 

government.  I'm not exactly sure but it would certainly appear 

to be that. 

 

Mr. Minister, in your office we noted, in the global questions, 

that there were a couple of employees . . . and I'm not sure, I 

may get the names pronounced a little wrong.  Donna Fincati, I 

think, went from a 2,893 a month to 3,454 in the space of just 

three months, an increase of nearly 20 per cent.  And also, Lisa 

MacMurchy who went from 2,480 last year to 3,454 this year, 

an increase of nearly 40 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we've had an ongoing dialogue and debate 

in this Assembly regarding salary increases and the fact there 

are certain people in our society that were refused increases.  

And yet here again we see, even in your office, where there's 

substantial increases that have taken place in a matter of not 

over a year, a year and a half, but a matter of a few months.  

And certainly the public are wondering how can you justify the 

outrageous increases.  What have these employees done to earn 

these increases, and what are the qualifications for these 

positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to 

answer that.  In the case of Donna Fincati, this was a 

reclassification because Ms. Fincati moved from her original 

position of junior ministerial assistant to that of intermediate 

ministerial assistant, within the classifications that now are 

published, which didn't used to exist before. 

 

So it's simply a change of jobs from a junior position to an 

intermediate position, and therefore there is a different pay 

scale there.  There was no increase to her in the pay scale itself; 

she went to exactly the same level which she left, so there's no 

increase other than the fact that she has now got a more senior 

position and therefore is in the new salary that applies to that 

position. 

 

In the case of Lisa MacMurchy, she is my senior secretary.  

Before this position she was an intermediate secretary; but 

when my previous senior secretary left, Lisa MacMurchy 

moved into that position and therefore is paid according to that 

position. 

 

There was no . . . again no change from the step that she was 

on, simply because it's a new position which pays a higher 

salary, just as if you move from a director's position to a 

vice-president's position, there's a different salary that's paid in 

the vice-president's position. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'll provide them to you. 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, as we've seen time and time 

again, we've noted and certainly your office has and many of 

your colleagues have indicated that the increases in salary 

weren't necessarily salary increases, but were reclassifications. 

 

Now I think to most of the public across Saskatchewan, a 

reclassification was just a polite way of giving people a major 

increase in salaries.  In most cases they continue to work in 

your office, you indicate that they've moved up a stage, which 

automatically gives them the salary increase.  Most other 

people don't have the opportunity to move up. 

 

I'm sure if you were to ask the Provincial Court judges, they 

don't move from a class 1 to a class 2 or a class 3 position.  

They would probably argue that if they had that opportunity 

then we wouldn't have been and your government wouldn't be 

in the position that it is today, where you're being taken to court 

because of the roll-back and the rescinding of your legislation. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, the people across Saskatchewan are 

wondering what real public benefit was served by just 

reclassifying people and bumping them into a higher income 

bracket, rather than just saying, okay, we'll give . . . take the 

normal increases, like other public employees across the 

province have received. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The explanation is very simple, Mr. 

Chairman.  These people took on a different job and a different 

position.  And that is not unique; that happens in retail stores, 

that happens in factories, that happens in the public service.  If 

you are employed as a clerk steno 1, you get paid a certain 

salary.  If there is a vacancy in a clerk steno 3 position and you 

apply and you get that job, you will get paid the salary that is 

paid by that particular position with all the increased 

responsibilities that come with that position. 

 

In the case of both Ms. Fincati and Ms. MacMurchy, they both 

were moved into the new positions -- not new positions, but 

positions in which there was a vacancy because people who 

had previously filled them went on to other jobs or left. 

 

So I don't think that there's anything confusing about that and I 

don't think the public does not understand what that's all about.  

I think the public of Saskatchewan clearly knows that if you 

work at a certain job and you apply for a different job and you 

take that job, that you will get the pay that that particular job 

pays.  This was not an attempt to simply increase somebody's 

salary.  This was people who moved to a different job which 

has higher responsibilities and are paid according to the 

classification of that job. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Asking leave to 

introduce guests. 



2670 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the 

minister and the member from Moosomin for allowing this 

interruption. 

 

It's my pleasure today, Mr. Chairman, to introduce on behalf of 

the member for Melville, some 54 grade 4 students from 

Parkview School in Melville seated in the Speaker's gallery. 

 

They've already had the tour of the legislature, and I regret to 

say they had their picture taken and I wasn't able to be there 

with them; so contrary to what guide services indicate about 

my picturesqueness, it didn't work out today. 

 

Accompanying these 54 grade 4 students are their teachers, 

Darlene Taylor, and Elmer Heshka; and chaperons, Mrs. 

Burridge, Mrs. Nordin, Mrs. Szaroz, and Mrs. Smith.  I ask all 

my colleagues and all hon. members to join me in welcoming 

these Parkview School students, teachers, and chaperons to the 

Legislative Assembly and wish them a safe trip back to 

Melville. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you've just given us a bit of an exhortation as to why people 

would apply for new job opportunities.  It seems to me that in 

the private sector if the job opportunity comes open, there is a 

public tender, at least a notification put out and tenders open 

for bids for people to . . . individuals to apply for these 

positions. 

 

And I'm wondering if in your offices there was a notification 

and there were tenders for these positions or the fact that it was 

just another avenue . . . You can argue one thing, but the reality 

is it was just a way of bumping up people into higher-salaried 

positions and using the argument that they have taken a 

position where they actually have greater responsibilities, and I 

would question the fact of those responsibilities.  Indeed, Mr. 

Minister, can you tell us what new roles have been played by a 

number of these individuals in the positions they have now 

assumed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think . . . 

once again I have to disagree with the member opposite.  The 

positions in the office of the minister of the Crown are 

positions that are not publicly advertised positions.  Everybody 

understands that.  They are positions that are particular, 

confidential kind of positions that they report directly to the 

minister. 

I don't think anybody in Saskatchewan would expect that 

ministers would hire under that kind of a process, so that does 

not apply in this particular case.  I mean I ask the member 

opposite did the member from Rosthern who became the whip 

of the Conservative Party, did the Conservative Party or House 

Leader . . . sorry, House Leader.  Maybe the member from . . . 

he's not the whip, but whoever might be the whip, I'm sure the 

Conservative caucus or the Liberal caucus didn't issue an 

advertisement asking for applications to fulfil the role of the 

whip or the House Leader which is the same kind of thing.  

And yet when they moved into that position of the whip or the 

House Leader or became a member of the . . . Leader of the 

Third Party with an additional member, there came along an 

increase in pay.  I don't know how you can argue that this is 

somehow wrong. 

 

There's something I want to add further to the member from 

Moosomin because I had forgotten it, and that when these two 

individuals moved to their new positions, they moved to the 

bottom of the range of those positions, so there was no increase 

other than what those positions pay for.  The responsibilities of 

Ms. MacMurchy are those of the main secretary or the 

secretary in the minister's office, so she fulfils the role of all of 

the direction of the secretarial staff in my office, and therefore 

there is greater responsibilities that come with that. 

 

In the case of Ms. Fincati, when she moved into the position of 

intermediate, she undertook the additional responsibilities of 

being my ministerial assistant looking after SaskTel which in 

itself is a full-time responsibility, but she carries along with that 

some other responsibilities as well. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to make one 

comment regarding your argument as to whether or not we had 

open nominations for the positions of Government House 

Leader or Whip.  Certainly if you're going to be a House 

Leader or a whip on this side of the House, you've got to be, 

first of all, elected to this Assembly to be appointed to that 

position.  And it's not really an open, competitive position. 

 

I'm sure on your side of the House it was the same thing.  You 

didn't openly have a competition for those positions.  And the 

Premier made a decision based on the individuals around him.  

So I just wanted to remind you because I'm afraid maybe that's 

some of the criteria that we're seeing taking place in your office 

right now and we hope that that changes. 

 

Mr. Minister, as well you hired two new staff members in your 

office this year, Randy Dickin and Linda Sarafinchan, former 

official agent for the NDP in 1991 election.  And here again, 

were these open competitions?  Were other people considered?  

How did you select the individuals?  What were their 

qualifications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, Mr. Chairman, Ms. 

Sarafinchan was hired to replace Ms. Lois Thacyk who left my 

office and therefore I had a 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2671 

vacancy, and Ms. Sarafinchan came in to be my chief 

ministerial assistant.  She was hired at the bottom of the salary 

range. 

 

Mr. Dickin is my junior assistant.  He was brought in at that 

level at the bottom of the salary range.  Ms. Sarafinchan has a 

teacher's certificate.  She has been involved in public service 

for a large number of years.  Yes indeed, she was the secretary 

of the New Democratic Party at one time.  I don't think that that 

should in any way . . . in fact if anything it makes her more 

valuable in my office because of the experience she has gained 

from that. 

 

Randy Dickin has had various experiences in the workforce, 

has been attending the University of Regina, is not attending 

this particular year, as is the case with many students who may 

take some time off to earn some money to go back to school.  

And he is fulfilling a particularly valuable role in his capacity 

as my junior assistant.  I would be pleased to undertake to 

provide some more specific information to the member on all 

of their curriculum vitae and I will do that in writing. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I think, Mr. 

Minister, you certainly give some sound reasons for the 

personnel that you have in your office.  I however must take a 

moment just to reflect on the fact of where the positions you 

took when you were in opposition.  And I trust that the next 

time, after the next election possibly when you're on this side of 

the House again, that you remember the decisions and the 

reasoning and understand how . . . maybe you'll understand a 

little more how government works, having been back on that 

side of the House. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I'll give a number of questions here, and 

maybe you can . . . if you feel . . . you can also feel that to . . . 

send the answers to us in writing as well, rather than taking up 

the time of the House in answering these questions this 

morning. 

 

I wonder if you would detail all expenses paid out to ministerial 

staff in the past year.  Detail all travel undertaken by ministerial 

staff in the past year, including cost -- both total and per staff 

member -- mode of travel, destination, purpose of each trip.  

Detail expenses paid out to yourself as minister in the past year, 

and detail all travel undertaken by yourself in the past year -- 

including costs, who accompanied you, destination, and 

purpose of each trip. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  My assistants tell me 

that was a little fast, but we'll get it out of Hansard, so no 

problem. 

 

A lot of this information has already been provided in the 

information which was sent over, but we will look at what is 

missing there -- the questions that you have asked which we 

have not answered -- and we will redo the package and 

certainly provide it for you.  Because I think this . . . eventually 

it all gets into the Public Accounts; but I appreciate that it 

comes later, rather than sooner.  And we will certainly be very 

expeditious in providing you with that information. 

 And I will make sure that the Liberal member of the third party 

will also get the same information. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

trying to be as articulate as I can and yet move through the 

questions I've got here at the same time, trying to bring up 

some of the points that we've noticed in going through the 

global questions that we feel maybe we didn't receive all the 

answers to.  And I appreciate the fact that you'll take the time to 

get those answers for us. 

 

We noticed, Mr. Minister, that comparing your personal 

expenditures between this year and last year, we of course 

realize that your department last year was actually only in 

effect for roughly six months at the reporting end last year, and 

so we've tried to take that into account. 

 

However it looks, Mr. Minister, that in relation to the fact that 

your department was really only in effect for some six months, 

the cost of your department is substantially higher when you 

take into the fact the full year versus if you made the 

comparison figure. 

 

For the six months of '92-93 you've spent about 42,000 for four 

employees, according to your answers to our global questions 

from last year, for a total monthly expenditure of about 7,000. 

 

This year you've spent 138,889 on three employees, for a total 

monthly expenditure of about eleven six -- an increase of over 

70 per cent.  And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, how you 

account for this significant increase. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I can answer the question.  

The report that you had for last year was not for a full year 

because intergovernmental affairs, communication policy unit 

-- those are the two main ones -- were only reported for six 

months of the year because they came to the Department of 

Provincial Secretary part way through the year.  And so there 

will be some discrepancy between those numbers and what you 

will see for this year because for this year you're looking at a 

full year.  And that's why you will see that kind of an increase. 

 

There really isn't an increase other than the fact that the 

expenditures shown under Provincial Secretary for last year 

were only for six months for those two major components 

which are intergovernmental affairs and telecommunications 

policy unit. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, the figures that I gave you in 

discussing the costs for the years, that partial year last year and 

the year this year, was that funding mostly for employees, or 

were there any other areas that the funding was used in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told it's all personnel. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I noticed in 1992-93 there was 

spending in the category of employees went from 



2672 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

24,728 to 141,956 for this year.  I'm wondering, although the 

period is only double, it seems that there's a significant increase 

of sixfold.  Would part of that increase come back from our 

argument a little earlier on, where people were reclassified into 

new job positions, and therefore the increases in salaries took 

effect this year, and that's the reason we see such a substantial 

difference?  Because if you take the 24,728, multiply by 2, 

that's only just about 50,000.  Yet we're up to 141,000 for the 

full 12 months of '93-94. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we're 

working from the same song sheets here.  In the 24,728 

number, that did not include telecommunications policy unit.  

That did not include intergovernmental affairs.  Now if we go 

to the other sheet -- the more recent one -- we're talking about 

the in-scope.  That now does include intergovernmental affairs, 

and it does include telecommunications policy unit, and I think 

there are two additional people that have been transferred from, 

one, the Department of Finance for administration officer.  And 

the other one was one person from Executive Council which I 

believe is part of the intergovernmental affairs unit. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, is that 

actually what we have is a number of people that now have 

fallen under the purview of your department that weren't there 

before, and as you amalgamated the departments . . . Fair 

enough. 

 

I noticed under contract employees, there's an increase as well 

in this category that we can't seem to explain from the global 

questions by the difference in reporting periods alone.  We see 

an expenditure of 50,000 on contracts last year and 145,000 

this year.  I also notice there are three contract employees we 

have listed . . . are Greg Argue, Ian Peach, and Clay Winslow.  

Can you tell us what each of these people did or are doing for 

your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me first of all try to be helpful 

by some clarification.  There may have been more contracts 

than what is here.  When you look at contracts three, it's as of 

March 31 or the end of the month, the number of people on 

contract.  But throughout the year there may have been others, 

and I think we have provided the whole list of contracts in the 

material we've provided that have been undertaken throughout 

a year.  So that's why that number . . . you can't just read it the 

way it is. 

 

Now once again, I am told that one of the reasons why there is 

a change in the numbers is that in the first report, the June 18, 

1993 one, that was the one that deals with the six-month period.  

And the one of March 31, 1994 deals with a full year.  And so 

that if you take all that into consideration, there's not that great 

a difference. 

 

Now as to the contracts that those three individuals who you 

referred to speak of . . . Do we have that?  Yes, here we are.  

Mr. Greg Argue.  He was on the contract service.  Mr. Argue 

did some research, short-term 

research on agriculture related to NAFTA (North American 

Free Trade Agreement) because we were at that time in the 

processes of having to find where we were heading with this 

thing, knowing that it was going to definitely be in place.  Mr. 

Ian Peach, who is there until the end of June, he's our Ottawa 

liaison officer.  We felt that we needed somebody in Ottawa 

day by day to monitor when there was a change in the 

government and talk of a wide range of changes in policy and 

policy reviews to sort of be on top of the issues so that we 

could be on top of them here in Saskatchewan.  And he's been 

fulfilling that role for us. 

 

Mr. Winslow, we brought Mr. Winslow in to pick up some of 

the responsibilities that Mr. Dickson Bailey had when we 

moved him to be the executive director of the infrastructure 

program which has turned out to be a fairly time consuming 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So in all then, Mr. Minister, how many contracts 

or contractual agreements did you have?  I'm just noticing that, 

at least in the information that I have in front of me here, the 

one page gives us the three individuals we just talked about: 

Mr. Argue, Mr. Peach, Mr. Winslow.  The second one -- and I 

just misplaced it for a minute here -- has Mr. Bailey's name on 

it, but there's just two.  Well Mr. Bailey was transferred to 

another department.  I forget the other . . . oh maybe it's right 

here.  Yves Larochelle -- I believe contractual service -- 

accepted a temporary position.  Were there any other 

contractual agreements besides what would appear five 

individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Besides the three you see here for 

1993-1994, Mr. Bailey had been on contract, and he is now 

transferred to permanent because of his new responsibilities, so 

he's no longer on contract status.  There were several 

employees -- and I will undertake to provide you that 

information because I seem to not to have it with me -- that 

were part of the communication agency which was located in 

the Provincial Secretary's department.  But as of the beginning 

of this fiscal year, we have transferred that to the Executive 

Council.  And when the Executive Council is before the 

legislature, you may want to pursue that some more. 

 

Those people who were on contract there -- and I think there 

we about three; we'll confirm that -- they no longer are on 

contract because they've been transferred to Executive Council.  

But that is the extent of the contractual personnel that we had in 

'93-94. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, as well, 

you alluded to the fact that Mr. Peach was located in Ottawa.  

You indicated that you felt you needed a liaison in Ottawa.  

What I'm wondering . . . is Mr. Peach still located in Ottawa?  

What was the length of his contract?  How much has been paid 

to him to date?  And, Mr. Minister, as well while we're talking 

about just . . . maybe I should ask you to just respond to this 

before I get into the next one because it doesn't directly relate 

to Mr. Peach. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Peach is still in Ottawa because 

we feel that's where he can serve us the best. 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2673 

He is on contract until the end of June of this year.  And we 

may be looking at offering him another position; oh, I 

understand he's taking another position and not working for the 

provincial government.  And then we'll have to consider what 

we do with that at that time.  He is being paid during this 

three-month period at the rate of $4,000 a month. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I guess one question that arises from that, since 

he's located in Ottawa, has he been there permanently, or has 

he been back . . . moving back and forth?   I'm not sure whether 

he's at family members' or what kind of costs would be 

associated with his travel back and forth to visit with -- say -- 

family members that he visited in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Peach has worked in Ottawa 

when we recruited him.  He has been working in various 

capacities there.  He's worked in the Department of External 

Affairs, I understand; he's been a research assistant of the 

Faculty of Law, Queens University.  He is legal assistant to the 

ministry of the Attorney General in Ontario.  He was 

constitutional adviser to the joint special committee in the 

process for amending the constitution in 1991. 

 

So he's certainly got the knowledge of the Ottawa environment, 

if I can define it in that way, that we needed in the individual 

that we wanted because we wanted somebody who knew what 

was going on and knew who to contact in order to get 

information that would be valuable for us in putting together 

our policies and our approaches in our dealings with the federal 

government. 

 

There has been no moving expenses because he was resident of 

Ottawa; he is resident in Ottawa and apparently is leaving at the 

end of June to take on new employment. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I notice 

there's another line that says, other personnel at $142,000.  

What would this include or who would this include, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That line under other -- 

$142,396.48 -- includes the following.  I'll give you the 

specifics.  There was a severance of $117,505.44 because of 

employees who were . . . positions were no longer available.  

There was a car allowance in here of $405.  There was 

honoraria of $2,200, and a career assistance expenditure of 

$4,839.38.  That's career assistance for people whose positions 

have been abolished, and therefore there is a program in the 

government to assist these people to go to another occupation 

and another career. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as well I indicated before that . . . I 

asked the question regarding travel.  I notice that there's 

significant increase in travels both in your personnel in 

in-province and out-of-province.  And I'm wondering if you 

could give us an indication of why we have such significant 

increases in travel by yourself and department personnel at the 

end of this year compared to last. 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Three reasons.  One, that the first 

year you're looking at was a partial year, six months.  What 

we're looking at now here is a full year.  In that first year not all 

of the employees were on board.  We had some employees 

brought in since then, so therefore there would be more travel. 

 

In the first numbers you're looking at, intergovernmental affairs 

was not involved.  In this most recent set of numbers, we do 

have intergovernmental affairs.  And in intergovernmental 

affairs, because of the kind and nature of the work, there is a 

considerable amount of travel.  Intergovernmental affairs, when 

you're dealing with other provinces, the federal government, 

and in some cases international matters, I'm sure the member 

will understand that there will be an increased amount of travel, 

as there has been.  If we're going to make sure that we are on 

top of issues dealing with the federal government and make 

sure that the province is treated the way we think it should be 

treated, we're going to have to go to Ottawa from time to time 

or Quebec City to be on top of issues. 

 

The same applies if we're dealing with the question of the 

provincial twinning with China.  You can't do it over a 

telephone.  There's a cultural thing.  There's a business thing.  

The Chinese . . . I introduced some people here the other day, a 

working group that was here.  Because Intergovernmental 

Affairs is now Provincial Secretary, there's a greater need for 

this kind of travel expenditure. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So I guess what that 

indicates, in your last comments about the twinning with 

China, it certainly looks like some of the decisions made a few 

years ago are beneficial.  And as we move into the new age 

regardless of which party is in power, maybe at the time it 

seems insignificant, but we've all got to move along.  And I 

appreciate those comments. 

 

Mr. Minister, I notice that Mr. Dickson Bailey was on contract, 

and we had Mr. Bailey in just a moment ago regarding the 

infrastructure program.  I'm wondering, is Mr. Bailey still on 

contract now, or is he a permanent employee of the department, 

or what is the rationale behind Mr. Bailey's contract?  And how 

is he employed presently, and what are his duties and his 

qualifications?  What were his qualifications for the jobs that 

he has presently been performing? 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Bailey is no longer on contract.  

He is now an Order in Council appointment, permanent.  The 

member will know that Order in Councils are at the wishes of 

the Executive Council or Her Majesty, but he is permanent to 

that extent. 

 

Mr. Bailey is the director, executive director of the 

infrastructure program.  He has certainly a lot of important 

qualifications for that in that he has extensive experience in the 

redesign of policies and procedures for the community grants 

review program in the city of Regina, where he was employed.  

He has 



2674 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

been a senior policy analyst in the urban planning department 

of the city of Regina during a period in the 1990s.  He's had 

private secretary experience as a managing partner in 

Performance Development and Training Ltd., and he was Chief 

Electoral Officer in 1979 to 1982, as the member will know, 

and director of policy development and co-ordination branch, 

Transportation Agency of Saskatchewan, between 1976 and 

1979. 

 

So I think he certainly has the qualifications to do the job that is 

necessary over that two-year period of time in the 

federal-provincial infrastructure program because of that kind 

of a background. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And picking up where . 

. . as a member of this side of the House, you probably would 

have reminded us of the fact and I remind you of the fact, 

probably the most important qualification: possibly some good 

political leanings and feelings at the time as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's a Mr. Bob Hersche and a Cyril Scheske 

listed as senior policy advisers.  Can you tell us what kinds of 

policies they advise you on and what their qualifications are? 

 

Also, what do the research officers who work for your 

department do?  Specifically, what research have they 

performed in the past year, and have they completed any 

reports for your department?  Could we see the copies of these 

reports? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Both Mr. Scheske and Mr. Hersche 

were public service competition positions.  They do the work in 

the telecommunications policy unit, dealing to a large extent 

with CRTC questions.  So therefore, they interface with 

SaskTel as well as the policy questions of the provincial 

government. 

 

I can provide you with the details in written form, but I'll give 

you a short summary of the backgrounds of these individuals. 

 

Mr. Hersche is now the senior adviser in telecommunications.  

He was for some time executive director of operations of 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Network or SCN, from '89 

to 1993.  Under the previous administration, he's been project 

coordinator, Saskatchewan Provincial Secretary, from '87 to 

'89.  Manager, research and budget unit, Saskatchewan Parks, 

Recreation and Culture.  And has had various positions within 

the provincial government that give him a wide range of 

knowledge. 

 

His educational background is: he has a Master of Arts degree 

from the University of Manitoba, Bachelor of Arts in Honours 

from the U of R (University of Regina) and Bachelor of 

Education, University of Saskatchewan, Regina. 

 

Mr. Scheske is a graduate from the University of Regina in 

computer science.  University of Regina, qualifying for a year 

in Master of Arts in environmental science.  And has a 

Bachelor of Arts with distinction in 

sociology and mathematics.  And is a graduate of Royal Roads 

Military College as well. 

 

He, prior to coming to the provincial government, was director 

of the business development division in Co-operator's Data 

Services Ltd in Regina, and I can undertake to provide more 

details on that.  But I think what the main question the member 

is asking is, how do they get their positions.  The positions 

were Public Service competitions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And, Mr. Minister, the question as well was, what 

research have they performed in the past year?  Have they 

completed any reports?  Would those reports be available to the 

House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Their main work has been research 

related to the CRTC because of the changing world of 

telecommunications.  That has preoccupied most of their work, 

but as you will have noticed in the press today or yesterday, 

there's talk of health technologies, business that may be an 

opportunity.  They did a considerable amount of work in the 

work related to the study that was done on that, and those are 

the major areas which they have been concentrating on in the 

past year. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, we also notice that you have a 

couple of new committees this year, one the Information 

Technology and Telecommunications Strategy Advisory 

Committee, and I guess the big question is, Mr. Minister, 

wouldn't it have been more appropriate to run these committees 

under SaskTel, Economic Development or Sask Research 

Council rather than out of your office, and what's the reasoning 

for running them out of your office versus these corporations 

that they're probably . . . the areas that they're dealing with 

specifically? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The main reason is that these are 

generally general policy committees as opposed to the business 

kind of decisions that SaskTel has to make.  These are general 

policy questions that the government has to look at from the 

point of view of telecommunications and so on. 

 

So we believe it would be inappropriate to have this kind of 

work done with the commercial Crown corporation which has a 

particular view of the world because of the nature of the 

business that it does.  In government we need more of a general 

policy approach, and that's why they're located here: to make 

sure that they give us that kind of advice as opposed to the 

advice limited to the perspective of the commercial Crown 

which would in this case be SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as well your department in its 

global questions reported that this year you have nine CVA 

(Central Vehicle Agency) vehicles.  We'd like to know who the 

vehicles were assigned to, and why they were required.  And 

last year you gave us some answers to whether these vehicles 

were owned or leased and the cost or value of each vehicle.  I'm 

wondering if you could do that again for us this year, Mr. 

Minister? 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2675 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member might point out where 

the nine number comes from, because I am told that the number 

of vehicles assigned to the Provincial Secretary's department is 

five, not nine.  Okay?  Just a moment. 

 

The vehicles . . . the member asked to whom have they been 

assigned and that's what I was looking for.  There is one 

vehicle that was assigned and it was leased to the French policy 

unit, French-language coordination.  There were two vehicles 

assigned to the Lieutenant-Governor -- one which she uses 

mainly out of Regina but there's also one in Saskatoon.  And 

there were two others -- one which is assigned to the deputy 

minister and one which of course is assigned to the minister, 

who must have a car. 

 

And that is the extent of and to whom these vehicles are 

assigned.  And as of April 1, if you look into the year, the 

Estimates which we're considering, that vehicle is no longer 

assigned to the French-language unit, so now there's only four. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Minister.  Mr. Minister, I thought you 

were within walking distance of your job and therefore you 

didn't need a vehicle . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right. 

 

Mr. Minister, we also noticed that you published a new manual 

this year -- the communication service procurement policy 

manual, and what I'd like to know, is this manual essential to 

the report of last year's committee, the communications audit 

committee?  Could you outline the main recommendations or 

guidelines of the manual, and would it be possible to receive a 

copy of the manual, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- May I suggest, Mr. Chairman, that 

the member raise that question when the Executive Council is 

here, because that unit is now transferred to the Executive 

Council, and the officials who have that information will be 

here when Executive Council is brought before the House. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Regarding computers, Mr. Minister, and this 

seems to be a question that comes up with every department.  

The staff, in going through the questions as well, have a 

question here: it seems that you failed to answer our global 

question regarding whether or not specific computer purchases 

have been tendered; why you didn't tender them, if you didn't 

tender them; and could you provide us with that information, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that all of computer 

purchases have to be tendered.  They are tendered according to 

the government policy.  The government policy applies to all 

departments, so I'm told that the computer purchases we have 

had have indeed been tendered. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- As well, Mr. Minister, under computer purchases, 

we notice there's a miscellaneous computer purchase supplies 

worth 3,900 to almost 

$4,000 from Carlyle Computer Products.  To your knowledge 

-- and what we are trying to determine -- was this a single 

computer purchase, or was it just the total of miscellaneous 

purchases made over the course of the year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sure this is the wrong technical 

term, but I would call them as, the accessories -- like buying 

diskettes, mouse pads, those kinds of things.  There would be a 

whole list of those little items that would be included under that 

expenditure. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, on the subject of polling -- this is 

something that continually arises regardless of which 

government's in power -- on the subject of polling paid for by 

your agency, I'd like to go back a little in time a bit, to some 

surveys done outside this year in review. 

 

In September of 1992 you conducted a general omnibus survey 

of the residents of Saskatchewan.  In the executive summary it 

is stated that 57 questions were asked, yet the survey 

instrument lists only 55 questions.  Likewise, in December of 

'92 you administered an omnibus survey in which the executive 

summary states that 58 questions were asked, yet our copy of 

the survey shows only 47 questions being asked. 

 

And what we'd like to know is how do you account for these 

differences between the stated number of questions and the 

actual number of questions being published? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, I think it's worth noting 

that the polling expenditures are down again for, I think the 

second or third year in a row, because we've been trying to 

reduce the amount of expenditures there.  I think we've done it 

quite significantly. 

 

The reason why you will see the discrepancy in numbers of 

questions asked is that sometimes the pollster may define a 

question as one question, but under there may be a number of 

subquestions.  So we may be talking about the larger number, 

but the pollster will see it as being the one question, not calling 

the subquestions as separate, individual questions. 

 

I should also point out that this also, along with the 

communications agency, has been transferred to Executive 

Council.  And if the member wants those specific answers, 

those officials will be here then. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, just a couple further 

questions.  We've also noticed that most of the executive 

summaries and general methodology sections of your surveys 

do not bother to state the total numbers of questions asked, and 

we'd like to know why. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's really a kind of a technical 

question that I think we should address that when the officials 

are here in the Executive Council, 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

and they'd be able to give that.  I'm sure there's nothing 

complicated about it, but I'm not competent to be able to speak 

to that without those officials but they will be here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Possibly one last question from myself, Mr. 

Minister, and that is one of the major reasons we're concerned . 

. . and you just talked about the fact that polling numbers were 

down or the costs associated with polling was down again this 

year.  What I understand is that we've had a number of people 

also call us with some of the polling that has been done, and 

that's one of the reasons we've asked this question, the fact that 

the number of questions they've been asked versus what we've 

indicated or we've been informed were the number of questions 

on the poll. 

 

(1245) 

 

One of the questions or a couple of the questions that seem to 

be continually asked in each one of these polls when people are 

contacted regarding these surveys is that pollsters commonly 

ask respondents how they are going to vote, who they think the 

best leader is, and other such clearly political questions.  Can 

you confirm for us that your department is in fact carrying out 

partisan political polling with taxpayers' money? 

 

It would seem to us and to a lot of people that the polling, 

indeed, and the conclusion we've arrived at is the fact that 

you've just conveniently neglected to leave out the questions 

that would basically be trying to draw out some partisan 

political responses.  And that's the conclusion we've come to in 

looking at the polling.  And, Mr. Minister, we wonder if you 

can explain this to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well you've come to the wrong 

conclusion, I'm pleased to say.  We're talking about 

expenditures.  Let me point out that in the whole overall 

department this year as opposed to last year, there is an overall 

reduction in the expenditures.  And I think that last year it was 

7.268 million; this year it's going to be 7.233 million.  Just as 

we have reduced the whole polling expenditures, we have been 

reducing the overall expenditures of the department. 

 

I also want to remind the House, Mr. Chairman, that all of the 

polling that is done by the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

omnibus polling, is released every three months.  It's published, 

it's made available to the public, it's made available to the 

press.  That's unprecedented in Saskatchewan.  It's one of the 

major reforms that we've brought about in this government 

since 1991.  It's freedom-of-information accessible, but we 

publish it so that people don't even have to pursue that question 

and ask. 

 

There are no first-by-the-gate to first-by-the-post questions 

asked in these polls.  The government and the taxpayer doesn't 

pay for that.  But I want to point out this: when a pollster 

undertakes a poll, he or she may have several clients for which 

they poll at the same time.  All we do, or anybody else, is we 

buy a  

certain number of questions on the poll. 

 

If the pollster is asking some questions about who you might 

vote for if an election was asked at this time, that wouldn't be 

questions that were being asked because the provincial 

government has asked it to be asked; the pollster may be doing 

it for some other political party or for some other client.  

Because the pollster will be doing work on behalf of more than 

one client on many occasions, and therefore there will be 

questions in those polls that are not related to the questions 

which the government has put on that particular poll. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the matter of polling is 

something that certainly could take some more time.  However, 

I think it's a matter that we can also address with the Executive 

Council, and I appreciate the time that you and your officials 

have given. 

 

I'm not exactly sure that I agree with all of your answers, but I 

thank you for the time you've given this morning and at this 

time I'll allow other members of the Assembly to get into the 

debate. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

would like to ask some questions about the recent western 

premiers' conference.  What was the cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan for this trip? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That just happened last week so all 

of the full expenditures will not yet be compiled so I'm not able 

to give you that.  But that's public information when it's 

available, but I don't have that here because we don't know the 

full amount of that, as I think the member will understand, 

because all of the bills have yet not been submitted. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'll look forward to getting that information 

when it becomes public then.  What role did your staff play in 

organizing the event? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As part of the functions of the 

department of intergovernmental affairs, the department will 

organize, totally, this kind of a conference from the province of 

Saskatchewan's perspective, but they will do it in conjunction 

with somebody from the Department of Executive Council and 

any other departments that may in some way be involved in 

some of the discussions there.  But intergovernmental affairs 

certainly will take the lead role as the central agency 

responsible in organizing. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What is your department's role in 

Saskatchewan's input to the GATT (General Agreement on 

Tariffs and Trade) negotiations?  Does it play the lead role for 

Saskatchewan?  And how do you coordinate your efforts with 

other government departments, particularly the economic 

policy function of Finance and the function of Economic 



May 27, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is overlap between several 

departments.  The department of Provincial Secretary, through 

intergovernmental affairs, will take care of international policy.  

But as it applies to trade matters it'll be the Department of 

Economic Development that will be the lead department.  

Provincial Secretary's intergovernmental affairs branch will 

coordinate, but that lead responsibility would be with the 

department that has that responsibility -- and in the GATT 

question would be the Department of Economic Development. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- What work plan does your department have 

for the forthcoming year regarding preparations for 

international trade negotiations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the various . . . it 

depends on what kind of international negotiations may come 

up.  In the case of agriculture, the Department of Agriculture 

will play the lead role because obviously there is some 

discussions that are taking place between the United States and 

Canada on things like durum wheat and other similar questions.  

That would be the Department of Agriculture. 

 

What intergovernmental affairs would do is make sure that 

other appropriate ministries and ministers are plugged in, make 

sure that the Premier is plugged in and is knowledgeable about 

the cross-sectional, across-government implications of any 

policy that's being talked about.  It will do a coordinating role, 

but if it's agriculture, Agriculture will take the lead.  If it's 

GATT, Economic Development will take the lead, but you 

always need to have a central agency that coordinates all of the 

actors to make sure that we come up with a coordinated policy, 

speak with one voice and go to any negotiations from a position 

of strength and pursue whatever agenda is important to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that's very important. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The Estimates document states 

that through this, the telecommunications and broadcasting 

subvote, the government develops policies and represents the 

government's position with respect to telecommunication 

agencies.  What is your role with respect to CRTC hearings on 

Saskatchewan broadcasters' applications? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The department, on CRTC 

applications, will always have some comment on behalf of the 

broadcasters if -- or whoever -- somebody similar to that wants 

some input from the provincial government, they will approach 

the department, telecommunication policy unit, and we will do 

whatever we can to assist them.  We have written prior to this, 

to the CRTC on behalf of people who were making 

submissions. 
 

There may be from time to time, when the government may 

want itself to make a submission.  I have not experienced one 

during my term in this particular position but that's certainly an 

opportunity that may come about, depending on what the issue 

might be. 
 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  What role does the government 

play in the sponsorship and development of Sask#Net -- 

Sask#Net, the Saskatchewan portion  

of the worldwide Internet computer network? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What the department has been 

doing is playing a coordinating role between the province, the 

universities, both universities, working jointly with Alberta and 

Manitoba to make sure that our efforts are being . . . and 

SaskTel.  So the department's role has been a coordinating role 

bringing all of the actors together. 

 

We are now working on something that I am told that is called 

WurcNet (Western Universities Research Consortium) and part 

of the coordination of the department will be to make sure that 

all of the players are pursuing in a coordinated way, this 

project. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you tell me what WurcNet is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry, it's W-u-r-k.  It's Western 

Universities Research Consortium is what that's all about. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The province of Alberta 

operates a public television network called Access Network 

similar to our SCN.  The Alberta government has changed its 

policy on sponsoring the public network and has decided to 

cease government funded operations, and it appears the Access 

will be absorbed into the private network.  What is the current 

government policy on sponsoring public broadcasting in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As you will have seen in the 

Department of Education, SCN in Saskatchewan continues to 

exist even though the federal government is deleting its 

funding, I think regretfully so, but that's happening.  That's 

different than what is happening in Alberta where they are, I 

understand as the member points out, are totally pulling out.  

We think that SCN has an important role to play.  It is now 

located in 223 communities in Saskatchewan.  Through SCN 

there are services such as university classes being provided in 

rural Saskatchewan so people have access to that kind of 

service; and there is, I think . . . as we get more into distance 

education which is, I think, going to playing a more important 

role in the province, SCN or some form of SCN will play a 

very significant role in delivering that kind of service. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  To what extent will your 

department influence the minister responsible for SCN? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, our role would be a 

coordinating role.  We don't have any responsibility for SCN; 

that is under the ministry of Education.  We have no 

responsibility for that.  But the department's role as a central 

agency will be, to make sure that it plays the coordinating role, 

that all other interest within the government, being it SaskTel 

or Education or some others, are playing one role and have a 

central place in which to go from the point of view of policy 

development. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- One last question.  What is the 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1994 

government's policy on the development of the so-called 

thousand-channel television universe?  What influence will 

your agency have on growth in this industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We've been, in our capacity as the 

coordinating agency, been supporting both the broadcasters and 

the cable companies to make sure that they're able to provide 

the kinds of services that they want to provide.  We've been 

very supportive there.  This is where I said earlier, we would 

intervene on their behalf or assist them, or send letters of 

recommendation to the CRTC if they request it and it's within 

the policy framework of the province. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- You're saying that your work involves 

writing letters or providing some kind of support to them in 

that way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All of the above, and if necessary, 

even going so far as to make representation. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Sounds good to end on a right note.  Thank 

you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials.  I appreciate your 

answers to my questions. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and apologize for 

interrupting the important matter of voting, but it is my 

pleasure on behalf of the member from Kelsey-Tisdale to 

welcome, seated in the west gallery today, 20 grade 8 students 

from Porcupine Plain School.  Accompanying the students are 

teachers Rob Pletz and Debra Zeleny; and the bus driver, Bill 

Zeleny. 

 

It will be my pleasure to meet this group in room 255 in 

another 15 minutes or so.  I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming the grade 8 students from Porcupine Plain School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Provincial Secretary 

Vote 30 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister wishes to acknowledge his 

officials before we go on to the next item. 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I want to 

express my appreciation to the officials who have been with us 

for their assistance and thank them for being here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I too join with the minister in 

thanking him and his officials for their responses to the 

questions we've had this morning.  Thank you. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

SaskTel 

 

The Chair: -- There is no dollar figure.  Are there any 

questions?  If not, then that is agreed. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 

 


