




















































Hansard: May 11, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2237 

 May 11, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I give notice that I shall on Friday ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation (SEDCO): (1) is the Titan Building in Saskatoon 

currently under consideration for sale by SEDCO; (2) how 

many proposals or offers have been brought forward to the 

government regarding this building; (3) has SEDCO received 

any proposals from any companies from the United States 

from a corporation entitled Home Depot; (4) what are 

SEDCO's intentions with the Titan Building; and (5) what are 

the details of any proposals received to date? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you 

and all members of the House, representatives of the University 

of Saskatchewan's Students' Union -- Shauna Curry, the 

incoming president; Tiffany Paulsen, internal vice-president; 

Dean Hall, administrative vice-president; and Bruce Pon, 

academic vice-president. 

 

I'd like to welcome these representatives of student government 

to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon and would ask all 

members to help me welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with the 

Minister of Education in welcoming the USSU (University of 

Saskatchewan Students' Union) executive here today, and in 

particular I would like to comment that Tiffany Paulsen is here 

today; she's a constituent of mine in Saskatoon Wildwood.  I 

had the opportunity to meet with these four dynamic people 

just before question period, and we had a bit of discussion 

about what happens after student union politics.  And I expect 

that some of them will likely go on to a career in provincial or 

federal politics.  So I wish them all the best in their future 

endeavours. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's just 

such a pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to 

my colleagues in the legislature a very special group of grade 4 

and 5 students seated in the west gallery.  They are from Pilot 

Butte School, a school where I taught for 15 years, I think. 

 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Loretta Dick, a 

colleague and good friend, and their bus driver, Ruth 

Betteridge.  It's just such a pleasure to 

have them here and I'm really looking forward to meeting with 

them later. 

 

So please join me in welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf 

of the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 

Rosthern who, as you know, is at home dealing with the 

problems associated with a fire on his farm, it's my pleasure 

this afternoon to introduce a group of students, grade 8 students 

seated in the east gallery from the Venture Heights School in 

Martensville, Saskatchewan.  Their teachers are Deborah 

Rodger and Terry Stanviloff. 

 

I'd ask all members to welcome these students here this 

afternoon, and I'll be meeting with them after question period 

for a brief visit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

take this opportunity to introduce to you and all the members of 

the Assembly a good friend of mine, Norm Haryung, in the east 

gallery. 

 

Norman is from Rabbit Lake and he has managed the Meeting 

Lake Regional Park for the past 30 years.  This is the longest 

period of time that anyone has held the position of secretary 

manager in any regional park in Saskatchewan.  Meeting Lake 

Regional Park has developed into one of the finest parks of its 

type in Saskatchewan, and it is through no small effort of 

Norman that that has become a reality.  I'd like to ask you to 

join me in welcoming him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: --  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of 

the Minister of Health, I'd like to welcome 50 Grade 10 

students from LeBoldus High School.  They are accompanied 

by their teachers, Mr. Paul Dawson and Miss Jolene Othnek. 

 

As well, I'd like to make special mention that Katherine 

Horsman is also accompanying these students.  She is a recent 

immigrant to Regina, having come from Saskatoon.  She's a 

well-known ringette player. 

 

I look forward to meeting with these young people after 

question period.  So I'd like everyone to help me welcome them 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Jamie Winkel, a constituent of mine.  He's 

seated in the west gallery. 

 

Jamie comes from Middle Lake, Saskatchewan.  He's here 

today visiting Regina and the legislature; he's on 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

personal business.  Jamie has just finished his college and has 

gotten his diploma from college, and certainly he's looking with 

enthusiasm and optimism to a future career here in 

Saskatchewan, and to contribute to the provincial economy. 

 

So I welcome Jamie here today and I wish him the best of luck 

in the future.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, given some of my former 

and current work in the church and the role of trying to keep 

marriages whole, I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 

a very special guest in your gallery, that being Mrs. Myrna 

Rolfes, your wife. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- All I can say to the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, try and get my attention again. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Prince Albert YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last night in 

Prince Albert, the YWCA hosted its annual Women of 

Distinction awards.  The awards, which are divided into four 

categories, honour the work of women within the Prince Albert 

area. 

 

This year's honorees are as follows. Margaret Morgan, 

recognized for her work in community enhancement; Joyce 

Ellison, noted for her efforts in health, sport, and fitness; Marge 

Nainaar, recognized for her commitment in arts and culture; 

and Debra Taylor, honoured for her role in the business and 

professional achievement. 

 

In addition to these outstanding women, Rachel Simpson, a 

grade 12 student, will receive the Dr. Roberta Bondar 

scholarship for her achievements and involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the members of the legislature, I 

would like to congratulate and commend each of these women 

for their outstanding accomplishments.  We would also like to 

recognize the countless other women in our communities who 

are worthy of such awards and are not always officially 

recognized. 

 

I would also like to congratulate and commend the board of the 

YWCA in Prince Albert for sponsoring this event which is 

important to our community, and for highlighting it this year by 

inviting the internationally renowned woman artist, Buffy St. 

Marie, to be the keynote speaker at this event, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Karate Association Tournament 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I 

would like to inform the House about the Saskatchewan Karate 

Association's spring tournament which took place in Esterhazy 

recently.  The events, which lasted all day, were both exciting 

and fast paced.  The tournament also offered a wide variety of 

competition in categories based on age, sex, and experience 

level. 

 

There were many sponsors willing to help out with the 

tournament, including Saskatchewan Lotteries, Sask Sport, the 

town of Esterhazy, International Minerals and Chemical 

Corporation, and the Esterhazy High School.  I also want to 

recognize the Esterhazy Karate Club, the host club, for the 

tournament.  The countless volunteers must not go unnoticed 

for their endless hours of work in order to put this tournament 

together and making it a success. 

 

Karate traces its origins back to ancient times when Buddhist 

monks applied their techniques of mental discipline to their 

need for physical exercise and protection from enemies.  Today 

karate is a sport, a leisure activity, an exercise, a style of 

fighting, a philosophy, and a way of life to many. 

 

In the words of Gichin Funakoshi, known as the founder of 

modern karate, the ultimate aim of the art of karate lies in the 

perfection of the character of its participants. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 

people responsible for the success of the 1994 Saskatchewan 

Karate Association's spring tournament.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

St. Angela's Choir to Austria 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, thank you.  Today I'm elated 

to reveal to the Assembly that four young ladies from my 

constituency are off to Austria to take part in a music festival.  

Mary Lewans, Carmen Lewans, Nadine Sabourin, and Sarah 

Powrie, who are all students at St. Angela's Academy at 

Prelate, but who live in Assiniboia, will perform in Vienna with 

the other members of their school choir. 

 

The Fireside Choir, as the choir is called, from the academy, 

were extended an invitation to represent Canada at the 23rd 

International Youth and Music Festival.  They were chosen 

from numerous entries across Canada, based on tapes and 

music.  The choir consists of 15 singers and an accompanist, 

and is under the direction of choir director Marianne Janoski. 

 

St. Angela's Academy is a residential girls' school and consists 

of a school body of 90 girls in grades 10 to 12, mostly from 

western Canada, and is operated by the Ursuline Sisters, whose 

motto is, learning from life. 

 

And on behalf of the Assembly and my constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I would like to wish the Fireside 

Choir the best of luck at the International Youth and Music 

Festival in Vienna, and I know that 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

they'll have a tremendous amount of fun in that beautiful city.  

Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Quill Lakes Designated a Western Hemispheric Short Bird 

Reserve Network 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Mr. Speaker, on Friday, May 27 the Quill Lakes 

will be designated as a western hemispheric short bird reserve 

network, an international reserve.  The Quill Lakes are one of 

the continent's most important inland water bodies for 

migratory birds. 

 

Acceptance of an international reserve site is based on 

biological criteria such as bird use.  The only other side in 

Canada to qualify for a similar status thus far, is the Bay of 

Fundy in Atlantic Canada. 

 

The recognition of Quill Lakes is one indication of just how 

important Saskatchewan wetlands are to the environment of our 

province, of Canada, and North America; indeed the western 

hemisphere. 

 

In addition to its positive environmental benefits, the 

designation will benefit the economy by boosting 

wildlife-based tourism in the Quill Lakes area and in the 

province. 

 

Our regional tourism association is developing a viewing 

tower, a broad walk, an interpretive signage for walking tours 

of the area.  And this area will be officially opened on the same 

day as the reserve dedication. 

 

On behalf of the residents of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to thank the agencies that cooperated in so 

designating the Quill Lakes:  Saskatchewan Wetland 

Conservation Corporation, Environment Canada, Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management, and Wetlands of 

Americas.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Police Services Victim Assistance Unit 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take the 

opportunity to update the House on the successes of what is I 

think a very important program which began just over a year 

ago.  That is the Saskatoon Police Service victim assistance 

unit. 

 

Since its inception on May 3, 1993 this service has helped over 

8,100 victims of crime.  The program, as members know, is 

intended to help crime victims cope with what are really very 

traumatic experiences. 

 

Workers at the police service first contact a victim to determine 

their needs and describe services that are available to them 

now.  This is followed by regular contact with the victim, and 

depending upon the needs of the victim, implementation of 

services such as referrals to other agencies, home security 

checks, and provision of court and police information. 

The Saskatoon police are assisted by 34 dedicated volunteers. 

And without these workers who are volunteering their work, 

the program would not be successful.  They are truly the 

backbone of the victim assistance program. 

 

The program is jointly funded by the Saskatchewan 

Department of Justice victim services program, through the 

victims' fund, and the Saskatoon Police Service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to share this good news with the 

House.  I think it's positive work for victims of crime in our 

society.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tribute to Saskatoon Blades 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Today I want to congratulate the Saskatoon 

Blades for a great season.  Fans from Saskatoon as well as all 

over Saskatchewan appreciate the Blades' terrific season and 

valiant effort in the Western Hockey League final.  

Unfortunately, the  Blades fell victim to the Kamloops Blazers 

last night, 8 to 1. 

 

The Saskatoon team, however, should be praised for their gritty 

determination.  The Blades were down three games to one 

when they mounted a serious comeback. They forced a seventh 

and deciding game but fell short of their goal.  This cannot be 

blamed on lack of effort or conviction, for the Blades, like 

Saskatonians always do, put out 110 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the accomplishments and the 

efforts of the 1993-94 Saskatoon Blades and wish them great 

successes next year. 

 

As an aside, a radio station in Kamloops issued a challenge.  

When the Blades lost, so did I.  I now have to display the 

Kamloops Blazers' banner in my office for a week.  What an 

indignity for a Saskatchewan politician! 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just a 

few short weeks ago the Minister of Labour chastised the 

business community, calling them ruthless and greedy.  And 

you challenged them to show you how your Bills were going to 

hurt their businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our office continues to receive letters and faxes 

from the business and employer community regarding the 

negative impact of the provincial government's ill-advised 

labour legislation. 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

Today we did a survey of hundreds of letters we have received.  

Many of those letters were very, very specific about what 

would happen to their businesses if you proceed with your 

legislation.  At least 20 said that they would move their 

businesses out of the province; 19 said they would not be 

investing further in Saskatchewan; 15 said that they would not 

be hiring any more people; 9 said that they would lay off staff; 

3 said that they wouldn't be able to hire part-time staff; and 3 

said that they would go out of business. 

 

My question to the Minister of Labour: Mr. Minister, there is 

your proof.  It's just a small sample, but will you heed these 

warnings, Mr. Minister, or are you waiting for these examples 

to become the reality before you act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I've got many of the same letters.  I may say we've also got 

letters from people supporting the legislation.  I've got a good 

deal of comment from both sides of this issue. 

 

Much of the concern which I have seen expressed is based on a 

misunderstanding of how the legislation is going to operate, 

and I know members opposite have not done anything at all to 

fan the flames of that misunderstanding.  I know you've done 

your level best to explain this properly. 

 

But notwithstanding the best efforts of the opposition to ensure 

that everybody understands it, there is a good deal of 

misunderstanding about this.  And I invite members opposite to 

begin to explain this in a fair fashion.  Once understood, I 

believe most businesses agree this legislation, far from posing 

any threat to them, is a positive step in restructuring the 

province. 

 

So I think, once this is understood, most agree that this is an 

important chink in the economic restructuring in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you're right.  We have had 

letters on the other side of the issue.  I think I've had a total of 

three, all from the union heads. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that you don't have very much 

respect for the views of the business community, and that is 

painfully evident in your recent comments and painfully 

evident in your desire to push these Bills through the House.  

But you cannot argue that your Bills will not hurt business and 

jobs in Saskatchewan.  That is simply not the case as evidenced 

by the letters that you and I have both been receiving, 

particularly the ones that I've presented to you today. 

 

Let me read from one letter from Nykolaishen Farm Equipment 

of Kamsack, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 If you pass these Bills, it will prove to farmers 

and all people who do business in rural Saskatchewan that 

you do not care about rural Saskatchewan.  If you pass these 

Bills, I also guarantee that you will have forced me to close 

my doors and cease to do business in Saskatchewan. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, at what point do you begin to believe what you 

have heard?  Is one business enough or will it take hundreds 

before you will act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I simply repeat the comment 

which I have made previously, that I have received many of 

these same letters.  We have responded to virtually all of them.  

And we have pointed out that the legislation, once understood, 

is an important part of the economic restructuring in the 

province and poses no threat.  Far from posing any threat 

economically to the province, it's an essential part of the 

economic restructuring. 

 

I remember members last year predicting all sorts of calamities 

if we actually went ahead with The Workers' Compensation 

Board amendments and The Occupational Health and Safety.  

What do I hear members saying this year about Workers' 

Compensation and Occupational Health and Safety?  

Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, because their dire predictions 

proved to be just that, nonsense. 

 

I predict that in a year's time members opposite will have some 

reason, you will find some basis, to try to divide people up, to 

try to produce divisions within society.  But I'll venture to say, 

it won't be these two Bills,  because by next year you'll find 

out, as we have said, that these Bills are not going to do any 

damage and indeed are a positive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think I should correct the minister.  We have in fact 

brought up The Workers' Compensation Act and the things that 

it's doing and the extra costs and where it's going.  And if you'd 

pay some attention in this House once in a while, you'd have 

heard that and you wouldn't have to make these kind of silly 

statements. 

 

Mr. Minister, the proof that you have asked for is before you.  

It is in the letters and the faxes that both you and I have been 

receiving.  The business community has been speaking out.  

And instead of listening and acting on their concerns, you hurl 

insults at them and at me.  And quite frankly, Mr. Minister, 

they tell what they want you to hear by the fact that they send 

follow-up letters saying that they do understand what's going 

on and they don't agree. 

 

Mr. Minister, before you go home tonight, may I suggest to you 

that you go through your mail once more, that you take a few 

hours because it's going to take you that long.  I believe that it 

would be worth it and worthwhile for your government if you 

take the 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

time to study through what's being said in those letters. 

 

You will make a small commitment today, if you might, Mr. 

Minister, and do that -- read those letters.  And will you read 

through those faxes that you've received from the business 

community and the employers community and report to this 

House tomorrow what you've found.  Will you do that, Mr. 

Minister?  Read the letters and report to us what exactly you 

find when you study the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I want to assure the member 

opposite I have read the letters.  I've responded to all of the 

letters which have come in up to a few days ago. 

 

I say to members opposite, we'll have an opportunity . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . if the member feels this strongly 

about it, we'll have the opportunity to take this up in estimates a 

little later on.  So perhaps the dialogue between us could await 

a more appropriate time. 

 

And perhaps at this point in time it would suffice to say that 

we've read those letters.  I acknowledge there are expressions 

of concern in those letters.  I do believe that that concern is 

partially fanned by people such as yourself in whose interest it 

is to try to divide management and labour. 

 

That may be in your interests.  We believe it is in the province's 

interest to have management and labour working in a more 

cooperative fashion.  And that's what we're attempting to do. 

 

And as difficult as this is at times, it's at least gratifying 

because I think we are succeeding in that.  I think we are 

succeeding in inducing a more harmonious relationship 

between management and labour, notwithstanding the valiant, 

energetic efforts of the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Company Relocation to Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation). 

 

Mr. Minister, yesterday you issued a news release about a 

company called KingAgro Canada.  The news release said that 

SEDCO and a company called Groupe Limagrain were going 

to buy KingAgro and relocate part of its operations to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, this morning we learned that this deal is yet to be 

finalized and that your premature announcement may have 

actually jeopardized the deal.  Mr. Minister, why are you in 

such a hurry to blow your own horn?  Why did you make this 

announcement of a finalized agreement before the 

deal has even been closed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

will know that the investment that we are making in the 

company is as a result of a cabinet decision.  Therefore there is 

what is called an order in council that became public yesterday.  

And far from expanding on or making a huge issue of this 

arrangement, in fact what we did is issue to the media a brief 

outline of the proposed deal. 

 

And I just say, on one hand they say we're not giving enough 

information about the activities of government, in particular 

SEDCO.  Then when we issue a short, brief press release, they 

say we're saying too much.  But what I can tell you, that in the 

best operation of government it's important that when monies 

are invested on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, that we 

make it public. 

 

This is a far cry from the Saskatchewan Development 

Corporation that was doing economic development on your 

behalf, spending tens of millions of public money and only 

coming to light that that money was even being spent, by 

accident. 

 

I say to you, sir, that the way we operate government, open and 

available to the public, is as it should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, our office spoke with 

Limagrain's project manager in Saskatoon.  He told us he was 

very surprised that your government chose to make this 

announcement prematurely and without consulting either his 

company or the current parent company, Mr. Minister.  In fact 

he felt that your government's early announcement may in fact 

harm the deal, and that your actions have created a really bad 

situation for all of the parties involved -- a situation that may in 

fact jeopardize the entire deal. 

 

Mr. Minister, didn't you learn anything from the Piper deal?  

Why do you insist on jeopardizing projects by making 

announcements before the deals are even finalized? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say again to the 

members opposite that the fact is, is that our government, when 

it makes a decision to spend taxpayers' money, makes it public 

-- which we did yesterday -- because it's required that 

order-in-council decisions of cabinet are made public.  It was 

made public yesterday. 

 

If you're telling us that we should make these decisions behind 

the closed doors of cabinet and they should never be made 

public, which is how you did business, that simply is not the 

way we operate, nor will we operate that way.  Because in the 

name of open and accountable government, which is 

well-based on auditor's reports and recommendation, we will 

make 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

public when we spend taxpayers' money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister, here's a little 

tip.  First close the deal and then make the announcement.  

Doing it the other way around doesn't work.  It didn't work with 

Piper. 

 

Mr. Minister, that's clearly a problem in this case.  The entire 

legislative session is nearly completed and you haven't even 

begun to begin to provide people with work; opportunities for 

work development in this province.  You haven't even begun, 

and so in desperation you decided that you were going to do 

this deal just before the House closed. 

 

And for what reason, Mr. Minister?  To try and make your 

government look good?  So you spend $6 million of taxpayers' 

money prematurely.  Is that what you did with Piper?  Is this 

deal going to be exactly the same as you did with Piper?  That's 

the question we're asking you to identify and address here 

today.  Is this deal completed or is it not?  According to the 

people involved, it's not. 

 

So you made a premature announcement today, or yesterday, 

saying that you had spent money that was not legitimately 

made and the deal wasn't closed.  Will you confirm that you 

didn't close the deal already, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll go through this 

slowly, because in order to get to the member, I think I have to 

go over this very slowly.  The issue here is, is that $6 million 

was needed to commit to the deal in order for the final 

arrangements to be made.  A decision was made by cabinet a 

week ago that that commitment would be made, that $6 million 

would be available for the deal.  That has to be made public in 

order to meet the commitments of our government.  The 

announcement was made because the release came from the 

OC (order in council) that was released to the press and the 

public yesterday. 

 

Now look, there could have been a press conference.  There 

could have been a ministerial statement in the House.  None of 

that was done in order to keep the deal -- as it should be -- 

moving along towards completion. 

 

But one thing I will do for you, sir, is the day we make the 

agreement in Saskatoon, which will be very shortly, I want to 

invite you personally to the announcement and I want you to be 

there to shake hands with the new company as they bring 15 

employees to the city of Saskatoon, which you are desperately 

trying to stop in order for your own political agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Office Closure 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

today are for the minister in charge of SaskPower.  The 

SaskPower district office in the town of Ponteix will close its 

doors for good on Friday. 

 

Town officials were disappointed to learn of the closure of this 

government agency, not through correspondence from 

SaskPower officials, but rather through a newspaper ad in the 

local paper.  And I'd like to send a copy to you of that ad. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, is this an indication of the kind of 

significance you place on this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'd like to thank the hon. member for his 

question.  Some of the information he does . . . and puts out in 

prefacing his question is inaccurate, and I want to point that out 

to him. 

 

The situation in Ponteix is one that was decided with the 

employees, with the union, and with management of 

SaskPower.  The member would well know that I reviewed the 

situation of the Ponteix office, as I did with other offices 

throughout the province, and the decision has finally been 

made as the member has outlined, that the Ponteix office will in 

fact be closing in regard to the function it now performs. 

 

Where the member is inaccurate is that the community knew 

full well, beyond the ad that was placed in the paper.  The ad is 

to inform customers who are used to dealing with the customer 

services section of that office, of the other methods of dealing 

with the payment and the concerns that they might have about 

their accounts and their services.  But I do want to confirm 

what the member has said, is that yes, the Ponteix office will be 

closing in regard to the function it now performs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The officials in 

those communities didn't know their office was going to be 

closed.  In fact, Mr. Minister, I raised this issue with you on 

March 23, and at that time you wouldn't give me any answers 

to it. 

 

Many communities depend on the services provided by this 

SaskPower district office in Ponteix.  They include Glentworth 

and Ferland, Mankota, Aneroid, Hazenmore, Kincaid, 

Meyronne, Glenbain, Vanguard, Neville, Pambrun, Val Marie, 

Cadillac. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you tell me today what criteria you have 

established to ensure that they will continue an adequate level 

of service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We're making sure, Mr. Speaker, that an 

adequate level of service is provided and that's why it's taking a 

long time, a long consultation period, with employees of 

SaskPower, with the two unions involved, CEP 

(Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union) and IBW 

(International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers), with the 

management, and with members of the community. 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

As the member points out when he asked me questions back in 

March, I stated to him at that time that I would review the 

situation in regards to the Ponteix office as well as other offices 

within the province.  The member knows full well that 

positions in terms of the field staff are not being lost.  In fact 

the one position, the IBW position, as I understand it, is being 

moved to the community of Shaunavon. 

 

So I don't know whether or not the member thinks that the 

service is going to go down by more people coming into his 

own constituency in Shaunavon and away from the Ponteix 

office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  An adequate 

level of service in the eyes of the Health minister was to hang a 

telephone on the side of their hospital.  And now an adequate 

level of service for SaskPower is to hang a telephone booth on 

the side of their SaskPower office. 

 

Mr. Minister, you state an adequate level of service is very 

important to you.  Yet response times for SaskPower crews 

could be as much as two to three hours to some of these 

communities.  In an emergency this is crucial.  People in these 

rural communities are continually asked to pay more for 

SaskPower, SaskEnergy, all their other forms of service and 

utilities, yet they appear to be receiving less and less service for 

their money. 

 

Mr. Minister, can your government not see past the bottom line 

in such cases?  And are you going to stand there and suggest 

that this is really an adequate level of service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I believe that I can quite safely 

defend an adequate level of service from the corporation, the 

Crown corporation, SaskPower.  And when the member is 

talking about a three hour time to provide emergency service, 

he is totally, totally out of line with that.  I think that he's trying 

to inflame the situation to get sympathy and public support for 

his political party that he crossed the floor to join. 

 

The member knows better than to put out misinformation to the 

public in regard to a three-hour service time and that's just not 

accurate.  If the member wants exact details on how the 

function will perform, I'd be more than happy to communicate 

that to him so he can tell the people of Ponteix to rest assured 

that they will have as high a level of service as any utility in 

Canada can provide its customers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Health or her 

designate.  Mr. Minister, the Krever blood inquiry is going to 

be holding hearings in Regina on May 24.  Is the Department of 

Health going 

to be making any sort of representation to these hearings on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people who have contracted HIV 

(human immunodeficiency virus) or the hepatitis C viruses 

through the blood supply?  And if so, what will the nature of 

your submission be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, since the Krever inquiry 

began its work, it's been clearly the position of this government 

and of the Department of Health that we will cooperate and will 

be cooperative with the commission in their work in every 

possible way, and that will include during their visit to our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, since we 

raised the hepatitis issue in the legislature, this problem and 

Vicki Lissel's case have started to receive national attention.  

Still she feels that action from your department has been 

extremely slow. 

 

Mr. Minister, what actions have you taken since we brought 

that matter to your attention?  Are you working on a 

compensation package for Saskatchewan residents who have 

contracted hepatitis C through the blood supply.  And what 

arrangements have you made to have the drugs required to treat 

this disease covered under the prescription drug plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, since the issue was raised 

here in the legislature by members opposite, with the visit of 

the individual involved, as the members will know, on that very 

day the Minister of Health met with the individual involved.  

They had, I think, a good discussion.  The minister indicated, 

and it's being followed up, that discussions would be 

commenced with officials in the Department of Health, and we 

would be in consultation, as we regularly are, with Health 

officials across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, good 

discussion isn't enough on this very, very serious issue.  Vicki 

Lissel and other people are not going to be around that much 

longer.  They need some action from your government right 

now. 

 

The University of Calgary liver specialist, Samuel Lee, says 

that the hepatitis C is more common and will end up killing 

more people than AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) will, Mr. Minister.  Doug Kennedy of the Federal 

Bureau of Biologics says that anyone who has had a transfusion 

before 1990 or has ever used an injection drug might be at risk 

of having hepatitis C and should contact their doctor. 

 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to get this kind of 

information out to the people of Saskatchewan?  Is your 

department making any effort, any effort at all to inform the 

people in Saskatchewan who are in this situation to contact 

their doctor as soon as possible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the member I think 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

well knows and would admit that many issues regarding health 

care are not political issues.  And we're not here to try, I hope, 

to score any political points around any very serious health care 

issue. 

 

And no one will disagree, Mr. Speaker, that the condition of 

hepatitis is a very significant health care risk and a health care 

problem.  And we are treating it in just that fashion.  As the 

member indicates and as the doctor has indicated, it is wise 

advice for those who have had transfusions to check with their 

physicians and their own family doctors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, what we 

are simply asking of you is do your job.  Vicki Lissel is in a 

very, very difficult situation and other people like her are in 

that same situation across this province.  And we are asking 

you to do something to help those people.  They don't have a 

great deal of time to sit around and wait while you decide on 

some course of action; they need help and they need help right 

now, Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you commit to the legislature this afternoon, and to her 

and the other people in that same situation to do something 

about their situation and the costs that are associated with their 

situation rather than just sitting around and waiting for the 

results of another study? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, what I think is not helpful 

is a lot of noise made in the Legislative Assembly to try and 

gain attention to the individual politician rather than to try and 

seriously deal with the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a situation of a very serious medical 

condition.  As with the condition of AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome) and hemophiliacs, these issues are not 

dealt with simply overnight in a haphazard manner.  We are 

working closely in the department, we are working with other 

Canadian departments of Health around this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

Things are being done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Office Closure 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for SaskPower.  Mr. Minister, Ponteix 

was used for the dispatch of all of the after-hours services 

provided in the south-west part of Saskatchewan.  Where will 

this dispatch be now designated out of?  And will you provide 

this Assembly with that information at least? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I will provide the Assembly with 

that information.  In fact I'm surprised that the member doesn't 

have the information.  I believe in fact you likely do because 

you wouldn't have asked the question if you'd not had the 

answer to it. 

The situation with the Ponteix office, Mr. Speaker, the shared 

amount of extra workload with that office no longer being 

open, will be out of Swift Current, Shaunavon, and 

Gravelbourg. 

 

I do want to point out to the member though as well, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in some cases where through reorganization the 

physical office no longer remains, there are some cases where 

the employees have chosen to live within those communities.  

And if the employee chooses to live within those communities, 

that provides exactly the same level of service for emergency 

responses that you had before. 

 

And I assure the member that it is utmost on the minds of 

management of SaskPower to provide good quality service as 

expeditiously as possible to the customers throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, in the 

west gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have 38 grade 8 students from 

DunDonald School in my riding in Saskatoon.  And they're 

accompanied by their teachers, Diane Selby and Derek Barss; 

and chaperons Lisa Gurski, Audrey Sabiston, and I believe 

others, but I don't have their names, but I do welcome them as 

well. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I recently was at DunDonald 

School and enjoyed a very nice afternoon visiting with the 

grade 4 and 5 students and the teachers and having a tour of the 

school with the principal.  And I'm very happy that I'm going to 

have the opportunity today to return the hospitality that I 

enjoyed from DunDonald because I'll be meeting with the 

students for drinks and Dixie cups.  And we'll be having our 

picture taken and I know . . . no Dixie cups for the other 

members, Mr. Speaker, just the students. 

 

But I know all members will want to join with me in wishing 

the students a very enjoyable visit to the legislature and to 

Regina.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Credit Union Amendment Act, 1994.  

The proposed amendments provide for adoption of the concept 

of regional directors for credit unions.  They also provide for a 

number of housekeeping changes which correct statutory 

references and allow for service of documents by certified mail 

or by priority courier. 

 

Presently, credit unions in Saskatchewan have the option of 

electing regional directors according to a procedure that is 

cumbersome.  Director nominations are sought at the branch 

level and the names are then put forward for consideration at 

the annual meeting of the credit union.  The process does not 

guarantee that regional or branch representatives will be elected 

at the annual meeting. 

 

(1415) 

 

With these amendments, Mr. Speaker, credit unions will have 

the option of adopting by-laws that provide for regional 

directors to be elected, elected at the annual meeting of the 

members.  Directors elected on a regional or branch basis will 

continue to represent the interest of all credit union members.  

The housekeeping changes correct outdated statutory 

references in The Credit Union Act, 1985 and provide for two 

additional methods of serving documents -- by certified mail or 

by priority courier. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the primary purpose of these 

amendments is to provide for regional or branch representation 

on the board of a credit union following the adoption of 

by-laws to that effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Credit Union Act, 1985. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

understand from the minister's comments that this Bill is 

certainly not the one that a number of people have been 

anticipating or thinking may come to this House during this 

session.  That would certainly drastically change the services 

that credit unions would be offering.  And we're pleased to hear 

that the government is giving reconsideration to that and at 

least taking some time for the consultation process that's 

needed. 

 

However I gather from the minister's comments that what the 

Bill does is allows credit unions a greater flexibility in the 

election of board members.  And I understand from the 

comments that this flexibility has been asked for by credit 

unions as they find themselves in a situation where 

amalgamations are taking place, and the feeling that a larger 

community may end up with total representation on the boards 

and some of the smaller communities may be left out.  And 

they're asking for the ability to have some control over that. 

 

As well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, the other areas 

regarding courier service and fax service, Mr. Speaker, we 

really don't have a major problem with the Bill before the 

Assembly, but we'd like to have a few more . . . or a little more 

time to at least review the Bill in a little more detail before we 

proceed to even Committee of the Whole.  And therefore at this 

time I would move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act respecting the Superannuation of 

Teachers and Disability Benefits for Teachers 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It's my pleasure today to outline the purpose and the key 

provisions of this Bill.  This Act deals with the teachers' 

superannuation plan administered by the Teachers' 

Superannuation Commission.  This is the plan sometimes 

known as the old formula plan, to distinguish it from the newer 

pension plan administered by the Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation. 

 

Members will note that this is not an amending Bill but rather a 

completely new Act.  And I'd like to explain the reasons for 

this.  The teachers' superannuation plan is subject to negotiation 

through provincial teacher bargaining. 

 

Over the years, as new terms and conditions of the plan were 

negotiated, the Act became increasingly complex and difficult 

to interpret.  Inconsistencies in terminology crept in and the 

relationship between the different provisions became unclear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, the 

Teachers' Superannuation Commission, and our government all 

agree that the time has now come to eliminate these problems 

by placing the existing statute . . . by replacing the existing 

statute with a brand-new one, which will be described as more 

user-friendly. 

 

The new Act has been drafted in full consultation with the STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation) and its legal counsel, as 

well as the commission.  All parties are satisfied that the new 

statute is complete and accurate and they fully support this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year provided a good opportunity to prepare 

the new Act, because amendments were needed, in any event, 

for two reasons.  One, to incorporate provisions negotiated as 

part of the 1992-94 provincial collective agreement; and two, to 

incorporate changes needed to keep the plan in compliance 

with the federal Income Tax Act and regulations. 

 

I would like to briefly outline the main provisions included in 

each of these categories.  One of the key elements deals with 

the funding of the superannuation plan, which has been an 

increasing concern of teachers in recent years.  The new 

legislation clarifies the government's funding obligations and it 

defines more clearly those monies which must remain in the 

pension plan and those which can be withdrawn. 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

As well, the legislation provides that in the future all annual 

earnings of this fund will be credited to teachers' accounts and 

will stay in the fund to be used to pay teacher pensions. 

 

These provisions address an issue which has been the subject of 

legal action by the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, and 

they helped to establish a long-term plan for ensuring the future 

security of teacher pensions. 

 

Other notable provisions negotiated in the collective 

agreement, and now included in the Act, are as follows.  

Female teachers who were forced to resign to have children in 

the years before maternity leave became mandatory will now 

be able to purchase up to one year of each absence as 

pensionable service. The actuarial penalty on the pensions of 

teachers who retire at age 55, with 20 years of service, is 

reduced, and an active teacher will now be able to withdraw 

monies from the fund and transfer them to the locked-in RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan). And finally, provisions are 

added to provide for the division of pension benefits in cases of 

matrimonial breakdown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to remain registered with the federal 

authorities, the superannuation plan will comply with the 

federal Income Tax Act and regulations.  As a result of recent 

changes in this federal legislation, some changes have become 

necessary to our own Act.  These changes were agreed to by 

the parties to the provincial collective agreement as part of the 

negotiations and are reflected in this new Act. 

 

The key changes are as follows: (1) the cost of living increases 

in pensions are now prorated for teachers who have 

superannuated within the previous 12 months; and (2) the 

disability benefit provisions are now restructured to be separate 

from the pension plan itself, rather than being integrated as in 

the past.  This restructuring is needed in order to maintain the 

existing disability benefits.  (3) Superannuation allowances will 

be capped at Revenue Canada maximums, and teachers will 

contribute only on that portion of their salary up to the 

maximums; and (4) a maximum of 35 years of service will 

continue to be used in calculating pensions, but teachers will no 

longer make contributions after 35 years; and (5) a variety of 

other technical amendments with no significant financial or 

policy implications are also included under the compliance 

category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me briefly summarize.  This new Act 

accomplishes three objectives. It incorporates the provisions of 

the 1992-94 provincial collective bargaining agreement; it 

implements the changes needed to keep the plan in compliance 

with federal legislation; and it replaces a very complex and 

difficult piece of legislation with one which can be interpreted 

accurately and consistently. 

 

For these reasons the Bill is both legally required and highly 

appropriate.  It has the support of the Teachers' 

Federation and the Teachers' Superannuation Commission. 

 

I am therefore pleased to move, Mr. Speaker, that An Act 

respecting the Superannuation of Teachers and Disability 

Benefits for Teachers be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments before we adjourn the debate this 

afternoon.  But I'd like to begin by acknowledging the fact that 

the government is finally . . . or this NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government finally acknowledges its responsibility. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, we are all quite well aware of what 

took place prior to 1981 and the fact that at the time of the 1982 

election the government talked about a surplus they had sitting 

on the operational side of the budget.  But they forgot to, and as 

the auditor brought out recently, they continually neglected to 

inform the public of the unfunded pension liabilities that were 

sitting at the hands of the Saskatchewan taxpayers and some $5 

million that were sitting in unfunded pension liabilities back in 

1982. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, the teachers, when the new 

government -- the Conservative government -- was elected in 

1982, took the government to task over original policies that 

forced the government in 1981 to change the whole pension 

program because they realized they were in a difficult position 

of trying to bring the old plan and make it solvent. 

 

And the governments from '82 to '89 made a commitment to 

not only take the pension funds and the matching contribution 

by the province and put it where it belonged into investment 

opportunities in the pension fund to guarantee the solvency of 

that program. 

 

But the government of the '80s also indicated and made a 

commitment to put an additional sum over and above to try and 

alleviate the shortfall that was created.  Because the 

government prior to 1981 used those funds for general revenue 

rather than putting their commitment into the fund and allowing 

that fund to grow for the benefit of the individuals who were 

involved in that pension plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of the uproar and the 

controversy that arose in 1989 when the Conservative 

government for one year did not put in the additional funds, 

and how the teachers reacted.  I think the Minister of Education 

has been hearing from the teachers' organizations and the STF 

over the last couple of years about the fact that they still haven't 

. . . this government didn't make a commitment. 

 

They indicated when they were in opposition it's time we acted 

on the plan.  They also said, Mr. Speaker, that if they were 

elected they would guarantee the pension plan.  And the fact 

that the minister has brought forward this piece of legislation 

today, Mr. Speaker, 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

indicates that they finally heard, finally listened, and finally put 

in place a piece of legislation that is going to guarantee the plan 

that I think at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, unless they 

decide to change the legislation, or retroactively change it, will 

force them to indeed take the matching funds they contribute to 

any plan -- and in this case, the teachers' plan -- and make sure 

that it is committed to the plan, that it is put aside for future use 

of the individuals who are out there, the educators across this 

province who are contributing to a plan, a plan they understand 

will be providing them some benefits and guaranteeing benefits 

in the future. 

 

No doubt, Mr. Speaker, the formula plan, as a few individuals 

in this room are covered under, is a plan that most teachers 

would like to revert back to as there is a better guarantee than 

there is under the present system where the plan will pay you at 

the end of the day based on what has accumulated and built 

over itself through the years.  And certainly the ability of a plan 

to build under the present system is going to be based on the 

ability of the administrators to invest that plan wisely.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, I commend the minister for having taken the initiative 

to bring this piece of legislation forward. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think we should at least take a little 

more time to dissect the legislation, to take a little closer view 

of it and make sure it meets the requirements that have been 

brought forward by the STF not only to the government but to 

our caucus as well.  And therefore at this time I'll move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise to comment on the provisions of the Crown Corporations 

Amendment Act, 1994.  At the end of these comments I will 

move second reading of this legislation. 

 

As members of the Assembly will recall during the last session 

a new Crown Corporations Act was passed.  This Act clarified 

reporting and accountability on our Crown corporations sector.  

It established conflict of interest guidelines for officers and 

directors of Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 6 of the Crown Corporations Act gave the 

Crown Investments Corporation a range of powers.  These 

powers were deemed by this Assembly to be necessary so that 

the Crown Investments Corporation could properly manage the 

commercial assets owned by Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

(1430) 

 

One of these powers was outlined in section 6(1)(u) and section 

6(1)(x) of the Act.  Subject to the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, the Crown Investments Corporation was 

given the power to 

provide loans, loan guarantees, or other financial assistance.  At 

the time of the drafting of this legislation, it was felt that this 

provision would be sufficient to provide the Crown 

Investments Corporation with the authority that it needed to 

conduct its business. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as the Crown Investments Corporation 

has worked to renegotiate and improve various business deals 

entered into by the previous administration, it has become 

apparent that a clarification of this power might be needed in 

some negotiations.  As a result, the government is proposing 

that section 6(1)(u) and 6(1)(x) be amended to allow the Crown 

Investments Corporation to provide indemnities as well as 

loans and loan guarantees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an indemnity functions in a manner similar to a 

loan guarantee.  A person or entity providing the indemnity 

commits to make good on the losses that might be suffered by 

another person or entity as a result of participating in a business 

deal or transaction.  As such, Mr. Speaker, this is a technical 

amendment of The Crown Corporations Act, that it clarifies the 

nature and extent of the powers of The Crown Corporations 

Act. 

 

I would like to make a few other points about this amendment.  

First, what is outlined in this provision is an enabling power.  It 

more clearly gives the Crown Investments Corporation the 

authority to enter into a particular type of business 

arrangement.  That is all that it does. 

 

Second, I want to stress that in the event this power is ever 

used, there will be full public disclosure.  This is ensured in 

two ways.  The Crown Investments Corporation's power to 

provide an indemnity is contingent upon the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council.  This ensures that there will be 

an order in council that by law must be made public. 

 

The Crown Corporations Committee has recently passed a 

resolution requiring that it be notified within 90 days of any 

significant transaction that materially alters the liabilities faced 

by the taxpayers.  Entering into an indemnity agreement would 

certainly meet the definition of a significant transaction passed 

by the Crown Corporations Committee.  As a result, this 

committee of the legislature would be required to be notified of 

any such agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that the members of the legislature will 

be wondering what caused the government to come forward 

with this amendment at this particular time.  As the members of 

the Assembly will know, the Crown Investments Corporation is 

engaged in renegotiating the financial arrangements of several 

megaproject investments entered into by the previous 

administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of these negotiations are extremely complex 

and detailed.  Some, such as the financial restructuring of 

NewGrade, have been under way for more than two years.  At 

this point, our technical and legal advisers indicate that this 

amendment would be 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

of assistance in pursuing one possible path towards settling this 

particular set of negotiations.  Beyond this, I cannot be more 

specific at this time or stage of the negotiations. 

 

I want to stress, however, that this is merely an enabling power.  

When and if this power is ever used by the Crown Investments 

Corporation, there will be full public disclosure. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Crown 

Corporations Amendment Act, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to hear that the minister has acknowledged some of the 

proposals that have been put forward by the Crown 

Corporations Committee and the fact that CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) has already . . . is 

acting on them, and through this piece of legislation, is even 

taking note of the recommendations, especially public 

disclosure regarding major transactions that would take place. 

 

The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

continues to view the investments made, investment 

opportunities made by the former government as something 

that would seem to be a millstone around their neck rather than 

an investment that in the long run would be good for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we will find a 

number of these projects that the government is working on 

right now and seeking ways of renegotiating terms will . . . and 

even the government will acknowledge that they have certainly 

become major beneficial corporate citizens providing not only 

a job base in this province but certainly additional tax revenue 

which will be beneficial and I'm certain the Minister of Finance 

will appreciate. 

 

And I realize that the legislation before us is just expanding 

somewhat the role of CIC and giving it an ability to go beyond 

just providing loans or loan guarantees but now giving it the 

ability to enter into indemnities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't really see anything wrong with this.  

I think at any time when you've got a major investor or major 

Crown in your province responsible for the interests of all the 

public utilities, it's certainly appropriate to at least give them 

some tools to work with.  And the fact of whether or not they're 

using the tools wisely will certainly be made evident when they 

make their public disclosures and we in the Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan have the opportunity to review the 

disclosures and debate them, whether through the Assembly, 

whether through Crown Corporations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point I would allow for a further review 

of the Bill before we proceed any further.  And therefore I 

move adjournment of debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

to Create, Encourage and Facilitate Business Opportunities in 

Saskatchewan through the Establishment of the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

be able to rise today to speak on this issue because it is an 

important issue in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House regard this 

legislation very much as a mixed bag.  And of course as usual, 

we appreciate the government's need to reduce expenditures in 

all areas, including those that make it through its economic 

development agencies. 

 

Also, we would like to take the opportunity to applaud the 

government for its move towards greater accountability in the 

Crown sector.  The proposal to make the annual allocation for 

an economic development corporation to the Consolidated 

Fund is a good one.  And I will be the first to admit that it 

should have happened long ago. 

 

Were that all that was in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I 

can safely say that we would have no problems whatsoever 

with this.  However, the Bill undertakes many more serious 

changes that at best are ill-conceived and at worst, are 

deceptive. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are some things that are being hidden 

within this Bill.  Probably the single most offensive aspect of 

the Bill is the fact that it essentially preserves an existing 

Crown corporation but simply changes its name  

_- sort of like the leopard trying to change his spots by washing 

itself in a little bleach. 

 

We have all seen this kind of tactic by the government before 

when it moved to abolish the Agriculture Development Fund, 

the ADF fund, only to revive it in another guise within the 

department.  This was simply, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

government's moves to eliminate anything that had to with the 

Tories, or anything that had to do with the government prior to 

1991 election -- just change the name of it, hide it some place 

else; we'll carry on with the program, but we can't have it 

associated with a Tory initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister himself gave the explicit reason for 

this change when he said in this House on February 28, and I 

quote: 

 

 Because of the magnitude of (the) . . . losses and . . . the 

perception of a political interference in the corporation in the 

last 10 years, SEDCO's 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

image has deteriorated to the point where the corporation 

cannot recover its credibility. 

 

And later in the same speech, and I quote again: 

 

 I would also like to say that the decision to create a decidedly 

different economic development corporation is also 

appreciated and supported by the vast majority of people and 

business people in the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the minister's own words, this is nothing 

but a sham and a shell game that he is perpetrating on the 

people of Saskatchewan.  He's saying that the only reason the 

changes are being done is because of the perceptions that are 

involved with SEDCO -- not the essence of SEDCO, but 

simply being changed because of the perceptions within 

SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government still wishes to carry on lending as 

it has in the past through SEDCO, it just doesn't want to suffer 

the same scrutiny and criticism that SEDCO had in the past.  

This, Mr. Speaker, is political propaganda and spin doctoring. 

 

I am reminded of the history of the provincial police force in 

Quebec. When they were called the Quebec Provincial Police, 

they developed a reputation for being a cruel and ruthless 

police force.  So what did the government of Quebec do?  They 

gave them a new name, the Sret du Qubec.  Did that fix the 

problem with the Quebec police actions?  Of course not.  It was 

still the same members operating under the same rules.  All 

they had was a new name, Mr. Speaker, and the names in 

themselves do not do anything . . . a change of name, Mr. 

Speaker, does not do anything except maybe score a few cheap 

political points.  If you can confuse people as to what the 

department is actually doing, what the corporation is actually 

doing, then perhaps people will think it's a whole new 

corporation rather than the same people doing the same job 

simply with a different name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has gone to great lengths to show 

how this is more than just a name change.  They have led us to 

believe that a whole new set of loan criteria and operating 

procedures will be put into place at SOCO (Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation); or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it should 

be . . . it would be better known as son of SEDCO. 

 

They've said that it will restrict itself to loans assisting 

manufacturing and processing, export oriented and import 

replacement markets, and attracting new businesses.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that's quite a broad range of areas that they can deal 

with.  And I really wonder how many businesses and how 

many previous applications to SEDCO would not fall within 

those criteria -- within manufacturing and processing, within 

export oriented or import replacement markets, or attracting 

new businesses.  Well, Mr. Speaker, any time you include 

attracting new businesses, you make it fairly broad. 

 

They have identified one area though, Mr. Speaker, 

the retail sector that does not fall within their criteria.  But even 

here, Mr. Speaker, the shell game continues.  Look at the 

weasel words the minister used in his introductory speech, and 

I quote: 

 

 Proponents in this sector will have to have a strong 

community backing for their projects before the new 

corporation will consider participating. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at small town rural 

Saskatchewan and somebody proposes setting up a new 

business, opening up a new tire shop, or a grocery store, or any 

form of retail business within the communities, you are going 

to get strong backing.  You're going to get very strong backing 

from everyone in the community; particularly, Mr. Speaker, if 

that community does not already have one of those types of 

businesses. 

 

Now I'm sure if you open up a grocery store and there's a 

grocery store already there, the first grocery store is not going 

to be real keen on the competition.  But if a small community 

doesn't have a grocery store and somebody comes in and says 

I'd like to open up a new business here, they're going to have 

strong community backing to go to son of SEDCO to get a 

loan.  Because every small community views a new business as 

part of their viability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one has to wonder just what community the minister 

intends to listen to if he's going to narrow that field down.  

Maybe he means the community of people who pay to go to 

NDP political luncheons.  Maybe he means the community of 

NDP partisans or patronage appointments. 

 

This one little phrase, Mr. Speaker, gives him a very broad 

scope for interpretation.  New businesses with strong 

community backing.  The shell game does not end there, Mr. 

Speaker.  The minister is trying to suggest to business and other 

groups that have been critical of SEDCO that this will mean the 

end of so-called government boondoggles in the economic 

development sector. 

 

And as the minister well knows, however, that SEDCO in the 

past has been the springboard for a number of worthwhile 

economic development programs that have had a remarkable 

success but which in all fairness would perhaps have been more 

suitably handled by the Department of Economic Development 

or some other agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm thinking specifically of programs like the 

young entrepreneurs program. Through it, many young people 

were able to create their own jobs.  Mr. Speaker, in my own 

community of Alida we have a young couple who took part in 

this program, who took advantage of the young entrepreneurs 

program to set up a grocery store and operate a grocery store in 

our community. 

 

And the community has benefited all the way around, Mr. 

Speaker.  We have a new young couple in town who are very 

enthusiastic in running their business.  It 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

allowed the people that were there before to retire and the new 

couple that we received brought with them two children, Mr. 

Speaker.  That was two new children for our small community 

school that was very welcome because that represented more 

than a 2 per cent increase in our school population, those two 

children.  That was very important. 

 

(1445) 

 

And if the members don't think that that kind of an increase in 

the school population in a small rural school isn't important, 

they should go out and talk to the people who live in rural 

Saskatchewan who are deathly afraid that their small school is 

going to close.  When you can bring in two new children at any 

time that's very important. 

 

Also the young couple that moved into town, Mr. Speaker, are 

very active in the community.  They're both active in the 

theatre group, they're very active in their church, they're very 

active in all of the aspects of community life.  And the ability 

to bring those kind of people into a small community through a 

young entrepreneur's program is very, very important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Another success story was the small-business loans association 

program that gave small, local, and interest groups the ability to 

make and administer small loans for its members to set up new 

businesses.  And this was a program, I think, that applied very 

well, Mr. Speaker, to northern Saskatchewan where an 

organization, a small, local organization or interest group, 

could get a pool of money through SEDCO and then turn 

around and loan out very small amounts to their membership.  

And this membership would then repay the loan to the local 

interest group.  And that program worked out very well also, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The participating loans program that made loans to businesses 

in return for a share of its profits -- another very successful 

program.  And one has to wonder how much the equity-holding 

program the minister has proposed for SOCO, or son of 

SEDCO, will differ from these programs, Mr. Speaker.  Just 

how radically different will they be, or will they simply be the 

same programs with a new set of clothes on them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these were all very worthwhile programs, but I'll 

concede that they could very well have been done through 

another agency.  Likewise, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

like to go on at length about megaprojects undertaken by 

SEDCO.  Well has the Crown Investments Corporation not 

funded megaprojects in the past, and will it not continue to do 

so?  The Partnership for Renewal program certainly suggests 

that it will, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have another example that came up today.  We talked 

earlier about Piper Aircraft company in this legislature.  And 

that failed deal, would that not have been a megaproject?  

Where would the government have gotten the money for that?  

What department would have supplied that money?  It could be 

done through Economic Development, or it could have 

been done through SEDCO, but the government would have 

found the money some place. 

 

So while they may change the names, Mr. Speaker, of the 

lending agency, the job is still being done, and will still 

continue to be done under son of SEDCO, as it was under 

SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the minister is trying to suggest to the public 

that programs and projects will never, ever happen again 

simply because he has changed the name of one Crown, he is 

perhaps not being quite forthright.  It is easy to pin the blame 

on SEDCO for both this government's and the last 

government's economic development strategies, but it really 

comes down to what shell are you going to hide the pea under.  

You may change the name, Mr. Speaker, you may change the 

shell over top of it, but the pea still remains the same. 

 

The government has not tried to reassure concerned members 

of the public and business community that it will avoid doing 

things like SEDCO did in the past.  In fact, the minister in his 

speech reassured us that he would continue to do the same 

things. All they have decided to do is to stir the pot a little and 

put some programs into SOCO or son of SEDCO, some into 

CIC (Crown investments Corporation), and some into the 

minister's own department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not change; this is not improvement; this is 

not reform; this is simply trying to hide what is actually 

happening within the government and nothing more.  So again, 

Mr. Speaker, we support the government's move on 

accountability on this Bill, but we wish it did not carry such a 

thick coat of duplicity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to 

amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I guess I 

was standing as you were looking the other direction there for a 

second. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, demonstrates the government's 

hypocrisy on the subject of offloading.  The arguments against 

federal offloading, i.e., that there are only one taxpayer and that 

it bumps financial problems from one level of government that 

is less able to deal with them, are just as valid if not more so in 

dealing with municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The worst part of offloading is not only that it passes the 

financial buck, it also passes the buck in regards to 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

public accountability.  The government can make false 

promises of not increasing taxes and stick the municipalities 

and blame them when the taxes rise.  This is particularly 

dangerous and offensive, given that municipalities are the most 

accessible and grass roots level of government in the province 

of Saskatchewan and therefore the most vulnerable to the 

outrage of taxpayers, because they're right at hand to the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker.  You can get at the councillors very 

easy; most of them are your neighbours, in most cases. 

 

Also municipal services, roads, buses, police, etc., all are public 

services that the people encounter the most and depend on the 

most.  Inevitable deterioration of these services that will come 

as a result of this Bill will hit the average citizen the hardest 

and serve as the most visible and poignant examples of how the 

government has lost control and lost its concerns for the needs 

of its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing will bring on a taxpayer revolt as quickly 

as people seeing their roads deteriorating.  You only have to 

think back to the kind of outcry there was when the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose talked about ripping up the highways, Mr. 

Speaker, and turning them into gravel roads, for the kind of 

outrage that there was at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their street lights are not coming on, their public buildings 

falling apart, their libraries closing, their personal safety 

threatened by poor police service, and so on -- that will bring 

outrage to the people of Saskatchewan.  It is here at the grass 

roots infrastructure level that we, as legislators, have the 

greatest duty to give citizens solid, unwavering quality of 

public service. 

 

Hundreds of dollars spent on Roughrider tickets for 

government entertainment, thousands of dollars spent on health 

care and golf club membership for Crown corporation heads, 

and hundreds of thousands spent on government hacks, 

millions of dollars spent on high-priced policy consultants, tens 

of millions spent on top-of-the-line computers for government 

departments -- none of this will contribute a single thing to the 

public's confidence in the government and the political process. 

 

The first pothole a citizen runs over tells him he's getting bad 

government, Mr. Speaker.  And all this, and the provincial 

government still expects the municipalities to pick up the tab 

for much of their health care spending. 

 

The minister, in her second reading speech, spoke of the 

challenges that would face municipalities as the result of this 

Bill.  It is appalling to see the government launch this attack on 

the vulnerable and dependent level of government, and they try 

and dress it up in fine language. 

 

Is a crisis a challenge?  Is a catastrophe a challenge?  Yes, I 

suppose they are.  And the member from Melfort, I recall, prior 

to being elected as a member, she used to stand up on the 

highest building in Melfort and cry 

that there wasn't enough help for the city of Melfort.  And now, 

when she's in government, she sings a different tune, Mr. 

Speaker.  And somehow or another, the people of 

Saskatchewan are just supposed to excuse her for what she did 

as a mayor and somehow now accept what she's saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And I don't think they will, Mr. 

Speaker, because they realize the hypocrisy that they see 

displayed on a regular basis from this minister. 

 

No resident or institution in this province is trying to evade 

their duties regarding the provincial deficit.  However, as 

Alderman John Lipp said on behalf of SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) in regards to this Bill, again 

this year property taxpayers are being asked to pay for a large 

part of the provincial government's deficit reduction.  Urban 

governments are carrying more than their fair share of the 

provincial deficit. 

 

While no one in this House denies the need for deficit 

reduction, this must be done rationally, compassionately, and 

fairly.  None of these standards apply to this Bill we have 

before us today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns that we have about 

this piece of legislation and we will asking questions of the 

minister when we get to the committee stage and we would see 

no reason why it couldn't proceed to that stage. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 62 -- An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments before my colleague, the member from 

Kindersley, picks it up. 

 

Regarding Bill No. 62, the Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency, Mr. Speaker, we've seen already through 

Bill 61 the government has reduced its commitment to SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) by taking 

funds from the municipal revenue-sharing pools. 

 

In this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we see the government again reducing 

SAMA's funding by 46 per cent, taking it down from 7.5 to $4 

million.  And they have indicated that they will continue to 

reduce their contributions to SAMA in the coming years, 

reducing them to nil by 1996-97. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what we find, as the government reduces 

its funding, it throws municipal budgets into confusion since 

they do not know exactly what their new assessment from 

SAMA will be. 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, according to SAMA figures, urban municipalities 

can expect to see their SAMA requisitions increase by 250 per 

cent this year.  This is obviously more than their share of the 

deficit burden.  And it's something, Mr. Speaker, that if it's not 

picked up at both the senior levels of government, when 

municipal governments look at funding their share of any 

program, who do they go to?  They go directly to the taxpayer.  

And, Mr. Speaker, what that means is whether it's through 

property taxes or in whatever form, the taxpayer at the end of 

the day still foots the bill. 

 

So if the province is shifting one area of responsibility back 

onto the local municipal governments, that responsibility the 

taxpayer still pays for, and whether it's from the left pocket or 

from the right pocket, it still comes out of their pocket. 

 

This Bill achieves some positive things by making the agency 

more responsible to municipalities and allowing municipalities 

to opt out of SAMA, while still maintaining some level of 

consistency with SAMA policies.  And no doubt there are RMs 

(rural municipalities) and rural, urban governments across our 

province that have had a number of concerns with the way 

SAMA has operated for the years.  And this Bill certainly will 

give them an ability to have greater input and involvement on 

the SAMA board and in SAMA policies. 

 

However even the second point, opting out of SAMA, serves 

only to undermine the efficiencies and benefits of SAMA to 

determine, to the detriment of the taxpayers.  Mr. Speaker, the 

impact of this Bill and Bill 61 is a decrease in municipal 

revenues of $6.6 million, according to SAMA estimates.  And 

as I indicated earlier, that becomes another burden that they 

must review when they are reviewing their budgets.  And they 

must assess whether or not they discontinue other programs 

that are currently in existence, or they go to the ratepayer and 

assess a higher level of assessment on the property taxes in 

order to recover the costs that will be associated with the 

offloading or having to pick up a greater share of the costs of 

running the SAMA board. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have received letters protesting this change 

from numerous communities across the province, including the 

RMs of Elcapo, the RM of Blaine Lake, the RM of Moose 

Creek, the RM of Clinworth, the RM of Benson, the RM of 

Winslow, the RM of Antler, and SUMA and SARM, and 

numerous organizations and numerous urban governments 

within SUMA and SARM organizations. 

 

The minister, Mr. Speaker, bases this change on the false 

argument that municipalities are the main beneficiaries of 

SAMA and therefore should pay more for it.  Given the 

government's continued dependence on municipal revenue for 

hospitals and schools, they clearly benefit as much, if not more 

than the municipalities themselves. 

Having operated on a . . . or having served on a local hospital 

board, Mr. Speaker, I know what the process is involved when 

you sit on a hospital board and you requisition funds and you 

go to your municipality seeking an increase in the mill rate for 

hospitals; how the municipalities treat that when they're trying 

to balance their budgets of providing the road services and the 

other services, road maintenance, to their RMs (rural 

municipality) and then to find health and education are eating 

up the greater portion of the tax dollar. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there isn't a ratepayer across this province 

who doesn't at times . . . where every fall once the notices come 

out and they go to pay their property taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

generally the recipient of their anger at the increase in property 

taxes tends to be the administrator of the local RM or the local 

town who is responsible to collect the taxes.  And yet the 

greatest user of those property taxes in most cases tends to be 

hospitals and hospital boards and educational boards.  And so, 

Mr. Speaker, this becomes another added expense that is added 

on to the property taxes of ratepayers across this province. 

 

As well, if the main beneficiary argument were extended, the 

provincial government is clearly the main beneficiary of the 

health tax which is a provincial responsibility, and therefore 

municipalities should not be responsible for collecting it. 

 

Again none of these protests we've received over this Bill 

suggest that municipalities shouldn't pay their fair share of the 

deficit.  They say only that municipalities have already paid 

more than their share and deserve relief from this constant 

provincial tax grab. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's certainly other comments to be made 

regarding this piece of legislation.  I'm going to give other 

members an opportunity to speak on this Bill before we allow 

the Bill to move into committee.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

is in many ways even more offensive than the previous Bill, 

Bill No. 61.  Through the reductions this year and the reduction 

plan for the next three years, the government has shown its 

intention to totally abandon its participation in an important 

area of public administration. 

 

The government bases its argument for these changes on the 

premiss that municipalities are the main beneficiaries of 

SAMA, that it is an assessment in an area that is within their 

jurisdiction and therefore they should pay for it.  At the same 

time, however, they expect municipalities to pay for health care 

which is within the province's jurisdiction. 

 

If they were going to use this argument they can't have it both 

ways, Mr. Speaker.  During debate on Bill 61, we mentioned 

the potential of a tax revolt brought on by the government's 

actions.  With the response we have gotten on this Bill, it is 

clear that in many ways this revolt is already under way. 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

Municipalities from across the province are threatening to 

withhold support from SAMA.  Bernard Kirwan from SARM is 

predicting the collapse of SAMA as a result of this legislation.  

Evelyn Filson, spokesperson for SAMA, says she doesn't know 

how her agency is going to make up this drastic cut. 

 

How does the minister respond to these legitimate concerns?  

Does she consult, does she compromise, does she negotiate 

further with the municipalities to find an acceptable middle 

ground?  No, Mr. Speaker.  All she does is threaten the 

municipalities about the consequences of breaking the law.  As 

has been said so often in this House, there is law and then there 

is justice. 

 

Over and over we have gotten the same messages from the 

municipalities.  The council of the RM of Elcapo states: 

 

 The value of SAMA cannot be overstated and its value is as 

great or greater to the province as it is to the municipalities.  

This type of action will only increase the discontentment with 

SAMA's requisition amounts. 

 

And James Burak, the administrator for the RM of Blaine Lake, 

says: 

 

 We oppose this downloading by the provincial government to 

this degree.  It is too great an impact on rural municipalities 

who are trying to maintain current mill rates for farmers who 

are facing economic difficulties. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What are they doing in Alberta? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And one of the members says, what are they 

doing in Alberta?  And I remind her that she is a representative 

in Saskatchewan, not in Alberta.  And what goes on in Alberta 

is absolutely of no concern to me and shouldn't be to you 

either. 

 

You should spend a whole lot more time thinking about 

Saskatchewan and the well-being of Saskatchewan people, and 

a whole lot less time worrying about what Mr. Klein and the 

Conservatives are doing out there.  You are the government, I 

remind you, in Saskatchewan, not Mr. Klein. 

 

Naida Dillman, the administrator for the RM of Clinworth, 

says: 

 

 By decreasing provincial funding to SAMA, your 

government will force municipalities to pick up too large a 

portion of the cost, thereby transferring this again to the 

taxpayer. 

 

John Eberl, the administrator for the RM of Antler, wrote to the 

Premier, saying: 

 

 Our message for you is that the property tax base cannot bear 

the brunt of either reductions in revenue or increases in 

expenses.  The property taxpayer's dollar is stretched to the 

limit. 

Laureen Keating from the RM of Benson says: 

 

 With an increase in the requisition of these proportions, 

council would be forced to decide whether an agency such as 

SAMA is essential for assessment purposes. 

 

All these voices of legitimate concern have fallen on deaf ears 

with this government, Mr. Speaker.  Even the positive aspects 

of this Bill, the ones that allow for greater accountability of 

SAMA to the municipalities, have met with opposition.  

SUMA and SARM have expressed the concern over the 

structure of this SAMA convention proposed by this Bill; they 

see it as a needless duplication of their own conventions and an 

attempt by the government to draw attention away from the 

assessment issues at SUMA and SARM conventions. 

 

Furthermore they have complained that the complicated system 

whereby SAMA convention resolutions must be debated and 

passed by each council will make the convention useless.  Why 

bother spending money sending a delegate to a SAMA 

convention if the resolutions are just going to be mailed back 

for the councils to debate?  All of these are critical issues that 

we urge the government to consider. 

 

The administrative reforms proposed by this Bill are flawed 

and desperately need to be reworked.  The financial aspects are 

simply heartless and irrational.  On the whole, this is bad 

legislation and we urge this Assembly and the government to 

change their mind on this and go back and redraft it.  And we 

urge the minister to go back to the table with the municipalities 

and bring back new legislation that is in the interests of all of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see . . . a number of letters from municipalities 

came in to us from all over the province.  We see editorials in 

the paper and articles in the various newspapers across 

Saskatchewan suggesting that the government is headed in the 

wrong direction on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a number of concerns about this piece of legislation.  

We're hopeful we can convince the government to change its 

mind.  We will be asking questions of the minister with respect 

to this piece of legislation in committee stage, at which time we 

believe we hopefully will be able to convince the government 

to change its policies in regard to SAMA funding, Mr. Speaker, 

and the other provisions within this Bill. 

 

So at this time we'll allow this Bill to move forward to the 

committee stage and we'll address those concerns with the 

minister at that point. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

don't want to respond to all the political hyperbole that you just 

heard from the members opposite.  A lot of it is inaccurate and 

a lot of it is political rhetoric.  So I think it's probably not a 

good 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

use of time at this point to debate some of those issues.  But I 

do want to correct some inaccuracies, deliberate or otherwise, 

that they have put on the record. 

 

First of all, this Bill clearly states that the provincial 

government will contribute $4 million annually to the core 

service functions of SAMA.  That doesn't talk about 

withdrawing it in 1997.  It doesn't talk about reducing it.  It 

talks about a continued contribution of $4 million for core 

service function, which is the most important function of 

SAMA.  And we can describe those functions as we go through 

the Bill, but I wanted to make it absolutely clear that we are not 

withdrawing total support from funding the SAMA agency. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge that property 

taxpayers' dollars are stretched to the limit.  But it is interesting 

to note that there are many municipalities across Saskatchewan 

that are actually reducing their mill rate this year, and part of 

the reason they're reducing their mill rate is because of the 

reduction of the old union hospital requisition and the change 

from that to the 2 mill health levy that the government 

undertook last year.  So a lot of municipalities are actually 

finding it easier this year than particularly in the 1980s to cope 

with some of the pressures on the property tax, and those are 

measures directly related to undertakings of the provincial 

government in the last couple of years. 

 

So while we acknowledge that property taxpayers are indeed 

being stretched, municipal governments are undertaking to look 

at their budgets and review their programs.  And in a number of 

instances municipal governments are actually reducing their 

mill rate this year. 

 

I want to also correct some impression that the provincial 

government, particularly in Saskatchewan, is in some way not 

providing adequate support to the assessment base and the 

importance of that assessment base to the economy and to the 

municipal governments.  When you look at jurisdictions across 

Canada, the Government of Saskatchewan still, with the $4 

million that we contribute today and in the future, is providing 

more support for assessment services than any other 

jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

If you look to Manitoba or you look to Ontario or B.C. (British 

Columbia) or Alberta, there the municipalities pick up the 

major cost of assessment services.  And with this Bill we're still 

paying between 45 and 46 per cent of the assessment cost, and I 

think that's reasonable and fair.  So we haven't withdrawn 

support in any way from assessment services, and we recognize 

our responsibility in that area. 

 

Another issue that the opposition member spoke of, and I want 

to correct it, and I will be tabling a letter of support for this Bill 

from the local government federation.  The local government 

federation is a combination of SUMA, SARM, and SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association).  And at their last 

meeting they endorsed, with some recommendations for 

amendments that we will be 

bringing in as House amendments, but with some minor 

changes they endorsed the thrust and the intent of this Bill. 

 

And so I think it is quite misleading for members opposite to 

speak about SUMA not endorsing this Bill, or SARM.  We 

have actually resolutions from both associations that speak 

quite favourably about this Bill and the thrust and intent of this 

Bill. 

 

So with those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to close 

debate, second reading debate on a Bill to amend The 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time, I would invite the minister to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think this is the first time we've 

been here.  On my left is the deputy minister, Merran Proctor; 

behind me is Graeme Mitchell; and indeed Jeff Parr is on my 

right. 

 

At this time I'm going to table consolidated versions of the 

amended Bill 54 and the consolidated version . . . I guess I 

won't because there isn't a page around.  Would you be kind 

enough to . . . (inaudible) . . . and a consolidated version of the 

Bill itself.  So I table those for the benefit of members who may 

want to use those consolidated versions to see how the whole 

thing will read. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, as 

you've said, this is our first crack at The Trade Union Act 

where we can have an interchanging dialogue and perhaps 

some questions and answers, although often we find ourselves 

together not really answering questions or asking them, but 

simply trading political insults. 

 

Today I think we should try to be more constructive because 

we've worked our way into this process, and I want to welcome 

your officials.  I see that they are all diligently prepared to 

assist you in the difficult task that we have ahead of us. 

 

And a difficult task it probably will be, Minister, because, of 

course, while this is the sleeper of all of the labour-type and 

labour-related legislation that you've brought in in the past two 

years, it certainly is the one that will most affect our province 

and philosophical direction that we will go, and the potential to 

great harm to our province in terms of destroying our tax base 

and the business base and the job creation 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

potential of our province. 

 

We led you into this process the other day by offering you the 

opportunity to give us the amendments that you were going to 

put in if we would allow it to come into this committee for 

debate and get out of second reading debate.  And you took us 

up on our offer, and we had received those. 

 

So now you have given us a copy of the revised version which 

we will study through a bit as we go.  But I want, I think in 

fairness, to give you an opportunity to explain to the province 

of Saskatchewan how your amendments are now going to 

change the legislation that we previously saw. 

 

Could you go through your amendments and explain how they 

plug into the new Bill, so that people will understand what you 

are doing that is different now than what you had originally 

proposed when we started this debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All right, I shall do that.  We are 

amending three sections:  2(b.1), 11(1)(i), and 47, which deal 

with benefits during a strike.  It was, I think, always understood 

by everyone that what was intended to be accomplished by 

section 47 was that the employee could continue to pay for 

benefits during a strike or lock-out, and the employer had to 

remit those.  There was some suggestion made in the various 

discussions that the legislation might be open to a different 

interpretation, and so we amended it to ensure that the 

legislation reflected that intention. 

 

With respect to section 37.1, this section has been amended to 

clarify that provisions will . . . that the section which provides 

that with respect to cafeteria and food services, janitorial 

services, or security services, it states that a . . . to summarize 

it, a rough summarization, is that these services are often 

contracted out. 

 

If a contract changes and a new person gets the bid, what the 

effect of these sections in effect is that the collective agreement 

remains in place and thereby, in most cases, so will the people 

-- although that's not necessarily so.  This section provides that 

this provision only applies to the public sector in the broadest 

sense -- the Government of Saskatchewan, municipalities, 

universities, schools, and hospitals. 

 

We amended section 37.2 to give the board the power to make 

different arrangements where successorship was an issue by a 

federal company becoming a provincial company.  One of the 

truly delightful things about this area of the law is that every 

new day brings a new problem.  I never heard of short-line 

railways until a few days ago.  I had heard of short-line 

railways; I'd never heard of them in the context of this Act. 

 

And a very few days ago, for the first time, someone raised the 

issue of short-line railways and whether or not the collective 

agreements which apply to the national railway system might, 

by this section, apply to the local short-line railways.  You go 

from having a collective agreement which covers tens of 

thousands 

of employees in the national railways, then covering a handful 

of employees on a short-line railway, and is that agreement 

applicable.  It may not be. 

 

What we did in those circumstances was give the Labour 

Relations Board the power to order alternate arrangements 

where that's appropriate.  And of course each side would be 

heard. 

 

The major change in substance is in the area of so-called 

automatic certifications and decertifications.  This was left 

undefined in the legislation.  It simply said the Labour 

Relations Board had the power to arrange for . . . to certify 

without a vote.  And a well-defined practice had grown up in 

Manitoba and B.C., but here that didn't . . . And it seems to 

work reasonably well in Manitoba and B.C. 

 

However, that created a very vigorous protest by a great 

number of employers who believed that there was a real 

likelihood that their businesses would be unionized without the 

consent of their employees.  Unable to really convince people 

that what happens in other provinces would happen here, we 

decided to change this to provide that the certification and 

decertifications may be made, I suppose, on a conditional basis, 

but that before they are complete and final, a vote of the 

employees must take place.  And that perhaps is the most 

far-reaching of the changes. 

 

We had a series of provisions in the Act which required one to 

bargain in good faith and to apply an agreement in good faith 

and to bargain collectively.  That was recommended by 

Professor Ish in his report.  It did not find once in the . . . It 

seemed to myself and I think seemed to officials in the 

department to be fairly straightforward. 

 

Surely we want people to bargain collectively and surely we 

want the agreements to apply in good faith.  However, this time 

both labour and management agreed upon this one.  Many 

elements in each didn't like the section and so we took it out, 

notwithstanding it appears to just be straight common sense. 

 

There were some typographical errors with respect to the 

arbitration procedures, and those have been corrected in section 

26.  We are fixing up another technical problem.  The Labour 

Relations Board goes from being . . . The chairperson and 

vice-chairperson were alternate . . . were appointed at pleasure.  

In order to try to wring some of the politics out of the Labour 

Relations Board and to make this neutral and non-political, we 

provided that they're appointed for a term, for a period of time. 

 

The experience elsewhere has been if they're given a fixed term 

and cannot be removed, except by a vote of this legislature, 

governments then tend to appoint people who are neutral and 

who are very competent, because once they're gone, you can't 

recall them.  It's like a missile -- once you pull the trigger, you 

can't recall it.  And this system has worked elsewhere. 

 

We're providing, with respect to the members . . . we 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

used to have alternate members which were called for given 

cases, and the work of the board has grown to the extent that 

we felt the public can be better served by permanent members, 

so we're going to permanent members who also have a fixed 

term of three years.  Again, to try to wring the politics out of 

this whole system. 

 

All this amendment does is . . . the only change in this House 

amendment to section 4 is that it provides that the existing 

board continues in place until a new board is appointed.  The 

penultimate amendment that I'm going to discuss is that to 

section 46(3).  This section provides that workers have a right 

to return to the workplace after work stoppage, or in lieu there 

of they must be paid severance pay.  It was always understood, 

I think, that there would be exceptions to that. 

 

Let us take the case of a plant which has been on strike for a 

lengthy period of time.  And then let's say it's been on strike for 

a year or two -- this will occasionally occur.  Finally a 

settlement is reached.  The business may have declined to the 

point where they simply don't need all of the workers they had 

when the strike began.  And in many strikes, many strikes are 

ended by a so-called protocol agreement.  The technical 

amendment here provides something, I think, that was always 

understood. 

 

And that is the union and management, in entering into a 

protocol agreement, may arrive at different arrangements than 

the strict letter of the law which would seem to provide that 

everybody's got to come back at once or the company's got to 

pay severance.  That would make some strikes extremely 

difficult to settle. 

 

Finally with respect to first contract settlement, this also exists 

in other provinces.  It works, I am told, reasonably well in other 

provinces.  Basically I'm told the jurisprudence in other 

provinces is that the boards do not go out of their way to make 

it attractive for parties to rely on this.  They really, in a way, try 

to discourage parties from relying on the board to do the first 

contract.  And I'm told on that basis it works reasonably well, 

and I'm told that by both labour and management. 

 

Again we left this section . . . we left a great deal to the 

discretion of the board, and I truly think that would have 

worked reasonably well.  However in the superheated climate 

in which these Bills are passed, things which would pass with 

the approval of all concerned in other Bills are subject to the 

most intense scrutiny here.  And this is one of those sections. 

 

(1530) 

 

We therefore took the liberty of spelling out more fully how 

this would operate.  The changes in substance would provide 

for a two-year contract.  The purpose of the first contract 

legislation is that . . . and the theory behind it is that after a first 

contract, after a certification there's often bitterness and hard 

feelings, the parties aren't used to dealing with each other, and 

this is a very high-risk period.  Some 15 per cent of strikes in 

the province, or thereabouts, are strikes before the first 

contract.  And in this section we . . . So this writes that first 

contract for them, gets them used to dealing with each other. 

 

We have provided a two-year term to give them a goodly 

period of time to work with each other and get to know each 

other.  We have also provided that . . . The issue was raised as 

to whether or not this contract can be terminated unilaterally.  

Here we have chosen a middle ground.  We have said that it 

can't be terminated unilaterally, but it may be terminated on 

establishing to the satisfaction of the Labour Relations Board 

that all sides have bargained collectively and in good faith.  

Those are the two changes to the first contract. 

 

Those are the changes which we have made.  They have, I 

think, removed some of the concerns of the business 

community without affecting in any real way the thrust of the 

policy and the Bill. 

 

The most extensive amendment is the automatic certification 

and decertification.  There are people who would say that the 

policy there is changed, and I guess people will form their own 

views on that.  But leaving that section aside, I think one can 

say, with respect to the rest of the sections, the policy is 

unchanged. 

 

Our intent in pursuing this has been clarified, and I have always 

said and I said to the hon. member today in question period and 

I've always said that once this is understood and operating I 

don't think people will have much concern with it.  Much of the 

concern arises because they don't know how it's going to 

operate, they don't thoroughly trust any government, including 

this one, and the concern expresses -- the concern in many 

ways is -- fear of the unknown. 

 

And I think these amendments, if I may characterize them, 

clarify our intention and that gives some additional comfort, 

because I think they will live quite happily with what we're 

going to do; they're just not entirely sure what we're going to do 

and I guess nothing but the actual operation of the Act will 

wholly lay that problem to rest. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, 

Minister, for that brief preview of your changes to the Act 

through the amendments that you're bringing in. 

 

I don't know who should or who might take credit for the work 

that's being done here, in so far as we have now got some 

amendments that do I think significantly change what we 

originally saw.  There will be some, of course, like you said, 

that will debate how much that change is or isn't.  I personally 

think that it's a significant move.  I obviously have to say that it 

doesn't go far enough, but at least it's something. 

 

The simple fact that we have collectively, whoever can take 

that responsibility or that credit, convinced you to put back 

some democracy into your 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

government and its actions by allowing for votes in the 

certification and decertification process -- that move alone 

makes it worth, I think, the province having paid my wages for 

the last two months at least and I'll go home and hold my head 

up and say that I've earned my pay, simply because we now 

have the democratic right for people to show their views 

through a vote. 

 

I do have a question about that vote though.  And I want to 

know, is this a hand-waving vote or will this be a secret ballot? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make two comments.  First 

of all, I don't mean to flatter the member from Maple Creek and 

I know nothing can be worse than having an opposition 

member say something nice about you -- your own people 

distrust you. 

 

I think the member from Maple Creek has been more than 

diligent in these estimates.  I have not agreed with him, but I 

think you've been more than diligent.  I think you've more than 

earned your pay this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I have more than earned my 

pay.  I think the two of us can go home, pick up our pay 

cheque, and not apologize. 

 

Well I guess the member from Souris-Cannington isn't sure 

about one of those two.  But I think we both worked reasonably 

hard. 

 

If the member refers to the actual House amendment in section 

7, it states a secret ballot therein.  So the secretness of the ballot 

is actually written into the legislation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, now that we've squared up 

our justification for our pay, I think we should go on with a few 

more of these questions that people have been posing to us. 

 

Now the coalition of provincial associations represented by 

urban government -- we have the school boards, the rural 

governments, and the health care facilities -- sent out a news 

release on May 3.  SUMA, SARM, SSTA, and SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) have 

spoken to you, sir, regarding changes to The Trade Union Act 

that they believe are vital. 

 

Now I'm hoping that somehow some of these amendments have 

changed these requests.  But I want to just run through these. 

 

Now these changes include: waiving the requirements that 

employers continue to pay benefit costs during strikes.  Now 

you've made some changes there, but you haven't really done 

what they've asked.  They've asked you to waive the 

requirement and you haven't done that; you've simply fortified 

it. 

 

I think we need to have you explain what the change here in the 

policy is compared to what it used to be, 

and how your new amendment is going to change what these 

folks thought you were going to do.  Because I don't think 

we've quite got to the roots of what they wanted changed here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think we in fact have met this 

requirement.  I think we're reading from the same newspaper 

article -- it's not dated -- it's Mr. Burton . . . under Mr. Burton's 

name.  And the comment here says: 

 

 The public employers want the government to waive the 

requirement that the employers must maintain benefits to 

employees during a strike. 

 

The clear implication of this is that the employers must pay for 

them; that actually was never intended.  It was always 

understood that the employers had no responsibility to pay for 

them, and therefore no responsibility to maintain them.  Their 

responsibility is simply to remit them.  And the section clarifies 

that.  So I think we have met this concern. 

 

I don't think the public sector employers were concerned about 

remitting them.  I think they were concerned they might have to 

maintain them in a sense of pay them. 

 

And I think we have met this, so I think this concern has been 

met.  It's clear in this amendment.  They don't have to pay for 

them; they simply have to remit them.  So I think we've met 

this concern actually. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm not going to make a judgement on that 

right now, Minister. You've made your explanation, it'll be on 

the record, and we'll let the business community assess that and 

have them get back to us. Because quite frankly, you know, 

you've got your explanation and I'm not really sure that I agree 

with that personally. But I have to wait for the business 

community to give their assessment because it might be 

different than mine as well. 

 

I'm not so sure that they're going to be totally comforted.  I 

have some misgivings, I guess, put it that way, but I'll let them 

express those before I continue with it.  And we will be at this 

for another day, I'm sure. 

 

Now the withdrawing of the amendments restricting 

contracting out, is what they had asked for, and here you've 

done some work with your amendment.  I noted in your 

original statements that you have, with the amendment, done 

some work in that area. But here again, I'm not sure that what 

you've done has solved the intention of what these folks had 

asked you for.  You've watered it down a bit, but perhaps you 

better go into that a little further. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We've given them some partial 

comfort in the sense that the board . . . the interpretation was 

placed on this -- I don't think this was a proper interpretation 

--the interpretation was placed on the existing section that the 

board could expand the services which could be prohibited 

from being contracted out.  I think that was not the proper 

interpretation of the legislation, but to the extent that 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

that was a concern, that has been changed. 

 

However, I think the substance of . . . the more substantial 

concern they had was that they wanted freedom to contract out 

these named services.  To that extent we haven't met their 

objection.  I admit that.  Our rationale for so doing here is that 

these people are generally at the bottom of the pay scale.  In 

any institution, the food, cafeteria workers, security and 

cleaning people are often at the bottom of the pay scale. 

 

They're also often contracted out.  And it is extremely difficult 

for them to receive any degree of protection.  Because as soon 

as they're organized, someone else gets the contract.  And they 

and their contract are just washed away with the new bidder. 

 

So in order to provide these people with some minimum 

measure of protection, we made this provision.  And we did not 

extend it to the private sector, because quite frankly that's very 

complex, to extend it to the whole of the private sector. 

 

But we do apply it to the public sector.  We are dealing with the 

people at the bottom of the pay scale here, and we're giving 

them the very minimum protection.  So we don't apologize for 

this but I would admit that we have not met the request of all of 

the public employers in this area. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Mr. Chairman, the 

minister has alluded to the fact that we needed to extend some 

more protection to people who are on the bottom end of the pay 

scale.  And certainly that's difficult to be against; it's sort of like 

being against apple pie and motherhood. 

 

But at the same time the argument has to be made that a lot of 

folks get positions in life according to their ambition to want to 

do certain things, their educational pursuits, the vigour at which 

they go after things.  There are some cases always of course -- 

and we can always be proven wrong here and I don't want to, as 

one fellow said, kick crutches out from under people with 

broken legs -- but the reality is that often times these folks are 

not really highly skilled, not really highly trained; and by 

contracting out these services it has, I think, been somewhat of 

a practice that you could easily change the personnel who are 

not competent to perform certain tasks in a rather -- I'm 

searching for a polite word -- kind of an easy way of doing it 

without being very messy about the whole business of having 

to come out and say: you're fired; you're a dirty rat; get out of 

here, you know, or something like that.  You could say simply: 

we're changing the contract and we'll have to have some folks 

come in that can now do the job. 

 

So I suspect that perhaps, while you have done some work in 

this area, that you haven't really understood the need of the 

business community and oftentimes to try to replace personnel 

without a deliberate confrontation.  And I sometimes think that 

the process we're in where the unions press for all of these 

kinds of absolute guarantees, it creates more confrontation 

than we had before because people that are in business don't 

like to have to change personnel because of incompetence, but 

it does have to be done. 

 

If you have a floor to sweep and the person that is supposed to 

sweep the floor can't run the machine that does the sweeping, 

because nowadays we use machines for that . . . they've got 

them up and down the hall here every day, shining it.  I 

sometimes wonder how that marble doesn't wear out the way 

they shine it so much, but it does indicate to me that we aren't 

just into the brooms and dustpans kind of era any more.  So that 

what we're doing is that we've got people that need to run a 

machine that sometimes maybe they don't know how or they 

can't or they won't, and it's a polite way with contracts of being 

able to change those folks. 

 

And I think you're taking that option away from the business 

community.  And it's a kind of a nit-picky thing but there it is 

for what it's worth.  And they did ask you for something that I 

don't think you really gave them. 

 

They then go on to talk about the amending and definition of 

the technological change.  Followed by that, they went into 

reinstating the termination of contracts during open periods.  

Now I guess I should let you respond to those two concerns 

before I get into the next one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just simply . . . I correct the 

member.  This section 37(1) does not apply to the business 

community; it applies only to the public sector.  And that's the 

effect of the House amendment. 

 

The member stated that these were people who had arrived at 

that station of life by lack of energy or lack of ambition.  That 

may sometimes be the case.  I think a more frequent cause 

though is simply lack of opportunity. 

 

When I think of the children that grew up in the farming 

community that I did, some of whom succeeded in life and 

some of whom . . . sometimes the success was considerable; 

sometimes the success was pretty modest.  It seems to me it 

was more a question of opportunity than it was will-power. 

 

And I think it's more a question of luck and birth in many cases 

than it is whether or not you decide you're going to be an 

energetic person than an ambitious person -- so the different 

philosophical view, I guess, of life than the member opposite 

on that issue. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Of course, a 

tremendous difference in our philosophical views on that issue 

because I do believe that ambitious people in a free society, for 

the most part, go ahead.  And the lack of opportunity does of 

course sometimes happen and that will be the exception to the 

rule again.  There always will be some example that you can 

dig up to prove me wrong but in the vast majority of cases 

those people that are willing to pursue a good education, 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

and have the wherewithal to be able to succeed at that 

intellectually, do pretty well in life.  And there are some 

exceptions, of course. 

 

The lack of opportunity, though, mainly comes as a result of 

those people who are here in this Assembly.  Government 

direction and government policy is what determines 

opportunity for people.  And quite frankly, I think that the 

legislation that we are involved with today is going to do 

exactly the opposite to what people want.  And they're going to 

lose opportunities as a result of this legislation because you 

have put us out of context with our neighbours in neighbouring 

provinces and neighbouring states.  I've alluded to this for you 

before, but it has to be repeated.  You've put us out of sync with 

our neighbours and the business community, quite frankly, 

won't be here, and we won't have that job base and we won't 

have those opportunities. 

 

It's the workers of this province that are going to suffer as a 

result of this piece of legislation that basically gives unions 

more power than they have any place else in the world, and 

more power than they should ever deserve to have.  And it puts 

us out of tune with society. 

 

Now had the rest of society and the rest of our neighbours 

introduced this legislation simultaneously to ours, most likely 

we could evolve with it and succeed to . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The member from Rosemont wants to enter the 

debate.  I know he's just eager as can be to talk about scab 

labour and all kinds of things like that -- the kind of thing that 

we never see in Saskatchewan anyway to very much of an 

extent. 

 

But in all fairness, Minister, your colleague from Rosemont 

should go and live in Ontario where they actually have some 

big union problems, and he could be a real star there.  In 

Saskatchewan this just doesn't wash. 

 

We want to get on with the list of questions and concerns, 

Minister, so I just will get back to the listing here.  

Withdrawing the amendments to the definition of employee 

and the purpose of the Act. The next issue was withdrawing the 

provisions for automatic union certification, notwithstanding 

the absence of a major vote by employees.  And you've alluded 

to that and made that change, and we're happy to see that.  I 

think we will want you to explain that voting procedure a little 

more closely. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It was getting 

really difficult to hear myself ask the question, and I'm not even 

too sure that I was going to keep my thought trend much 

longer.  But anyway, a good thing I have some notes to follow. 

 

Mr. Minister, to what extent have you considered the 

recommendations made by these provincial associations, and 

what steps have you taken to address these concerns? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well we've certainly considered them 

and we have weighed them.  Some of them we have accepted 

and some we have rejected.  You can't govern by trying to 

please everyone.  That simply is the road to disaster.  In 

government, one must listen to what people have to say to you.  

They have every right to speak to their elected representatives.  

But at the end of the day, you owe them not your obedience, 

but your judgement.  So says Edmund Burke over 200 years 

ago, and the comment still stands.  One must listen to the 

electorate, but at the end of the day you owe them your 

judgement, not your obedience.  And that's what we've done. 

 

We believe that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I've not 

read everything that Edmund Burke wrote recently, but I'll tell 

you what -- I would be astonished if he put any stamp of 

approval on the style of government which you had when you 

were in office, or for that matter, on the style of opposition.  I'd 

be astonished -- he was a Conservative -- and I would be 

surprised if he would give any approval if he were here today, 

if he would give any stamp of approval to the kind of 

government which you people wrote. 

 

Actually we weren't here to try to divine his thoughts on The 

Trade Union Act.  I was here to answer the question which you 

raised about whether or not we're going to sink. 

 

I would simply point out to the member that the most 

industrialized provinces are Quebec, which has had a Liberal 

government for a lengthy period of time, Ontario, B.C.  Those 

are the provinces with the most progressive labour laws, by 

quite a degree.  They're the most industrialized provinces.  The 

provinces which are least industrialized, with the most 

regressive labour laws, are the Maritimes. 

 

Now I'm not suggesting there's a correlation between the two.  I 

don't think there is.  It's more a matter of geography and 

resources.  But there is simply no statistical, no empirical . . . 

there is no statistical evidence, there's no empirical evidence, 

there's no anecdotal evidence, no evidence of any sort, direct or 

indirect, which suggests that regressive labour laws will bring 

prosperity.  There's none at all. 

 

And indeed, if you look around the world, there is evidence . . . 

there's at least an analytical evidence that it will.  One of the 

really interesting developments was put in place by the former 

Conservative administration.  It's called the Canadian centre for 

labour market productivity.  And one of the things . . . this is 

funded by the federal government, half management, half 

labour; the management of it is equal management and labour. 

 

One of the things which that body has said is that jurisdictions 

which are going to thrive in this post-industrial world are those 

which can adapt readily to new technology, new information, a 

new way of doing things. 

 

These days that requires the consent, and not just the 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

consent, the active willingness of workers to adapt to it.  You 

can't force this extremely complex technology on a baulky 

workforce. 

 

If the workers are expected to buy into the new world and the 

new technology, they must receive more than just a share of the 

risk; they must also receive a share of the benefits.  And that 

lies at the basis of this legislation.  It is our desire to see 

Saskatchewan not just survive in the 1990s, but thrive in the 

1990s. 

 

We believe that's going to take the active cooperation of 

management and labour, and labour must receive a degree of 

protection if they're expected to buy into the new technology. 

 

So I think there is at least an analytical argument in favour of 

saying that this legislation is an important and necessary part of 

restructuring.  There is simply no evidence at all of any way, 

shape, or form which suggests that regressive labour laws will 

bring prosperity -- none at all. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I'm going to just take you up on your argument there 

for just a second, because it's such a nice one to just jump right 

into. 

 

You say that regressive labour legislation will not ensure 

prosperity.  On the same note, aggressive labour legislation will 

also not guarantee prosperity.  And there is no evidence and 

there is no proof and there is no measurement that can prove 

that overly aggressive labour legislation will also bring us 

prosperity. 

 

You see I've just taken your argument, turned it around 

backwards, and it applies equally well.  Because there is no 

measurement to weigh this thing by on either side.  We can 

only use our common sense in knowing the very simple fact of 

life, that is, that when you are in balance, then you have a better 

chance at success -- only a chance, not guaranteed.  No 

guarantees in this business.  Except that you and I won't be here 

probably after an election or two or three.  That's probably one 

of the guarantees in life that people can probably be happy 

about. 

 

So I'll let you give a prognosis of your durability for yourself.  

But your argument just doesn't wash, that you have to do what 

you're doing because you have no proof or evidence.  Because 

there's no proof or evidence that what you are doing will also 

help.  So we have to use this balance. 

 

And noting that, I want to go back to your statement where you 

say that you can't please everyone.  And I agree with you; you 

can't please everyone and I can't please everyone.  Even if we 

both thought alike, we couldn't please everyone.  That's just not 

the way the world is. 

 

How many people though do you think that we should please?  

Should we please half the people?  Or should we please 25 per 

cent of the people?  How many does it take to get re-elected? I 

suppose that 

might be the question somebody would ask.  Then that must be 

how many we'd have to please. 

 

No, I say to you, it's more important that we do better than half.  

We have to please at least a majority.  In the context of the 

argument of democracy itself, because in a democracy where 

we have the right to vote and express ourselves, we've taken the 

one-half vote as being the part of society that rules the day for 

every issue.  Fifty per cent plus one or whatever, or a little over 

50 per cent -- that's the majority.  In some extreme cases we use 

a two-thirds vote. 

 

So it has to be one of those magic numbers if we defend the 

principles of democracy.  So I say to you, do we not have a 

majority of people saying to you, whoa, hold up here.  Because 

after all, these concerns that I'm bringing to you are not the 

concerns of the official opposition, ourselves, and they're not 

the concerns of the Liberal Party over here. 

 

These are the concerns that are being expressed quite widely, 

outside of this Assembly, through the media and through letters 

and through all kinds of outlets of person to person.  These are 

coming from municipal governments, school divisions, from 

SAHO.  We've got an awful vast majority of people being 

covered by these umbrella group organizations that are saying 

to you, we don't agree with what you're doing. 

 

They have to represent . . . just by the list of the people that 

we've got here, they've got to represent more than 50 per cent 

of the people of this province.  So I say to you quite simply, 

with Bill 54, how many people do you have to please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The art of government is the art of 

framing good public policy.  It is the exercise of your best 

judgement as to what is in the best interests of the public.  It is 

not a matter of attempting to gauge the wind and then go with 

it.  You can't run a government by finding a parade and then 

trying to get in front of it. 

 

Your question simply doesn't make any sense.  How many 

people does it make?  That's not the question.  The art of 

government is the art of framing the public policy, then when it 

works, assuming people will re-elect you.  I think that's how 

you succeed. 

 

I think how you fail in government is to play too close attention 

to the polls.  I really agree with a former and a distinguished . . 

. You've got to go back some time to find a distinguished leader 

of the Conservative Party, but I'm going to pick one -- John 

Diefenbaker.  John Diefenbaker's comment was, dogs know 

what to do with polls.  I couldn't agree more. I couldn't agree 

more. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I missed your comments on the vote certification -- 

whether or not that will be an open ballot in such a show of 

hands, or if it will be a secret ballot. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is stated right in the 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

amendment that it will be a secret ballot. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's very 

important that that does actually become a secret ballot because 

a good many people, especially at their first certification, are 

unsure of what's going on, are nervous about the whole process, 

and people feel much more comfortable when they can enter 

into a ballot booth where they can mark their ballot and that it 

is secret, that no one else knows about it. 

 

So it's very important that that happen because we have seen in 

the past just some of the things that the unions have done.  This 

Bill provides a greater power for the unions.  And yet not that 

long ago in Nova Scotia, we saw an abuse of union power.  

When the union members in the province of Nova Scotia 

stormed the legislature, as happened here prior to the previous 

election, that, Mr. Minister, is an abuse of union power.  And if 

this piece of legislation increases that power, then it's a move in 

the wrong direction. 

 

(1600) 

 

When people take the law into their own hands, when they 

break our civil law, that's an abuse of power.  And if this Bill 

means giving people who will do that greater power, then the 

government themselves are abusing power. 

 

You talked about the art of governing.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, the art of governing is a compromise.  And truly 

governing by polls is not the answer.  Because sometimes 

members -- or I shouldn't say sometimes; all of the time -- 

members have to use their own judgements in making 

decisions.  And to simply follow polls will mean to swing from 

extreme to extreme. 

 

The minister talked in his second reading speech about 

swinging the pendulum.  Mr. Minister, the pendulum has not 

swung that far in either direction but you will push it to another 

extreme.  I know that the union members argue that it has 

swung too far on the side of business, on the side of 

management.  And yet you look from 1982 to 1991, we had a 

period of relative labour calm in this province when you 

compared it to the 10 years previously under your previous 

administration. 

 

So that would suggest, Mr. Minister, that things were in a 

balanced position, that they were not swung out to an extreme.  

And this piece of legislation will swing that pendulum back to 

the extreme situation that was in place during your previous 

administration. 

 

The member from Regina Rosemont was speaking from his 

chair about scabs.  And, Mr. Speaker, there's some quotes that 

we could supply in this House dealing with scabs, that come 

from . . . the name the member used, Jack London.  It was also 

used by Daryl Bean in a very contentious strike in Ontario in 

which, I would contend, the terms used are an abuse of a 

person's civil rights; that they should have been covered under 

our human rights legislation that was passed in the previous 

session. 

But when asked about those very things, the Minister of Justice 

explained that this was a labour dispute and therefore not 

subject to Human Rights Code.  It seems that if you have a 

labour dispute, almost any and all things are permitted because 

it deals with labour relations, and that the Human Rights Code 

does not apply when you're talking employees and employers 

and unions; that unions are somehow above the common law of 

the land.  And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, when 

you provide even greater powers in those kind of 

circumstances, you abuse the public. 

 

Mr. Minister, when the terms used in the quote from Jack 

London about individuals who cross a picket line, that they 

should be terminated, that their death should be accomplished 

by the most vile of manner, I think something is wrong in the 

system. 

 

And this Daryl Bean used this particular quote involved in a 

strike.  And when your union leadership is promoting those 

kinds of ideas, those kinds of ideals, Mr. Minister, again I have 

to say you're abusing the public by providing more power to 

those people, to the people who would advocate and advise 

those kind of dramatic actions. 

 

If we were to stand in this legislature and contemplate and 

endorse those kind of actions by any other group in society, by 

any other group of any philosophy, it would not be permitted.  

But because it's being promoted by union activists, it somehow 

seems to be permitted within our society.  It becomes 

acceptable in the eyes of the government and its members.  It 

becomes acceptable to the Labour Relations Board.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, I believe it is totally wrong. 

 

Mr. Minister, when people cross a picket line, they do so for 

reasons of their own -- because they have financial 

commitments they wish to meet; because they are not 

supportive of the actions being taken by the union in their 

workplace; because they're philosophically opposed to it. 

 

And yet under this piece of legislation you are going to allow 

the unions to fine and to seek redress before the courts of 

members of their membership who may cross a picket line for 

whatever reason. 

 

Now I know of an example of a member of a union who 

worked for a Crown corporation in a small town of 

Saskatchewan, and this member was philosophically opposed 

to the idea of strikes.  This person liked their job, and they 

wished to carry on with their job.  This particular union went 

on strike against the Crown corporation. 

 

And what was the result for the individual in small town 

Saskatchewan who wanted to go to work?  Well because the 

particular company corporation he worked for utilized a large 

number of vehicles, the night before the strike was to take place 

his driveway was surrounded by other corporation vehicles, 

locked; and there they sat.  So the next morning when 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

time came for him to go to work in the morning, he was not 

able to move his vehicle because other corporation vehicles 

were parked across his driveway. 

 

Now this was being done by the union membership that has 

less power than what you're giving them under this piece of 

legislation.  And I know that some of your other members 

support the union actions in this particular case.  But it's wrong, 

Mr. Minister; they were breaking the law.  But yet it was 

acceptable because it was being done in the context of a labour 

strike, of a labour action.  And it seems that all things are 

permitted when it comes to labour action. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you give people the opportunity to seek 

court action against their own membership for the collection of 

fines that they impose on their membership, I believe you have 

exceeded the desires of the public, and you should have 

exceeded the abilities of the union to impose those kind of 

actions on our people. 

 

Mr. Minister, just how do you foresee this kind of action taking 

place where the unions can access the court system to collect 

fines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's logic interests me.  

You feel it is a violation of someone's civil liberties to be called 

a scab.  You apparently don't feel it's a violation of anyone's 

civil liberties to actually be a scab or use a scab, but you don't 

like the language.  I must say the logic of that escapes me. 

 

Surely if scab is a pejorative term, then to be a scab is 

something one shouldn't be.  And I would assume, since you 

feel so strongly about it, you'll be moving a House amendment 

to this which would ban replacement workers. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Hear, hear.  And I'll support it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, you may find someone to 

second it.  So if the member wants to carry your logic through 

to its logical conclusion, you may find at least one person who 

will second it.  I just raise it to point out I think your comments 

are not completely thought out. 

 

You also raised the issues of fines.  You may not be aware that 

it was the former Conservative administration which put in the 

Act the right to fine.  That wasn't this administration; that was 

the former administration.  And all we do is define the process 

for collecting it.  And I want the member to note the process.  

You must get a judgement.  And so there is due process. 

 

So I say to the member opposite once again, you put the 

provision in there -- not you; the party of which you're a 

member when in office put that provision in there.  We didn't.  

We're simply defining the process.  We're making them go to a 

court of law to get a judgement.  That's due process. 

 

I don't see where you can be critical unless you're 

going to be critical of the former administration.  And I can see 

the member from Morse looking at you intensely in case you 

want to criticize the former administration.  So I invite the 

member to clarify his comments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 

certainly will not be moving amendment to allow for the 

banning of replacement workers.  But in my discussions with 

the Minister of Justice under the human rights legislation, I 

certainly did try to ban the actions being condoned by union 

members in threatening the lives of someone who did cross a 

picket line.  Because in the quote that I used from Mr. Daryl 

Bean, he suggested that people should be either hanged or 

drowned in a pool of sewage water if they cross the picket line.  

And I think those kind of comments and those kind of actions 

are to the most extreme, and it should not be allowed in any 

context, Mr. Minister. 

 

You talked about a judgement in applying fines.  You state that 

the previous administration brought in the allowing of fines by 

unions of its memberships.  Well as I hollered across the floor 

at you, that the previous administration did make some 

mistakes and perhaps this was one of them. 

 

Mr. Minister, in talking of judgements, who would supply that 

judgement?  Who would make that judgement that a fine was to 

be imposed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's made according to the 

constitution of the union.  It is the court of . . . it is a judge in a 

court of law which gives you the judgement which enables you 

to collect it.  So I point out to the member that while the fine is 

obviously imposed by the executive of the union, it is the judge 

and therefore there is due process before the fine can be 

collected. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  When the 

union . . . You say the union constitution allows the union to 

bring forward the . . . to seek a judgement before a court case.  

Who makes that determination within the union structure that a 

person who may or may not have crossed a picket line is at 

fault as far as the union is concerned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well that depends on the constitution 

of the union.  It would normally be the executive, but on 

occasion there may be something in the nature of a tribunal set 

up to impose fines.  But that depends on the constitution of the 

union. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, with respect to The Trade Union Act, I think you've 

made the comments about business that are well known all over 

Saskatchewan and probably all over Canada by now; your 

views on business and the kind of people that run business.  It's 

unfortunate that you take a licence with the English language to 

call people the names and resort to that type of activity that you 

did, calling people that run business heartless and greedy and 

all of those kinds of things. 

 

And I remind you, sir, that people out there that run 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

businesses in Saskatchewan are just trying to make a living and 

trying to make a living for the people that they work for or that 

work for them as well.  And as a person who employs other 

people, I take great exception to the kind of comments that you 

make with respect to people and their motives for being in 

business. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Minister, that you should offer an 

apology up to the people and the business community of 

Saskatchewan for saying the kinds of things that you do with 

respect to business.  Any time that a cabinet minister has the 

audacity and the unmitigated gall to stand up and call people 

who operate a legitimate business in Saskatchewan greedy and 

dishonest and all of those kinds of things that you suggested to 

the people of Saskatchewan, that they are greedy and heartless 

and all of those kinds of things, Mr. Minister, I think you owe 

the business community of Saskatchewan an apology about 

those kinds of comments, Mr. Speaker.  It's no wonder that 

columnists are taking you to task for it -- calling you the misfit 

minister because of those kinds of comments that you make, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I wonder if you would care to maybe offer up that 

apology now to the business community? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to make a comment about that 

news story in The Financial Post.  I do not understand how -- 

his first name was Ashley -- I do not understand how he could 

have drawn that conclusion from our interview.  I do not see 

how that story could have been honestly written. 

 

What was actually said . . . The words, incidentally, the words, 

greedy and dishonest, were first used by you.  If one wants to 

talk about members who engage in slashing, unthinking 

attacks, then you don't have to look a whole lot further than the 

riding of Kindersley. 

 

But let's leave that aside.  Nobody ever used the words greedy 

and dishonest.  The word ruthlessness was used.  What was 

said in the interview -- and as I say, I think it was understood 

and I just don't know how the column could have been honestly 

written -- what was said is the legislation is the product of 

social changes in our society.  What are those social changes?  

There are quite a number of them:  increasing number of 

part-time workers, increasing number of women in the 

workplace. 

 

One of the changes, which every meeting with every group of 

businesses in Saskatchewan raised with me, was a ruthlessness 

on the part of a very few businesses.  Nobody called all 

businesses ruthless.  What was said at every meeting with every 

chamber of commerce I've met with was there are a few 

businesses which are behaving in a ruthless fashion.  Why don't 

you go get them and leave us alone? 

 

My response to that is that's exactly what we're trying to do, is 

curb the ruthlessness and leave the 95 per cent of businesses 

alone which are legitimate and 

don't engage in those tactics. 

 

Who recognizes that there is a ruthlessness in the market?  

Virtually every group of business people in the province.  That 

is not to say that everybody is ruthless and that is why I find the 

story in The Financial Post highly offensive. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Intellectually dishonest. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it isn't just intellectually 

dishonest.  It is dishonest in every sense.  It is professionally 

dishonest, as well as being intellectually dishonest. 

 

Nobody called all business people ruthless.  Nobody said that 

all business people have become ruthless and that's why we're 

doing this.  And I don't think he could have honestly arrived at 

that.  Well I know he didn't, because we had a conversation 

about it. 

 

And so I do appreciate this opportunity to clarify the remarks.  

But the view that there is a ruthlessness in the market-place is 

shared by every single small-business person who's concerned 

about competing with Wal-Mart, to put it bluntly.  If you watch 

the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) . . . and I'm not 

necessarily suggesting Wal-Mart is a ruthless business. 

 

But every retailer on Main Street, Saskatchewan is concerned 

about the super-competitiveness of some of these businesses.  

And they would raise it with me and they would say to me: 

why don't you go get the people who are causing the abuse and 

leave the 95 per cent of us alone? 

 

My response was, exactly what I'm trying to do.  That was the 

comment I made to the writer from The Financial Post.  And I 

learned a long time ago, never complain because there's no 

accountability.  You write whatever you want.  In this country 

there's no accountability and no enforceable standards among 

journalists.  You can't enforce it.  So I don't complain to them 

directly. 

 

But since you asked, I do appreciate the opportunity to clarify 

what I said, because what the sentiment I shared . . . the 

sentiment I expressed is shared by most business people in the 

province.  And they aren't a whole lot happier with it than we 

are.  They would much prefer to work in a market-place which 

has an agreed set of norms, ones that they generally follow.  

They'd much prefer to work in a market-place which wasn't 

defined by the lowest common denominator in terms of 

treatment of employees. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  That 

was a pretty good attempt at back-pedalling if I ever saw it.  

Here we see the minister suggesting that business groups in 

Saskatchewan are ruthless.  Maybe you didn't want to go so far 

as calling Wal-Mart ruthless; maybe you'd care to identify the 

ones that you believe are ruthless. 

 

You said that there are people out there that believe 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

there are ruthless employers, and you share that view that there 

are ruthless employers in Saskatchewan.  Just take the time, 

Mr. Minister, to elaborate a little bit on that and share with us 

who just exactly you believe is ruthless in this province with 

respect to employing people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

Wal-Mart isn't ruthless?  Who is ruthless . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Please do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, the nature of that 

question simply confirms my earlier comment that the member 

from Kindersley is far more interested in causing problems than 

he is in asking legitimate questions about this labour 

legislation.  That question has no place in this Assembly.  That 

question has absolutely no place in the Assembly and I'm 

surprised that even a member of two years wouldn't know 

better than to ask the question. 

 

It's a legitimate question.  It might be a legitimate question in a 

different forum.  The problem with this forum is that we have 

absolute immunity and you therefore use the names of 

individuals with extreme care.  We have the right to do it and 

they don't have the right to complain and therefore we do not 

name individuals in this session.  And that's a policy which all 

members of decency, and even without it, members with 

experience, do not violate.  I don't name people in this 

Assembly.  It's just a bad practice, and I suggest to the member 

opposite, you get back to the Bill, stop trying to cause trouble. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it's no 

wonder people are calling you a misfit member and a misfit 

minister, when you say those kinds of things.  You stand up on 

one hand and say that there are people in Saskatchewan that are 

ruthless and then you haven't got the guts to tell us who they 

are.  That's the problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'll ask the member to be aware of 

the use of language which is provocative and unnecessary to 

contribute to the debate of the estimates, and to keep his 

remarks in that context.  I will ask him particularly to pay 

attention to remarks of a personal nature.  It is the estimates 

with the minister here as a minister of the Crown that is before 

us and not the minister's personality. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, it's not 

me that called business people in Saskatchewan ruthless; it was 

you who called them ruthless.  And it was you who went so far 

as even identifying one and then prefacing it quickly by saying, 

I don't think they're ruthless but maybe . . . I think the 

implication was there that it was your belief that when a 

company comes into Saskatchewan and they are considered to 

be a very extreme, a strong competitor, then you believe that 

they're ruthless somehow or another, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wish you would take the time to read some of 

the articles that there are about you, and particularly about The 

Trade Union Act because there's lots of comment around 

Saskatchewan about 

the kinds of things you're proposing to do here.  You're saying 

that the pendulum is just swinging back towards the middle.  

And comments all over and columnists all over and editorials 

all over are saying that that isn't the case, that it's swinging far, 

far to the left with respect to this legislation, Mr. Minister. 

 

And you look at things like the column entitled, Wrong 

message: Whether or not it realizes it, the provincial 

government is sending out a message to business.  Simply put it 

is, don't come here. 

 

Is that what you consider centring the pendulum, Mr. Minister, 

when you say to business groups or to people all over 

Saskatchewan or to people who are considering moving 

operations to Saskatchewan, don't move here.  Is that the 

message that you're trying to convey to the people of 

Saskatchewan and to the business community of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Is that the kind of thing that we should be saying, or is that the 

kind of things as a government, that we should be doing to try 

and bring back some kind of opportunities for the people of 

Saskatchewan?  I don't think so, Mr. Minister.  And I don't 

think the people of the business communities support you one 

little bit on this, no matter what kind of side deals you and your 

government might be trying to cut these days on this issue. 

 

And we understand that's exactly what you're trying to do, Mr. 

Minister -- trying to cut some deals with some side deals to get 

some support for these kinds of things from big business 

interests.  And I hope, I hope, Mr. Minister, that you're 

unsuccessful in that, because even though you may be trying to 

do that, I'm hopeful that small business in this province will 

realize exactly what you're trying to do. 

 

And it's my understanding that they're meeting, I believe it is 

this afternoon, to discuss what their plans are for the future 

with respect to this legislation.  And it's hoped, it's hoped that 

they will pour some sand into their backbone with regard to this 

piece of legislation and will not support you on this kinds of 

stuff because it isn't the kind of thing that business needs.  It 

isn't the kind of thing that the province of Saskatchewan needs 

at this time, Mr. Minister.  We need encouragement for 

business, and we need encouragement for people to provide 

jobs in this province, not this kind of discouragement which is 

what you're doing with this piece of legislation, Mr. Minister. 

 

And your government has continued upon this vein right from 

the day you took office.  Retroactive legislation; retroactive 

deals; retroactive anything. You've set out commissions, all of 

those kinds of things. You ignore anything that you feel isn't in 

your best interests politically.  And everyone understands that, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

And everyone is beginning to . . . and that's why they're 

beginning all over this province, to call you a misfit minister, 

Mr. Minister.  That's why people in this province don't believe 

that you are in a position, or 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

should be in a position to govern any longer, Mr. Minister, or 

in a position to be able to bring forward legislation like this, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder, I wonder why you feel that this type of 

legislation is necessary at this time.  Is it because you think 

that, is it because you think that you've got a couple more years 

and maybe it'll all blow over before you have to call an 

election?  Or what is exactly the reason why you feel that this 

kind of legislation is so important at this time? 

 

Are you getting that kind of pressure from labour unions?  Is 

that what it is?  Is that the kind of thing that's happening to this 

government right now, where you're getting that kind of 

pressure that labour unions are putting on you in order to get 

you to swing this far to the left with regard to labour 

legislation?   Is that what's happened, or could you elaborate on 

that for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Maple Creek had 

already asked the same question without the wide-sweeping 

personal attacks.  Let me repeat for the member from 

Kindersley what I said to the member from Maple Creek.  

What I said to the member from Maple Creek, I repeated some 

comments made by the Canadian Centre for Labour Market 

Productivity, an institution set up by the former Conservative 

administration in Ottawa, which has done some excellent work 

in trying to induce a more cooperative relationship between 

labour and management. 

 

It is apparent from casually observing the opposition that they 

have, like elephants . . . they learn nothing and forget nothing.  

In government they sought to divide and conquer.  If you've 

changed your view of the world and you now want to induce 

cooperation between various groups, it certainly is not apparent 

from the comments which you just made. 

 

The Centre for Labour Market Productivity points out the 

future belongs to technologically advanced societies.  That 

requires the active participation, consent, and support of labour.  

It's not something you can ram down their throats.  And that 

requires them to share more than just the risk; they've also got 

to share some of the benefits.  And I offered that explanation to 

the member from Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I've been listening 

with some interest to the comments from both sides of the 

House today, and I think the minister should understand that 

this issue is raising a lot of very honest concern amongst people 

out there. 

 

There are people that have invested their entire life savings in 

ventures that today employ significant numbers of people.  

There are people that have gone out and convinced other 

people to trust them in ventures.  There are people that have 

staked their future with this province, Mr. Minister.  And for 

them not to react in a very strong way to some of the proposals 

that you bring forward, I think would be unrealistic by you. 

And one of the big criticisms that I have heard and have been 

expressed in this House to you, Mr. Minister, time after time is 

that I don't understand for a minute why you didn't pick that up 

and understand that as you supposedly went around this 

province over a period of 16 to 18 months putting this piece of 

legislation together.  If you didn't understand that then, no 

wonder that you react the way you do in this Assembly when 

someone expresses those concerns on their behalf on the floor 

of this House. 

 

(1630) 

 

I would wager with you, Mr. Minister, that if your government 

had had the courage to hold public hearings on this issue -- as is 

done in many parts of the world by the way and I don't think 

you can deny that -- if you had had the courage to hold public 

hearings by a committee of this House or with yourself, where 

people had the freedom to come forward and lay their personal 

concern or their group concern before you in full view, you 

would have heard those things. 

 

And you would have heard the passion and you would have 

heard the arguments being put forward, Mr. Minister, against 

parts of this legislation, and you would not then have been able 

to stand in this House and deny that that exists.  Because that's 

what you do.  And when you're called on it, you then brand 

those individuals as someone who is not compassionate, 

someone who does not care, someone who promotes 

disharmony in our province.  And that simply isn't true.  That 

simply is not true, sir. 

 

Now you would hear those arguments from both sides of the 

equation.  I grant you that.  You would find people in the trade 

union movement who hold very deep, valid concerns.  And I'm 

wondering, given what we are witnessing in this province 

today, which is divisive, Mr. Minister -- whether you like to 

say it isn't, it is divisive.  As my colleague from Kindersley 

says, there are groups meeting this very hour who represent 

thousands of people who are fundamentally opposed to parts of 

your legislation -- fundamentally opposed. 

 

And they are going to have to seek recourse in every way 

possible to get the message through to you because, obviously, 

during this long supposed consultation that you took, you didn't 

hear it.  So I suspect you're going to see full-page ads in the 

newspapers.  You're going to see all sorts of things taking place 

because they don't buy into this process that you've gone 

through. 

 

You tell me, Mr. Minister, what would be wrong, for instance, 

in holding a public process, a public process that would allow 

people to express that, as they do in many other jurisdictions in 

the world.  And people could get these things off their chest 

and you could actually sit and listen to it.  You'd have to sit and 

listen to it because that's your job, that's what you're paid to do.  

Not run some kind of a sham operation around this province 

where you say you consulted, and at the end of the day 

everybody's still up in arms. 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

I've said to you in this House, given the provisions that you 

proposed for the board, where you propose an individual in our 

society to sit at the head of that board for a period of five years, 

appointed by Executive Council, why that individual shouldn't 

have to appear, for instance, before a committee of this House, 

to express their views in full public on how they would 

interpret parts of your legislation. 

 

That's done, Mr. Minister, in a lot of places in the world.  And 

people have to put on record their views on how they view 

labour relations, labour issues, and the necessary interaction 

between management and labour. 

 

And once they state that in a public way, Mr. Minister, it would 

be far, far more difficult for them to change their views down 

the road when an issue comes up that must be dealt with.  That 

is done in many places in the world, and legislators take that 

responsibility to adjudicate that process. 

 

Then I think people would feel more comfortable.  Because you 

keep telling us, pass the legislation and then we'll do our sector 

by sector things in labour standards; we'll do our trade-offs that 

are necessary for the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have challenged you day after day in this House to show us 

where there's one new job, where there's one person coming off 

the 82,000 people on the welfare rolls, where there's one of 

those 12,000 jobs that have disappeared in this province since 

you took power are going to come back. 

 

And you know what?  You can't do it.  I know you can't do it.  

Now don't you think the alternative, Mr. Minister, of some type 

of public process where people can express themselves about 

those things would be preferable to you coming in here and 

ultimately using your majority to push through a piece of 

legislation, which I say to you, sir, will accomplish none of 

those goals? 

 

It may accomplish some peace for you, in the chair that you sit 

in, with some of the people that you probably don't want to 

have to face on a daily basis, but that isn't the objective of this 

House.  It never has been, never should be, and I hope never 

will be.  The chair means you take the heat.  And there are a lot 

of issues around this province that will never be easy to solve. 

 

I would like you to explain to me why the route you've taken is 

preferable to some type of a public process where 

Saskatchewan citizens would express themselves no matter 

where they fit in the spectrum on this issue.  And why that 

would be negative, why that wouldn't work, and why at the end 

of the day that process would not give you a better piece of 

legislation than what you propose to this House, which simply 

is a matter of time before your majority rams it through this 

House.  Can you explain that to me, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I can with very considerable 

ease.  There's nothing wrong with public hearings; we've 

already done it.  It was done with the Ish committee. 

 

What did it produce?  Very little in the way of agreement.  It 

produced a litany of everybody's conflicts, of everybody's past 

wounds, and it produced very little in the way of agreement.  

We've already had public hearings and the result was the Ish 

committee. 

 

I truly believe there's little to be gained by further public 

hearings except continued expressions of disagreement.  The 

time comes in office when you've got to make a decision.  

We're there and we're making a decision.  We think we have 

chosen a piece of legislation which will further the process of 

encouraging industrial peace and discourage strikes and 

lockouts.  And I can get into what portions of this I think will 

do that, if you want. 

 

I'm a little surprised that the member did not hear my earlier 

answer to the member from Maple Creek.  I admitted there 

were concerns about this Bill.  The fact that we had these very 

extensive tours was an admission of that, that this is a Bill 

which creates enormous controversy.  And I would be the first 

to admit that some of those concerns continue to exist. 

 

I also believe -- and I think this is the point at which we will 

disagree -- I also believe that once they see the Bill in operation 

much of that concern will disappear, as it has in other 

provinces. 

 

And just while we're on the subject of stormy seas, let's 

compare this province to other provinces.  The controversy was 

considerably greater in other provinces which went through 

this.  It was much worse in Ontario and it was much worse in 

B.C. than it is here.  We have indeed . . . I think we have two 

things:  I think this government enjoys . . . the problem here is 

that not that they fear what they understand, because they don't 

really understand it. 

 

And in a way, there's no way they could until they see it in 

operation.  There's no way you can read this Bill and really 

know with certainty how this thing's going to operate.  So in a 

sense, what they fear is the unknown.  They fear how it might 

operate.  And they place their worse interpretations on all of 

this and that's not a dishonest process. 

 

To some extent, one of the reasons why this has been a much 

calmer, a much more civilized discussion in Saskatchewan than 

it was elsewhere is because there's a greater degree of 

confidence in this government than there was in those other 

governments.  I'm not being critical of the governments in 

Victoria or Queen's Park, but there has been a greater degree of 

confidence in this government and that is why this has been a 

much more civilized discussion.  And it has been. 

 

Compare this province to any other and there's no comparison.  

There's been a much more civilized 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

discussion.  I'm not saying there's no concerns; I admit there is.  

But I truly believe that once they see this in operation much of 

that concern will dissipate as it did in Ontario and B.C. 

 

I know that because I've been there.  I've actually spent time 

unlike, I think, many members of this Assembly, I've actually 

invested some of my time talking to business people, talking to 

trade unionists, talking to government officials in Ontario and 

in B.C.  And I have a bit of a feel for where they're at at this 

point in time.  They're nowhere near as concerned as they were 

two years ago and they would admit their worst fears have not 

been realized. 

 

And indeed I can share with you -- if the member is interested, 

all you've got to do is ask for it and I'll share it with you -- an 

interesting piece in the Windsor newspaper, I think it's called 

the Windsor Star, maybe the Windsor Sun.  It is two pieces in 

the same paper.  And this is not an NDP rag, just in case there's 

any doubt about it -- just in case there's any doubt in the 

member opposite's mind. 

 

It was an interview with Bob Mackenzie, who is Minister of 

Labour.  He was saying this legislation's working well.  Strikes 

are down and there's more industrial peace.  That's on page 1.  

On page 5 or 6 or something like that, it's an editorial which 

said:  Part of the reason why there's industrial peace is because 

there's a recession in Ontario.  But there appears to be 

something to what the minister says.  The legislation appears to 

be working reasonably well. 

 

And then they went on to say:  It's high time the business 

community got on to the real problems facing Ontario and 

stopped wasting their time on an issue which doesn't appear to 

be bearing much fruit. 

 

Now that's just an interesting bit of anecdotal evidence, if you 

like.  But in Ontario, it's not working too badly.  And I could 

cite similar evidence from B.C. 

 

So I admit there are concerns.  I believe those concerns will 

dissipate when the legislation's in effect.  And I believe the 

reason why this has been a much more civilized discussion in 

Saskatchewan than it is elsewhere is because there's a greater 

degree of confidence in that this business . . . that this 

government is a government of common sense. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you did not answer any of the 

questions I asked.  I mean it is simply unfair for you to throw 

Ish out as any kind of a public consultative process.  I didn't 

ever pick up my newspaper and say, come on down and meet 

with Dan Ish; most of that was done by invitation.  Most of that 

was done by invitation.  You appointed the chairman.  You 

appointed the chairman, Mr. Minister. 

 

You could have . . . I mean given the way that process went, 

you saw nothing but failure coming down the road very early 

on, because you had interim reports which you were privy to 

and which I was privy to which said that that was going 

nowhere.  There was stalemate from the word go.  And that 

should have told 

you, Mr. Minister, it was time to pick up another format. 

 

You say that B.C. and Ontario are all harmony.  Well the last 

poll I saw coming out of Ontario was the Grits were at 55, the 

Tories at 29, and Bob Rae's getting close to single digits.  

Single digits, okay?  Single digits.  So that tells me that come 

the next election, this wonderful panacea of labour harmony 

that he's brought into Ontario is going to go down the tube.  

And I suggest to you, some of his legislation will go shortly 

after he goes. 

 

And Harcourt's not doing a whole lot better in B.C., according 

to the last numbers I saw.  People don't put them in those 

positions and get ready to throw them out if they love what 

they've been doing, Mr. Minister.  So you protesteth too much, 

I think.  It simply isn't true. 

 

And yes, we do talk to people in other provinces.  As a matter 

of fact, Mr. Minister, the people that are opposing this 

legislation in this province -- and I suggest the legal minds 

working on it are probably as good as what you have in your 

department -- rely very heavily on other jurisdictions to bring 

forward their arguments because they've seen what happens. 

 

And you can go around this province and your Premier can go 

around all he wants and try and cut these little side deals and 

say to certain sectors, to certain-size employers: don't worry, 

we'll look after it in the regulations; don't worry, there's 

exemptions that can be done.  And we're going to ask you 

about those exemptions, Mr. Minister, when we get back into 

labour standards. 

 

We're going to talk about your sectoral stuff and we're going 

expect you to put in front of this legislature the type of deals 

that you're proposing by your sector committees.  Because I 

understand that there's been some things proposed to people out 

there in order to get them onside.  And we're going to expect 

you to tell this House what those are.  Because before that Bill 

passes, all of us in this province, whether we're big or whether 

we're small, should understand exactly what kind of deals 

you're cutting, and they are being cut. 

 

Your Minister of Economic Development, your seat mate, very 

free about that; that process is ongoing.  Well that is very 

unsettling, Mr. Minister, to a lot of people out there.  A lot of 

people don't like that process.  What they would prefer, Mr. 

Minister, is some type of a public process, public process. 

 

(1645) 

 

If you have so much faith in this piece of legislation, so much 

faith, then why don't we have a special session of this House 

this fall and devote two or three weeks to nothing else but the 

two labour Bills.  Let's put a public process in place between 

now and then; and then as legislators, let's come in here and 

devote ourselves entirely -- if you have so much confidence, so 

much confidence, Mr. Minister.  There's lots of people out 

there, Mr. Deputy Premier, that would wholeheartedly 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

agree with me -- wholeheartedly agree with me. 

 

Unlike you, I don't have any agendas any more, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, no agendas at all -- simply to come in here and 

represent people, simply come in here and represent people.  

And I don't think the taxpayers of this province would mind 

paying your or my salary one iota if we came in here and dealt 

with this thing in a proper way, instead of simply using your 

majority to ram through a piece of legislation that a lot of 

people may fundamentally disagree with. 

 

Because your minister still hasn't answered any of those 

questions.  He hasn't said where he's going to find one new job, 

where he's going to take one person off of welfare, or where 

he's going to have one new company come in here and employ 

somebody -- not one.  In all this research and time that he's 

been putting into this you'd think he could stand in this House 

and rattle them off one by one by one.  Because this is going to 

mean employment in this sector and this is going to be 

employment in that sector.  And there's going to be harmony 

over here. 

 

It simply isn't there, Mr. Minister.  It simply isn't there because 

you haven't provided it.  And you should be able to do that.  If 

you've done your homework, if you're so sure of yourself that 

this harmony is going to exist, then you should be able to bring 

to this House any side deals that you've cut with various 

sectors.  You should be able to bring to this House some 

indication to the taxpayers of this province that this isn't going 

to cost them more money; that this isn't going to drive people 

out.  And at the end of the day, before your term as government 

is up, you're going to be able to go to the people and say, we 

were right on the money.  Because your process has been 

closed; it has been driven from inside; it has had a political 

agenda; and it hasn't had the courage to put itself out in front of 

the people. 

 

Mr. Minister, tell me again: have you got some proof?  Have 

you got some jobs?  Have you got some reduction in the 

welfare numbers?  Tell me why you would be afraid to let this 

piece of legislation be talked about freely in this province for 

the next five or six months before this House has to pass its 

final approval on it.  Can you tell me that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Thunder Creek 

made one very interesting comment.  He said: I suspect that the 

lawyers who are acting on behalf of the people are making all 

sorts of interprovincial comparisons, and on that basis are 

attacking it.  In fact they're not.  There've been very, very few 

arguments made against this legislation on interprovincial 

comparisons. 

 

Why?  Because most of this Bill is already in effect.  Almost all 

of this Bill is already in effect in other provinces with 

governments as diverse as Manitoba, Ontario, and B.C., and it's 

working well.  In fact there've been very few interprovincial 

comparisons. 

 

Who is making the interprovincial comparisons?  It's us.  We're 

making the interprovincial comparison 

arguments; the opponents can't be seen on the area at all.  

They've never mentioned them.  Why?  Because it's working 

well elsewhere. 

 

The member opposite made a comment about, it doesn't create 

one new job.  I truly wished I could get members of the 

opposition to be here and listen to the questions which others 

answered because I've already answered this question in a 

number of other times, and I will do it again. 

 

The primary function of this legislation is not job creation.  I 

share my desk with someone who does that very ably.  The 

primary function of this job is to recognize the basic civil 

liberties, the basic rights of workers to belong to a union and to 

organize.  This legislation recognizes that basic human right.  It 

is about compassion, it is about justice.  There are other areas 

of this government which are about job creation.  That's not 

primarily the role of this Act, is to create jobs. 

 

Having said that, we believe the long-run effect of this 

legislation is that it will assist in the economic restructuring, 

and it will play an important role in job creation. 

 

The member opposite talked about process and our closed 

meetings.  I said to the member from Maple Creek some days 

ago when we began this that virtually none of these meetings 

were organized by me or my officials.  Almost all the 200 

meetings I attended were organized by somebody else. 

 

The chamber of commerce organized most of them and they 

were open to everybody.  The municipalities organized some, 

the trade unions organized some.  We didn't organize virtually 

any of those meetings.  They were organized by somebody else 

and they were open. 

 

So the process was open, the discussion was open.  I invite 

members to deal with the facts. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, if that were the case, and I've 

heard the argument made that . . . And I understand -- and you 

correct me if I'm wrong -- the way you've done for instance 

with section 33(4) will put this province in a jurisdictional 

position that is not the same anywhere else in Canada.  In other 

words, we're way out in front of the pack here, okay? 

 

And then you try and tell us, oh no that only involves, oh 5 or 6 

per cent of the employees.  That only deals with some of the 

big boys in the province and they have other ways of working 

these out.  We're going to look after that after the fact because 

we'll set up some type of a sectoral side deal that'll look after 

that 5 or 6 per cent. 

 

If what you say is true, if all of the folks that invited you and 

they were so happy, why do they put out a press release?  This 

is the public sector side, okay?  The SUMAs, the SSTAs, the 

SARMs, the SAHOs that say we've got major trouble with you 

-- you did not listen.  We have major, major problems because 

the services 



May 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

that we deliver to taxpayers are going to be impaired -- 

impaired.  That we can't deliver our mandate to the people who 

elect us.  Because they have been offloaded on by your 

government to the point where they have to go back to their 

taxpayer and they're saying what you're going to prohibit them 

from doing is deliver the type of government which they are 

mandated to deliver under balanced budget legislation in 

almost all cases, because you are putting impediments in their 

road. 

 

These are the very people that invited you out -- yes, those 200 

times.  And you went there and you spoke, but you didn't listen.  

And they're part of the coalition.  And they're saying it is 

wrong.  It is wrong that you are going to increase the cost of 

doing business for each and every one of them, that you are 

going to make them lock in labour legislation which they don't 

want to live with. 

 

Now how can you stand here and tell me that you listened?  

How can you do that?  Is that compassion?  Is that harmony?  

Is that compassion for the people who elect those folks and pay 

the bills? No.  It's not.  It's not. 

 

That's why, Mr. Minister, it isn't just the private sector; it's not 

the so-called ruthless entrepreneur who's on the loose these 

days with NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) 

and everything else.  It's our public sector, our biggest 

employer groups in the province, Mr. Minister.  They're still 

saying to you, you didn't listen.  You're putting impediments in 

the way of the average taxpayer being able to keep his costs 

down.  That's what they're saying, Mr. Minister. 

 

And until you give us those answers, until you're prepared to 

show us that you have listened to them, then it is going to be a 

long time, Mr. Minister, before this Bill goes through this 

House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it must be easy for members 

opposite to judge the meetings, never having attended any of 

them.  It must be very easy for you to judge them. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I don't remember being invited. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well then you should speak to the 

local chamber of commerce, since they organized them.  I'll tell 

you, by golly, in my riding if the chamber of commerce and 

trade union people organized a meeting and didn't invite me, I 

think I'd be awfully concerned. 

 

I think you should give that some careful thought, Mr. Member.  

If they're organizing meetings in your riding -- they're not 

inviting you -- that's a cause for concern.  We didn't send . . . I 

see, I see I've hit a sensitive spot.  I may have hit a bit of a 

nerve there, may just have hit a bit of a nerve. 

 

To be fair to the member from Thunder Creek, there are no 

major urban communities in his riding.  I think Central Butte is 

about the largest and it's still . . . maybe a board of trade but it 

would be a relatively smaller one.  So I will honestly admit to 

the member 

that there may be no chamber of commerce in his riding; that's 

quite possible, but your colleagues are not in the same position. 

 

I want to point out to members opposite in a serious way, 

leaving the jocular nature of this aside, the kibitzing aside, I 

want to put out in a serious way; we didn't organize the 

meetings, they were organized for us.  It was . . . and by and 

large they were pretty civilized discussions.  And perhaps one 

of the reasons why the opposition weren't invited was because 

they did want to keep them informational and non-political. 

 

I don't know, have you got some more questions or do you 

want to . . . Okay, a few more questions then before 5. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, on that same note.  I heard from 

the real estate board in Swift Current, I heard from the chamber 

of commerce, and they said to me that you didn't know 

anything; you didn't answer any questions; you didn't provide 

any information.  You were completely at a . . . almost as if you 

were walking into an empty space.  That's what they told me.  

It was the most disgusting piece of seeking information that 

they had ever seen in their life.  That is what they told me, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

That came from members of the chamber, that came from the 

real estate board, and those individuals are held in high esteem 

by those communities.  And they told me that.  They said, that 

is the worst demonstration of any minister in the history of 

speaking to a Rotary club or the chamber of commerce that 

they had ever seen in their life.  Because you didn't provide any 

information, you didn't know anything, you shrugged your 

shoulders and didn't provide anything.  That's what they told 

me.  And you want to have that kind of a hearing process in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

My question to you is this:  Mr. Tom Kehoe is a well-respected 

individual in the province of Saskatchewan, and in the 

south-west he is extremely well respected.  He moved Spar 

Group into Saskatchewan because of obsessive, overbearing 

labour legislation in British Columbia.  Did you take the time 

to go ask Tom Kehoe what he's going to do with Spar Group 

when you get done with this labour legislation, The Labour 

Standards Act?  Did you go ask him?  You should, because the 

people in that community will be out of jobs, 250-plus will be 

out of work, and you have 82,000 people on the welfare roll. 

 

That's what we're talking about, Mr. Minister, and you haven't 

done anything to create a climate of investment and responsible 

investment for people to provide employment in this province.  

And that's what we're talking about, Mr. Minister, over and 

over again.  And we believe you need to respond to that 

because this is regressive in every way, shape, and form.  That 

is the real issue, Mr. Minister, and put it on the line. 

 

The amount of time that you took to put that deal 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1994 

 together in Saskatoon, which was announced yesterday, cost 

this province $400,000 a job -- $400,000 a job, Mr. Minister -- 

and that is very, very high.  If you want to deal with the 5,000 

more jobs that you want to create, that's $2 billion.  This 

province can't afford it. 

 

Why don't you allow people in this province, on their own 

merit, to invest their own dollars, and then show the people of 

Canada that we can make an investment, we can provide labour 

opportunities that have stability. 

 

I'm just going to put another point to you, Mr. Minister, and 

then I'm going to sit down, because I think you need to respond 

to it.  And that is this, the individual who runs McDonald's in 

Swift Current told me this.  He said, you know what I'm going 

to do with this new labour stuff that's coming up?  I'm going to 

ask the member . . . This individual is my constituent.  He came 

to me on Saturday and he said, I'm going to allow the member 

from Swift Current to come to my office and I'll put a list of my 

50 employees there and he can decided which 25 are going to 

be fired.  Let him decide. 

 

And I would say to you, sir, that you should go to that same 

McDonald's and do that for him.  Because he is going to have 

to terminate individuals who are kids looking for work to pay 

their school, to work the summer holidays.  And you're going 

to do that to those kids?  That's why there's unrest in this 

province, Mr. Minister.  And that's why we're concerned about 

it. 

 

And you need to respond to that in a very clear and legitimate 

way and you haven't done it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will respond very briefly.  The only 

name you actually gave me was Tom Kehoe.  As a matter of 

interest, I have met with Tom Kehoe.  As a matter of interest, 

he applauds some of what we're doing and has some concerns 

about some of what we're doing. 

 

There is no suggestion he's going anywhere.  And for you to 

suggest he is, I think does this distinguished business person a 

real disservice.  My conversation with Tom Kehoe was private.  

Let me just say it was quite an enlightened one. 

 

If you want to give me the names of the others, I'd be happy to 

go meet with them as well. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee rise, report 

progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


