




















































Hansard: March 28, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1207 

 March 28, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, it's 

good to be back to talk to you about the estimates in Labour, the 

Labour department.  A lot has been happening in the world 

around us as the days have gone by and it's certainly good to 

have an opportunity to discuss with you how you're spending the 

public purse in the pursuit of your political party's determination 

and direction. 

 

We want to talk tonight to you about policy direction and how 

you're financing it, and where you're going with it, and where all 

the money has gone and where it is going to go.  Actually I was 

just reading here. It's kind of interesting the things that you'll 

find in these good documents.  It says right here on page 81 

under Labour that: 

 

The mandate of the Department is to regulate and promote 

fairness and equity in Saskatchewan workplaces.  In 

co-operation with working people, unions, employers and 

other organizations, the Department: establishes the 

legislative framework for labour relations; promotes, 

develops and enforces occupational health and safety and 

labour standards; assists in preventing and resolving 

workplace disputes; and advances policies and programs 

to support labour market adjustments and injured workers. 

 

Now that's an awful lot to be said and it seems like it would be a 

nice direction for your department to follow.  Unfortunately, 

after I read that I had a sense of discomfort, I think would be a 

good word to use, Minister, because the little part here that says, 

employers and other organizations, seems somehow to have 

gotten lost in your department this year and last year. 

 

I see things like The Occupational Health and Safety Act, The 

Workers' Compensation Act, where many things have been done 

to help the working people and the unions of our province.  But 

we find in the community at large, our business community, our 

employers and other organizations -- and I'm sure you know 

who they are -- all phoning us, writing us, faxing us, telling us 

that they've been left out of your labour process and they don't 

feel that the estimates are being spent on their interests as well as 

the preferred groups. 

 

And so we have to discuss that, Minister, because after all if 

your first statement is correct in the book and explains what the 

Labour department is all about, then surely we must find some 

equity and some fair play in 

here.  And the word fair I see is used here, fairness, promote 

fairness and equity.  Now let's start working on some of that 

fairness and equity for the whole community and not just for the 

bosses of the trade unions. 

 

I want to have you explain to me, Minister, how is it that we 

have the increase of 1993-94, we have a total departmental 

expenditure of $141 million. That doesn't make you by any 

means, the biggest financial organization in the province by any 

means, but it certainly is a case here that dollars don't explain 

everything in terms of importance to our province.  The amount 

of money that you're spending in your department is dwarfed by 

the Department of Health and yet the labour problems that we 

have can literally destroy our province even more quickly than 

your devastating health legislation.  So I want you to explain to 

me, in general, tonight, Minister, where these dollars are going 

to go to help business and employers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member has confused the FTEs 

(full-time equivalent) and the expenditures.  We have 141 

employees, or full-time equivalents.  We're only spending $10 

million. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, when the minister answers the 

next question, my colleagues have decided that they think I can 

hear better if I move to the front seat.  So I'm going to ask 

another question, and then while that answer's being delivered, if 

you'll excuse me while I move over. 

 

Now, Minister, they want me to be eyeball to eyeball with you, 

and nose to nose.  In the estimates, Minister, your costs for the 

occupational health and safety have dropped in spite of the fact 

that new legislation was just passed last session.  It seems to me 

that you would be facing ongoing increases with the hiring of 

more inspectors, more board members, and having to continue to 

train staff on the legislation.  Can you comment on these costs 

and why they have not risen in the estimates. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The reduction is in grant programs.  I 

think perhaps we should just take a couple of minutes, Mr. 

Chairman, and allow the member from Maple Creek to move.  

So I'll just . . . perhaps we'll just agree upon a brief adjournment 

while he moves. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you going to answer now . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I can see this is going to be a long evening. 

 

Well, Minister, it's nice to find myself in a different seat for a 

change.  It gives me a new perspective on life.  I can see that it 

would be a lot better to be over there in your seat.  I think we'll 

have to aim for that next time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I'm getting a lot of help here, but I do have to get 

into this question, Minister, of where we're going with the 

monies that your department is spending.  Now you indicated 

that you can save some 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

money in here, enough to offset the expenses that you have 

incurred for The Occupational Health and Safety Act, and we 

somewhat fear that you may not be able to bring in a balance to 

the end of your budget in this department, so we want to dwell a 

little further. 

 

Now as you will recall from the debate over this legislative 

session, there was considerable concern in the business sector 

about the sweeping powers given to the inspectors under the 

Act.  Now it would seem to me that at the very least you should 

be engaged in some extensive training for this kind of staff to 

ensure that those powers and other provisions of the Act are not 

abused.  Now that would seem to be the kind of worries and 

fears that people are passing on to me at this time.  Now can you 

tell us if any such training has been undertaken and what it 

consists of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the member will note that 

administration is up by $152,000.  That is in fact where the 

training is located, and the training consists in simply familiarity 

with the new responsibilities under the Act and, in due course 

when they're passed, familiarity with the new regulations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well could you report to us, Minister, then, 

both the general and specific terms about the changes in the 

activities of health and safety inspectors since the passage of the 

Bill.  Have, for example, any businesses been closed as a 

consequence of the new powers given by these inspectors, and if 

so could you describe the circumstances. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I think there have not in fact been 

any businesses closed, nor have the powers been misused in the 

fashion which was so wildly described last year.  I think the 

general view in the business community is that the concern over 

the powers of the inspectors was considerably overdone, and to 

some extent one sees those kind of scare tactics engaged in on a 

continuous basis by those who, for partisan reasons or for selfish 

reasons, fight or try to oppose progressive changes in labour law.  

So I think the general view of the business community is that 

those concerns were over-exaggerated last year.  Certainly none 

of them have been realized so far. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you're opening up a whole new 

area which we naturally are going to have to pursue as we put 

our act together here this evening.  Logically, you would not 

allow your inspectors to abuse their power in the first year of 

their mandate.  Certainly this type of activity is an insidious 

activity, to use the words that would best describe it, because it 

will sneak in and attack you when you're not looking.  

Obviously from a political point of view you couldn't allow that 

to happen immediately, so it will be a gradual shifting more than 

a more dramatic thing that the media would pick up on.  And 

we'll dwell on that as we go on because I want to concentrate a 

bit more on this particular line of questions that we had going 

here. 

 

Now we wonder if you could report to us the recent activities by 

labour adjudicators.  Now has there been 

any changes in the numbers or types of cases brought before 

them since the new law came into force. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- So smooth is the administration that 

there has been no use made of the . . . there've been no appeals.  

I say to the member from Maple Creek, this is a smoothly 

functioning department, so much so that at this point in time 

there have been no appeals. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I would be happy to compliment you as 

soon as I'm sure you deserve the compliment. The reality is, 

though, that the business people, the employers of this province, 

are of such a nature that even though a particular law is passed 

that they find very onerous and very unacceptable, they are 

honest, law-abiding citizens who do not break the law 

deliberately, or even hinting of the bending of the rules.  I wish I 

could say the same about your government these days, but 

unfortunately we can't.  So we can't compliment you just yet 

because the fact of the matter is you won't have had very many 

appeals because the people simply don't allow themselves to get 

into a position to be on the wrong side of the law in our 

province. 

 

Now, Minister, the amendments to The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act provided extensive powers for your department to 

create health and safety regulations without reference to this 

Assembly.  Could the minister inform us of any regulations 

implemented under these provisions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That was an interesting process and 

one that we intend to repeat with respect to The Labour 

Standards Act.  What we did with respect to the occupational 

health and safety, what had been in place prior to the passage of 

this legislation was more or less a single set of regulations which 

applied to all businesses.  Occupational health and safety had 

been drawn up in the early '70s with the dangerous blue-collar 

jobs, the more dangerous blue-collar jobs as a target in 

construction, in mining, and so on.  The Act had been fairly 

effective in that regard but had not been of as much assistance to 

other lines of occupation of which one might mention the health 

care industry. 

 

When it was necessary to redraft regulations under the 

occupational health and safety, what we did this time was to set 

up a number of committees, actually about 20 in number, more 

or less one per each sector.  Each committee consisted of one 

labour person, one management person, chaired by an 

occupational health officer, and they drew up the regulations 

specific to their industry. 

 

I'm pleased to report the process has gone extremely well and 

has exceeded everybody's expectations.  Even people who are 

unrelenting critics of the Department of Labour will say of the 

process for drafting occupational health and safety regulations, 

this was a great process.  We expect the regulations . . . it is 

however, a relatively elongated process.  We have not yet passed 

the regulations.  We expect to gazette them and have them 

passed by early summer, perhaps 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

midsummer. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- That last sentence is really going to be tough 

for the business community to live with because regulations are 

exactly what they're afraid of more than anything else.  Maybe 

seeing as how you opened up that door, you might want to 

explain what some of those regulations are going to be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They're really very voluminous.  There 

will be sort of a chapter for each industry.  Generally they're 

designed to curb practices which give rise to an unacceptable 

risk to the health and safety of the workers and thus they're 

different from industry to industry. 

 

The regulations needed in a hospital, as a for instance, where 

there's a good deal of heavy lifting, are different than the 

regulations needed in the mining industry where the dangers are 

of a very different sort.  So that the regulations are specific to 

each industry; they're really quite voluminous.  I don't think I 

could do them justice.  It would take a very lengthy period of 

time to do them justice.  In any event, when they're gazetted 

they'll be available to everyone. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, seeing how we are going to go 

into this and it's going to affect so many people, why don't you 

just pick one area and give us a run-down, and then we can see 

how the business community reacts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's difficult to do because they've 

not yet been promulgated.  They're still being finalized.  And as 

I said to the member from Maple Creek, business and labour are 

working on them together.  None have been promulgated and 

none have been finalized.  It's therefore difficult to sort of 

describe one to you when they haven't yet been gazetted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, strange that you should say that 

you're working in conjunction with the business community.  I 

don't know if you read the papers or not but that's certainly not 

the impression that we're getting from the weekend news across 

this province.  We've got all kinds of articles here that indicate 

that the business community is not particularly happy with the 

direction that you're going.  And they suggest that your style of 

communications is that you are more inclined to a preacher's 

role rather than to a consulting role, that you tell them what you 

want them to hear and don't particularly listen to what they have 

to say.  Now that's the way I've understood what's being said. 

 

So maybe you could take a minute to change their minds, to 

show them that you are open and honest, and that there is 

something going on here that they can actually depend on.  You 

can go into some of this area of what you're going to do in the 

regulations of The Workers' Compensation Act . . . not the 

workers' compensation, The Labour Standards Act it is that we 

want to talk about here. 

The Labour Standards Act is the one where the regulations have 

got the people more worried.  You've spent several hundreds of 

thousands of dollars promoting this particular piece of 

legislation.  We understand that The Trade Union Act will be 

coming in very soon and you will probably be spending a few 

million dollars trying to promote that.  Surely you would want to 

let the people in the business community know what exactly the 

bottom line is going to be when this legislation is finished. 

 

Now you're sort of asking the folks to accept you writing them a 

blank cheque here, and letting them sign it, and you're going to 

fill in the numbers later.  Because what you're saying to people 

here is that you're going to write this legislation, you're going to 

tell us all the nice, flowery, good things about how it's going to 

help the people who are the workers of this province, where they 

need the help.  And that's good, there's nothing wrong with that.  

But the problem is that there's an awful lot of things that are not 

so good here that come in the regulations.  And I think you owe 

it to the province to tell them what those regulations are going to 

do to each and every industry, absolutely 100 per cent across the 

board, before this thing becomes law. 

 

So I'm going to give you another chance to take a shot at 

explaining to the people of this province what this Bill is going 

to really do to the business community and the chances of 

attracting manufacturers, for example, to our province once 

you've got it into place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member discussed both The 

Labour Standards Act, The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 

and I'm not sure which one his question refers to, perhaps you 

could . . . 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Let's go to The Labour Standards Act because 

it's the most new one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The process is that we have said to the 

people of Saskatchewan, in particular workers and business 

people, that there are some problems which need to be resolved.  

We have invited the business community and working people to 

join with us in finding a solution to those problems.  And thus 

we have invited them to join us in working to provide some 

regulations which will resolve the problems. 

 

My overwhelming sense of having communicated with the 

business community is they like the process.  They may argue 

about whether or not there is a problem, but they want to be 

involved in formulating the solution.  And most of them agree 

that where there are practices which society is not prepared to 

tolerate and should not be tolerating, they're anxious to work 

with us to resolve them.  And we have to do that.  And thus the 

meat of the Act is in the regulations; I would admit that. 

 

That's however done with the consent of both sides.  I might add 

as well that supplications which we've 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

received from the business community since The Labour 

Standards Act was introduced reinforces that.  If there is a 

general trend to what they want by way of amendments, it is that 

they want less in the Act and more in the regulations.  So I think 

the process is one they approve of.  Whether or not they agree 

there's a problem, I guess, will vary from one person to another.  

But by and large they do like the process which involves them in 

the preparation of the regulations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you see, I think you're starting 

to get the idea of where we're wanting to get at here because we 

need to know what those problems are.  You see you're bringing 

in a piece of legislation that's going to affect this province 

probably for many years down the road. 

 

Even if another governing body were to take over this province 

in the next election -- and I'm sure you won't want that to happen 

and you'll do everything to keep that from happening -- but even 

if that were to happen and they were to try to change back what 

you have started out here, it couldn't be done overnight because 

this is a roller-coaster type of thing.  Once you've lost a business 

to the province because it can't see its way fit to be here as a 

result of your legislation, you don't get them back again.  Those 

jobs are lost. 

 

What we've been saying is there's nothing wrong with protecting 

workers, but you also have to have them a job to protect them at.  

There has to be somebody come into the province to create some 

new jobs, a new job base, and at the moment they're flying over 

us and they're going away. 

 

So what are the problems in these regulations that need to be 

corrected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well in summary form, the Act was 

last revised in 1977.  It needs to be revised again to reflect 

changed social conditions.  And there are a number of social 

conditions which have changed since the mid-'70s, and I will 

give you some examples of things that have changed.  There are 

more women in the workplace; there are more single parent 

families; there are more part-time workers; the workplace has 

changed with the advent of the computer which, as a 

microcomputer, did not exist in 1977. 

 

All of those changes have . . . and indeed I would add one other 

change as well.  In addition to the change in the workplace and 

the change in the workforce, there is, I think, generally 

acknowledged a new competitiveness -- some would style it a 

ruthlessness -- in the market-place which I think many 

fair-minded observers believe did not exist, at least in quite such 

a raw form, a generation ago. 

 

So in summary form, The Labour Standards Act is being 

amended to reflect changed social conditions, and certainly 

things have changed enormously since the mid-1970s.  This Act 

is just being changed to reflect those changed social conditions. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I certainly agree with you that 

there is a ruthlessness in the job market and in the workplace 

these days because, quite frankly, with eleven and a half per cent 

-- or give or take a few per cent one way or the other -- 

unemployment, you've got an awful lot of people beating on one 

another, trying to get their jobs.  You've got an awful lot of 

competition for those jobs.  You've got several thousands of 

people that are no longer even represented in the UI 

(unemployment insurance) figures.  They're now on welfare.  

Most of those folks still want to work, and so there's a lot of 

competition there.  So that ruthlessness is a result of workers 

scrambling to try to take jobs away from one another.  That, I 

think, justifies our claim that we need a bigger job base, and the 

way to get the bigger job base is certainly not to drive people out 

of our province or to scare away those that might come in to 

create jobs. 

 

And quite frankly, if you get a labour relationship in the 

province that is out of tune with our neighbours, you will not see 

businesses come in and create those jobs.  It's not a question of 

fairness here; it's a question of staying in tune with your 

neighbours so that you don't get out of step with the rest of the 

world and cost us our job base.  And that's what we have to 

have. 

 

So, Minister, the fact of the matter is that you've introduced 

legislation, and you've talked about it, and that legislation -- on 

the surface, what we can see of it -- is reasonably good in a lot of 

areas.  However, by your own admission, the regulations are the 

key to the things that will affect most of the employers in the 

province. 

 

If that be the case, then those regulations are the things we have 

to know about and study and get out into the open to the public.  

Why are you being so dark and secretive and behind closed 

doors, hiding your regulations and the intent of your regulations 

and what you want to do?  If you're above-board and you want 

people to cooperate with you, do you not have to present those 

regulations with the legislation so that the public can weigh the 

whole Bill in order to know what's going to happen to this 

province as a result of those regulations? 

 

We've got to know what's going on.  If you're going to hide these 

regulations, then we have to assume that there's something 

wrong that you're covering up.  What else could we say?  You 

would say that yourself.  Any person in today's society would 

say that a government that doesn't want to tell us what the 

regulations are or how they will affect people must be trying to 

cover up some evil intent. 

 

So once again I say to you, we have to dig out those regulations 

and put them on the table.  They have to be a part of the 

package.  Otherwise the business community cannot rest with 

this legislation and they cannot allow it to continue.  So I give 

you the opportunity once again.  Tell us what the regulations are 

and how they're going to affect the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, what the 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

member from Maple Creek is not saying, I think, out of a sense 

of fair play and out of a sense of respecting a confidentiality, 

what the member from Maple Creek is not saying is that I did 

tell him last week that I expected to be in a position to give him 

a draft copy of the regulations. 

 

In fact, I now inform the member from Maple Creek, and I guess 

I'm informing everybody else as well, that we have been urged 

by both the business community and the trade unionists not to do 

that, not to table a set of draft regulations.  It is the fear of both 

sides that we will prejudge the end result and that they ought to 

be left free to try to arrive at solutions which they think is 

appropriate rather than us sort of imposing our view upon them. 

 

So we're weighing that with care.  But we may not be tabling 

draft regulations, as I think I'd said to the hon. member, that I 

expected to.  We're being urged not to by both the business 

community and the trade unionists, and we're weighing that 

advice very carefully.  It is, after all, it is they who we want to 

work with us, and if they say this is not going to be very useful, 

perhaps we should respect that. 

 

I thank the hon. member for respecting the confidence which I 

spoke to him, but I say to the Chair and to the committee that we 

are reconsidering our intention to table draft regulations. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I thought they'd be that bad.  But, Minister, in 

all fairness, I have a hard time believing that the business 

community wants to help you to cover up what's going to 

happen if they're against it.  I have a hard time believing that 

they will be in favour of it because of the fact that I've read the 

papers over the weekend where business leaders have publicly 

stated that they're not happy with what's going on. 

 

So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take your answer, deliver 

it to the business community if they're not listening tonight, and 

I'd be surprised if they aren't.  But just in case they aren't, we'll 

let them judge it, and we'll wait for their response on this issue 

because somehow I don't think they're going to agree with the 

way you've stated your case. 

 

I do want to move into some other areas though, and we'll 

probably get back to this as we go, and we'll ramble around here 

a little. 

 

I have some specific questions about the CLR (Construction 

Labour Relations Council) which was organized through or in 

the auspices of or as a result of your department.  Pick 

whichever one applies. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now apparently, Minister, they collect some kind of dues here.  

And it says here, just to refresh your memory, notwithstanding 

any of the other sections of this by-law, and this is part of the 

by-law from the CLR: 

 

every Unionized Employer, as defined in The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act, 1992 (called the "Act"), in the Trade Divisions 

represented by this Association, shall, on or before 

February 28, 1994, pay a Contract Administration and 

Industry Development Fee to the Association; 

 

Now how is that fee, as you understand it, arrived at and what 

does it pay for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's correct.  There is a fee 

levied by the construction labour relations to its members, and 

that's for matters of administration.  I'm not sure the extent to 

which . . . to some extent this is their own internal matter.  I'm 

not sure the extent to which they want us to get into a discussion 

of that, and I think I'm going to leave it at that.  It's a fee which 

is set by them according to their own constitution, levied on their 

own members, and I'm not sure, as I say, I'm not sure it would be 

appropriate for us to get into a discussion of something that is in 

many ways -- well in all ways -- an internal matter. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, maybe I should open the door a 

little bit for you, a bit further, because this has become a bit of 

an issue in the province with some folks. 

 

Now it says on this memo that I have here, that the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board has recently decided on 

the question of whether members and non-member, unionized 

employers are required to pay the contract administration and 

industry development fee.  The board is of the opinion that the 

answer is yes.  The decision confirms section 29 of The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992, and removes 

all uncertainty regarding the requirement to pay the fees in the 

accordance with section 29. 

 

So now, Minister, it does become a part of 1992 legislation.  It is 

definitely labour legislation.  This is under your department, 

under your authority, your legislation, so that should open the 

door for you to talk about this internal problem that has become 

an external problem.  And so I'll go on, and just read just a little 

bit more of this to give you an idea of what's going on just in 

case your memory hasn't caught what we're after. 

 

the Contract Administration and Industry Development 

Fee payment pursuant to this paragraph shall be 

determined by a formula and shall be an amount equal to 

the number of man hours worked during the period 

commencing March 1, 1993 and ending February 28, 1994 

by the employees working in each Trade Division of the 

Unionized Employer multiplied by eight cents an hour; 

 

Now the key is here, the cost -- quite a bit of cost -- plus the 

original fact that both members and non-members of unionized 

employers must now pay this. 

 

Why would there be a provision that non-members 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

have to pay this fee, and isn't that a rather exorbitant amount to 

be charging? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm assured by the officials that it is 

only those which are unionized which pay this, although one 

must recognize there are firms which do work both in a 

unionized mode and in a non-unionized mode.  But a firm which 

does not at all, in any way, do work as a unionized firm does not 

pay this.  This is only union contractors and those contractors 

which have both a unionized and a non-unionized aspect. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Minister, I understand that, but up at the 

top of this page it says non-member unionized employers.  That 

means the people that don't belong to CLR are now being forced 

by your Act to pay this fee.  It doesn't seem fair to me that if I 

don't join your organization that I should pay your fees; and if I 

do, I should know what those fees are buying.  And if they're 

buying something, I should not only know what it is, it should 

be something that's of benefit to me.  So I want to know what 

those fees are being used for and how you can justify charging 

non-members of an organization the fees as if they were 

members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The scheme of the legislation is that 

there will be industry-wide bargaining done by the Construction 

Labour Relations Council.  The scheme of the legislation is, as 

well, that all of the contractors will contribute to, all of the 

unionized contractors, will contribute to the administrative cost 

of this industry-wide bargaining.  So all of them in a sense are 

part of the system.  The rates apply to all, and it was felt fair that 

all of the contractors who are unionized should contribute to it.  

So I think that's the underlying philosophy behind charging 

everybody. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But what you're saying, Minister, is now the 

money's used for bargaining. Nothing wrong with bargaining.  

However, the money is being paid by the employers based on 

the number of people that they have working by the number of 

hours that they worked.  The employer's paying this money to 

CLR who use that money to bargain for better conditions for the 

employees. 

 

In other words, you're telling the employers here, you pay for the 

costs of the people to bargain against us, and we have to hire 

somebody to bargain for ourselves.  In other words, we're paying 

both lawyers in a sense, if you're looking at it from a point of 

view of the adversarial process that you would understand as a 

lawyer.  If you were fighting a case for Joe, and Sam has his 

lawyer, you're saying that one guy has to pay both lawyers to 

fight the case.  Shouldn't both sides be paying their own way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, well in fact they do.  The fee to 

which the member refers only goes to pay the cost of the 

administration of the employer side.  The employees, the trades 

who bargain, have to pay their own expenses. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I just want to go into this a little bit further, 

Minister.  I'm going to quote a little more off 

this memo that we have so that the folks will know exactly 

what's going on here.  It goes on to say that: 

 

any dues, fees or assessments except membership fees paid 

by any Member or any Unionized Employer, as defined by 

the Act, to the Association during the period commencing 

March 1, 1993 and ending February 28, 1994 shall be 

credited to any amount payable by the Member or the 

Unionized Employer pursuant to this paragraph; and 

 

The Council may, for the period from and after March 1, 

1994, fix, from time to time, the Contract Administration 

and (the) Industry Development Fee to be payable by every 

Unionized Employer, as defined by the Act, and until such 

fee is fixed by the Council . . . 

 

Now that means that these fees can grow an awful lot, doesn't it?  

That's what I see here.  It doesn't look like we have much control 

over this thing.  It goes on: 

 

. . . the fee shall be an amount equal to the number of man 

hours worked in a month by the employees employed by 

the Unionized Employer as defined by the Act multiplied 

by eight cents an hour and such fee shall be payable 

monthly, within fifteen days after the end of each month. 

 

If you are a Unionized Employer which has employed any 

Unionized Employees in Saskatchewan since March 1, 

1993, the Contract Administration and Industry 

Development Fees plus GST are due February (4), 1994.  

Our GST Registration number is . . . (and it gives that . . . 

and the) remittance form is attached for your convenience. 

 

Now, Minister, it seems to me that all of this sort of double 

charging is going to run up the cost of doing business in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I really, seriously need to have 

you explain to me how this is going to help the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the scheme of the legislation was 

that there should be industry-wide bargaining rather than having 

each contractor bargain separately.  It was felt to be more 

efficient and cheaper if the bargaining was done on an 

industry-wide basis.  That's the scheme of the legislation, and 

that's how it's thought to help the construction industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I'm pretty sure that meant that we're 

going to have a philosophical disagreement. 

 

But let's go on and pursue this, because I think I might be able to 

get you to rationalize some of these costs.  Somehow I wouldn't 

be surprised too to find out that some of these funds end up 

going to a particular political party as an automatic deduction, 

and you can answer that if you want, but I speculate that very 

strongly. 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

What I'd like to know more specifically right now, though, is 

how many employees are involved in this process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the employees have their own 

bargaining agent.  That's the problem.  I seem to have difficulty . 

. . The association bargains on behalf of the employers. It's an 

industry-wide bargaining system, and that is where that fee is 

going. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's good to know.  But of course, you 

said it's paying the bargaining agent and that's pretty natural for 

you to say that, but it was the employer's money that paid for the 

agent, so he's paying for the agent plus he's paying for his own 

people to bargain. 

 

But what I did ask you this time was how many employees are 

involved in this process. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The unionized workers are about 20 

per cent of the total industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How many people would that represent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think it's going to take a moment to 

find those statistics.  As soon as we get it, we'll give it to you.  

Perhaps in the meantime the member has some other questions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is it 80,000? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, that might be a way of doing it.  Would it 

be more or less than 100,000?  Maybe we can work on it that 

way and trim it down.  Less than 100,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm told that the best information they 

have here this evening is that they're bargaining on behalf of 

approximately 3,000 people.  There's approximately 3,000 

employers . . . There is approximately 3,000 employees involved 

in the unionized construction industry. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We're going to have to check that figure I 

guess, Minister, because it doesn't really seem like that's terribly 

many people in the whole province of Saskatchewan to be 20 

per cent of the workforce, of the . . . that seems rather light.  

Anyway we'll work on that. 

 

Now you've probably heard about the concept that's been talked 

about here lately about a job tax to replace GST (goods and 

services tax) and that sort of thing.  I think we're going into an 

awful lot of areas that are going to be changed in the next while 

that's going to affect the cost of doing business in Saskatchewan.  

How do you think that concept is going to affect the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Those would be proper 

questions to put to the Minister of Finance in their estimates.  

We wouldn't . . . this department wouldn't have anything to do 

with imposing anything in the nature of a job tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under this 

umbrella organization that you want to have negotiate their 

contracts, can you tell me what all the trades are that you would 

have under that umbrella organization and give me a list of 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's about 13 or 14 trades.  We 

don't have a list here.  We can undertake to provide it to the 

member from Morse, but we don't have it here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So under this umbrella organization, they're 

going to negotiate the contracts of all of these at one single time.  

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it wouldn't necessarily be done at 

one single time.  They'll be done industry wide, but they're not 

necessarily moving in lock step. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I recall, Mr. Minister, one other time when that 

was happening -- in 1982.  It caused the longest period of labour, 

construction, employer unrest that this province has probably 

ever seen, and you want to bring that back into place, or what's 

the difference between this, what you're doing here and what 

you did in 1982? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The process is really quite similar.  

There are some differences, but they're . . . basically the concept 

is the same and that is you have, on a trade-by-trade basis, 

industry-wide bargaining.  I don't think the member's comments 

are borne out by the statistics in the '70s.  In fact it was a period 

of relative industrial peace.  It's also true in the construction 

industry. 

 

I think those involved in the construction industry in the '70s and 

the '80s agreed that the system that was used in the '80s was 

better.  Hence we passed the legislation without any objection 

from members opposite, I want to add, and we are now trying to 

make it work in a difficult atmosphere -- made difficult because 

the construction industry is at such a low ebb and they are 

intensely competitive for every conceivable job. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One of the things that happened in that period 

of time, Mr. Minister, was that there was so much conflict 

between the various organizations in the trades that there was no 

agreement on what trade bargaining unit was going to finalize 

the whole deal.  And what happened is you had the electrical 

workers and the plumbers and all of those people, all were 

bargaining simultaneously and nobody could reach an 

agreement. 

 

And what you had over that period of time was probably the 

largest and the greatest amount of instability in the labour force 

that was ever given to this country.  And if you did look at some 

of the records they would show you that striking workers had the 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

most accumulated hours in the period of 1981 and '82 of any 

time in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I will also say to you, sir, that that was one of the reasons 

why you lost the election in 1982.  That is precisely the reason 

why the people in Regina North West and just about everybody 

in Regina voted against you -- for exactly the same reasons, 

because you had everybody bargaining, everybody was on 

strike, and everybody was mad at you.  Now why would you 

bring that in again?  That's the question we're asking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member's description of history is 

. . . The member's memory -- I think he's relying on his memory 

-- is simply not accurate.  It was a period of relative industrial 

peace.  There may have been a strike in 1981-82 which jiggered 

the figures.  By and large it was a period of industrial peace in 

the construction industry and that's why the construction 

industry agreed to go back to it.  And I would assume that's why 

members opposite voted in favour of the legislation -- which you 

did -- in the summer of 1992. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well let's just go back in history.  Your history 

shows you that you lost the election in 1982 simply . . . or one of 

the reasons was because of this.  And I saw ads going out all 

across this province by a unionized employee, saying that they 

didn't want to have any part with you because there was no 

labour rest and no ability to negotiate, because everybody was 

doing it on their own agenda within the framework of all of 

them, and nobody seemed to get anywhere with it. 

 

If I go from memory, I would say that there was 400,000 

man-hours of work lost in that period of time.  That's going from 

memory, Mr. Minister, but I would say I was pretty close to 

what it was in that one year -- 1981, spring of 1981 to the spring 

of 1982.  And that, Mr. Minister, was I think one of the reasons 

why you lost your seat as well. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No I didn't. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You didn't lose your seat?  Well then the 

majority of others did.  One of the reasons was the labour force 

was against you because of what you were doing in the context 

of these negotiations and nobody could have any labour peace 

because nobody was working.  Everybody was angry at 

everybody else.  And now you want to bring it back into the 

focus, and then you put a tax on it, yet besides. 

 

And the question we have in relation to that is whether that tax is 

going to end up in the NDP (New Democratic Party) coffers.  

That's what we're concerned about, literally, and we believe that 

that's probably what some of that money is going for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well your comments are simply 

absurd.  Your comments that the money levied on the 

construction firms is going to the NDP is simply absurd.  If you 

have any evidence for such a wild allegation, I suggest you 

provide it.  If not, I suggest you 

dignify these proceedings with a sensible comment.  If you've 

got any evidence to support that, I'd like to see it.  You haven't 

because it hasn't happened.  Indeed I think it would be a . . . If it 

weren't criminal, it would be very close to it for them to be 

doing that. 

 

So I say to the hon. member, if you have some evidence of those 

allegations, provide them.  If you don't have any evidence, you 

should never have made the allegation in the first place. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So then it's criminal for any union organization 

to give money to the NDP or to the Conservatives.  That's what 

I'm telling you.  It's not criminal.  It's done all the time. 

 

But I want to go back to the original comment that I made.  Why 

would you be putting this into place under the circumstances that 

exist today when there is hardly any work for these people, and 

you want to make it tougher for the employees to get work so 

that their employers have an opportunity to get a construction 

project going.  And you're making it more and more difficult all 

the time.  That's what I'm telling you. 

 

The 1970s and up until 1982, they were great days for 

construction because the whole economy was moving forward.  

And yet labour was in a state of unrest, Mr. Minister.  And today 

we have exactly the opposite.  Things are going down.  The 

latest statistics on welfare is over 80,000 people -- 80,000 

people, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now you're going the other way and saying we're going to 

tax more so that the people can negotiate better.  They haven't 

got work, Mr. Minister.  That's what the problem is.  They need 

work.  They don't need more laws.  They don't need more taxes.  

What are you going to do to change that around? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the creation of jobs is not directly 

a function of the Department of Labour.  The member's 

suggestion that somehow or other our legislation is going to 

drive jobs out . . . I guess that's always been the cover which 

right-wing parties who act as the handmaidens of privileged 

interests . . . I guess that's always been the cover that right-wing 

parties have used for doing nothing to protect those who are 

unfortunate and those who need additional protection. 

 

I guess throughout history right-wing parties have always said 

it'll drive away jobs and therefore we'll do nothing.  And 

therefore you've stood shoulder to shoulder with the privileged 

interests. 

 

Well it doesn't describe this government.  We want to assist 

some of these people.  We want to assist some of the less 

fortunate.  And we think we have overwhelming support from 

the public in so doing. 

 

But your comment that any progressive legislation is going to 

drive out jobs is not borne out by statistics.  It is not borne out 

by history.  It is simply a lame excuse that right-wing parties use 

in office to do nothing. 



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Who provides, Mr. Minister . . . who provides 

the employment for the employee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I was going to say this is sort of 

economics 101.  It isn't economics 101.  It wouldn't pass for a 

public school.  It wouldn't pass for a sensible discussion among 

elementary students.  I'm not sure I should dignify the member's 

question with a response, but let me just say that it is the 

economy which provides the jobs.  It isn't the employer, nor is it 

the employee; it is the economic system in which they operate.  

But I really think that the member's question is getting a fair 

distance from Labour estimates. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, Mr. Minister, it's right on Labour 

estimates.  I think that you are shirking your responsibility by 

saying to the public that . . . Over and over again, by making 

more rules and making more taxes, and making the employer 

pay more taxes under your regime than they have ever paid in 

their history, is a deterrent to employment -- and when will you 

ever understand that? 

 

You can say it's economics 101, but you haven't understood it.  

You haven't even begun to take the class because, as I look 

around, there are thousands of people who would prefer to be 

employed than to be on welfare.  Since we left office, you've had 

20,000 more -- no, I'm sorry; almost 30,000 more -- people on 

welfare than there were when you took office.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is serious, serious problems for the people of 

Saskatchewan -- 80,000 over 450,000 is almost 12 per cent of 

the total employable work force in Saskatchewan are paying for 

the 80,000 people on welfare.  Now they don't mind paying, but 

they'd sooner have people contributing in the work force to work 

and employment rather than the other way around, which is the 

way you're going.  You go another two years and you'll have 

100,000 people -- that's a quarter of the people -- on welfare 

compared to what's working, if you keep going the way you're 

going. 

 

Now that's economics 101.  Understand it, Mr. Minister.  I'm not 

talking politics; I'm talking serious business and economic 

development in the province of Saskatchewan.  And labour 

standards, labour legislation, regardless of what it is, will impact 

plus or minus to the labour force, plus or minus to the economic 

stability of the employer.  That's where you've got this all wrong.  

And each time you get up to pass a new Bill, we get one less 

employer in this province.  And they're leaving, and that's not 

good, Mr. Minister.  Eighty thousand people on welfare, and 

you're proud of that?  Your Premier, your leader, said in this 

province that he was going to get rid of poverty in this province.  

And we've got 80,000 people on welfare? 

 

Mr. Minister, economics 101 should be maybe put together as a 

class for you members opposite to understand really what the 

world is all about and learn and understand that impact on the 

labour and impact 

on the employer is directly related to rules and regulations that a 

government brings in -- plus or minus. 

 

And what I have seen in the past 18, 20 months is exactly this: it 

has become a minus in this province because of your positions.  

You haven't built the labour force.  The labour force has gone 

down.  Have you built equality and equity in the low pay 

people?  No you haven't.  You have in fact put them on welfare, 

more today than there ever has been in the history of this 

province. 

 

And that is serious, Mr. Minister, and that is why this question is 

important.  What are you going to do to help the employer hire 

someone to work?  What are you going to do for that person?  

You and the labour standards and The Trade Union Act and the 

Workers' Compensation Board -- what are you going to do to 

allow the employer the capacity to employ someone?  When are 

you going to do that?  That's important for the people of this 

province as well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is, and we have an economic 

development strategy which has been relatively successful and 

which has received, by and large, broad approval across the 

province.  The member will also have an opportunity to discuss 

that with the Minister of Economic Development.  I really do not 

see how this is germane to the estimates for the Department of 

Labour. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, I think 

that what we have to do here is move on from economics 101 to 

economics 102 because reality is that some of what you say 

about the economy driving jobs or no jobs is fact, but there are 

times when the natural processes of economic planning no 

longer work, and you end up in a reverse situation. 

 

When we had high inflation in our country, we didn't have full 

employment either.  We had quite high unemployment, and so at 

that point the fundamental principles of economics 101 had 

started to fail.  If we had allowed inflation to continue, this 

country would have been totally destroyed; I'm sure you would 

agree with that.  And so an old rule was tried, and that is that if 

you cure inflation and drive the jobless rate up, you can stabilize 

the currency of the country and the economics of the country, 

and we did that, I guess. 

 

Now if that's the reason why we have this unemployment 

problem and our welfare problem today in such massive 

numbers, then we'd better work on that and get it cured. 

 

But the reality is that we are mixing apples and oranges here.  

The economy of this country and the economy of our province 

are definitely factors.  But this labour legislation that we're 

talking about here now is going to damage the province of 

Saskatchewan's labour race, not the rest of the country.  We have 

the same rules of economy in Saskatchewan that Alberta, and 

Manitoba, and British 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

Columbia, and Ontario have.  And so in the larger picture if the 

economy and the fight against inflation, and the fight against 

joblessness, and all those kinds of things, if they all take place -- 

and our fight against the low dollar -- if all those things happen 

out there, they're going to happen equally to Alberta, 

Saskatchewan, and Manitoba. 

 

But where we are getting out of sync with our neighbours is in 

labour legislation.  Not that our labourers shouldn't have 

protection but you cannot be a pace setter in this area.  It's okay 

with health reform and those kinds of things because the people 

wanted that and they were willing to pay for it.  That's the 

history of our province as well.  But in labour legislation, the 

people have not shown a willingness to pay the price to have the 

best cared-for workers in the world so that we can set a pattern 

for the world.  Because the people that pay the bills have said 

goodbye, we're not going to stay here. 

 

And I'll give you a little story that I heard today on the 

telephone, to back up my point.  A lady called me, she runs a 

small abattoir.  She now employs several young people on a 

part-time basis.  In the summertime, in the busy season which is 

the fall -- the hunting season period I presume is probably 

included in their busy season -- after school hours and 

weekends, those kinds of things. 

 

She said that the other day she got a notice telling her that the 

labour legislation, The Labour Standards Act, was going to be 

changed.  There was a phone number to call, and she called that 

number and said, what's going on.  And they said, well we're 

going to bring about some changes.  She said, what are those 

changes.  Well they said, well we can't give them to you because 

the regulations haven't been set down yet.  She said, when will 

we know about this.  And the person on the phone -- rather a 

silly answer I thought when I heard it myself -- said, you'll read 

it in the news media. 

 

Well the lady said, you took the time to let me know that the 

regulations were going to change and that I would be breaking 

the law if I didn't follow them, why wouldn't you take the time 

to let me know what the rules are when they are passed.  And the 

guy simply sloughed her off and wouldn't answer the question. 

 

Now this lady said to me, if it's going to become so hard to 

employ these young people, why would I bother?  She said, dad 

and I'll kill as many beef as we can and hang them up and cut 

them and wrap them and we'll go as long as we can.  And when 

we go broke we'll close the doors and leave the province like 

everybody else.  That's her words not mine.  We'll close the 

doors and leave the province like everybody else. 

 

And she wasn't talking about economy number one or 102 and 

she wasn't talking about the Canadian dollar or inflation or the 

jobless rates in the rest of the world.  She was talking about your 

labour legislation in the province of Saskatchewan and how it's 

going to affect her small business.  So we can't mix the apples 

with 

the oranges any more, Minister.  We now have to sort out your 

labour legislation from all of the rhetoric and let's talk about 

getting ourselves back into sync with our neighbours so that all 

of the people don't close the door and go away. 

 

I said to this lady, I suppose you're thinking that Alberta looks 

pretty good.  And she said, yes it does but that's not where I'm 

going.  She said, I think I'll head south.  In other words this lady 

isn't even content to stay in her own country any more.  She's 

going to leave the whole country behind. 

 

Now we thought we had a problem when people were exiting 

our province.  But we've got an even bigger problem when they 

start exiting our country because then we either have to populate 

our country in one of two ways, either with birth or with 

immigration.  And that's going to lead to an awful lot more 

problems.  So why are we escalating and fuelling the problems 

of our society and our province? 

 

So, Minister, we go into these Acts, and you said a little while 

ago that the business community now doesn't want the 

regulations to come out into the open because they're quite 

content to take a chance on whatever you might be going to do 

to them.  I find that hard to believe. 

 

After I read headlines like this one here from the Leader-Post 

here, February 12, '94 . . . your name is the first one -- I guess 

I'm not allowed to say that -- so your name there, Minister, 

"under fire from business."  Under fire from business.  There's 

just a little . . . I'll just run a couple of these lines by you.  I'm 

sure you will remember the article as soon as I do this.  The 

person that was being interviewed said: 

 

I would strongly urge that you put in the right to a secret 

ballot for both (union) certification and decertification . . . 

 

One of the things that people are worried about in the upcoming 

legislation that you're planning.  It also alludes to the Woolco 

store in Moose Jaw and the loss of their application to be 

decertified.  You know all about that.  We've argued about that a 

few times.  It concerns people throughout this whole province. 

 

I might tell you, Minister, that over the weekend I was in 

Saskatoon.  I think you probably know the main reason but we 

did a few other things like talk to folks and listen.  In listening to 

people that weren't at the particular meeting that most of us were 

at later on in the evening, we discovered that this problem hasn't 

just stayed here in Regina and in Moose Jaw.  The people of 

Saskatoon at the coffee shops find it very, very stressful to know 

about what's going on down here, and they're talking about it on 

a daily basis. 

 

It also alludes to how you have treated the business community 

when you have gone out with this so-called consultation process 

that you talked about.  That's what makes me really wonder 

about how the business community has suddenly decided to play 

ball with you in secret and not have the  



March 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

come out into public because here it says you were to speak to 

20 minutes.  You took 50. 

 

Now I won't read this word for word because I can summarize 

this, and you know very well what people were talking about it 

because they told you about it as time went by.  They said you 

went to the meetings, and you talked for so long there was no 

time left for a question period.  My first answer was when 

somebody told me that, well how could that possibly be?  The 

minister would just stay a little longer and answer the question. 

 

Unfortunately I was wrong because what happened was you 

went to meetings where the chamber of commerce or somebody 

would organize a meeting.  The Rotary Club would organize the 

meeting.  It would be a luncheon meeting, and most of the folks 

had to leave at 1 o'clock to get back to work.  So if you were to 

speak for 50 minutes, the guy was right when he said that there 

was no time for any question or answers.  And when the few 

questions that were permitted because of the little bit of time 

were asked, you neatly didn't answer them according to these 

people, not only just in this particular article, but also others that 

I've talked to. 

 

Now folks are worried about the part-time workers, Minister, 

and this is a common problem throughout our province.  We're 

going to be talking to some people about that tomorrow, and I'm 

sure you're going to be talking to a few more as well.  But you 

have to do something, Minister, to alleviate the fears out in the 

community. 

 

Your broad statement that the business community is happy may 

be true of a certain number of umbrella group representatives 

because I'm not going to say that you would deliberately lead me 

astray here, and you may have a few of those umbrella group 

heads agreeing with you that you should cover this up.  But I 

seriously doubt that the vast majority of business people in this 

province want those regulations kept secret. 

 

And realistically, even though we do empower umbrella groups 

in our life to represent us . . . and all of us have done that.  I 

guess I probably would have to allude to some of the farm 

community umbrella groups; SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities) comes to mind that would represent my 

interests in municipal affairs as a property owner in the country.  

Not always when the president of SARM got up and said 

something did I agree with that.  Not always - 

_ even in spite of the fact that I supported him and elected him -- 

not always was he totally on track, whoever he or she might 

have been.  I think there have only been men in the past. 

 

So the point I want to make, Minister, is that even if you have a 

few people at the top of these umbrella groups agreeing with 

your position, you'd better check out in the countryside and 

through the big cities around you to find out if the whole 

community really agrees with this, because they don't.  The 

business people I talked to over the weekend are not in favour 

of these regulations coming in without a full disclosure of what 

they're going to do to their businesses and to this province.  They 

want to know what's going to happen. 

 

I don't think anybody wants to sit on top of a bomb and have 

somebody tell them that the switch has been taken off without 

being able to look for themselves.  And that's what this province 

is sitting on -- a bomb.  Now it may be an empty, with the switch 

taken out, or it may be loaded.  And it may just blow this 

province right clean out of the water as far as having a job base 

left when we're finished.  And I know that you want to do some 

right things by your union friends, but surely you want to have a 

province left when you're finished so that your union friends will 

have a place to work.  I mean after all, if there's no job base, 

even the union bosses won't have a job.  So that might be 

something for you to think about. 

 

So I want to emphasize, Minister, that you need to bring these 

regulations out into the open.  We've got all kinds of documents 

here from different papers: Labour federation intensifies fight 

over proposed legislation.  That goes back to February.  The use 

of replacement workers during strikes is a big concern -- and 

you're going to be dealing with that pretty soon.  It's amazing to 

me, Minister, how folks have mixed these two pieces of 

legislation together.  It's almost sort of like a big pot of potatoes.  

Reminds me of the hand grenade they found in the bag of spuds 

the other day, and they said that it was going to be the biggest 

potato masher in the world if somebody pulled the pin. 

 

But the kind of bombshell that you're mixing up here, Minister, 

is simply not acceptable.  And I'm not sure if it's your fault that 

these two Bills are getting mixed together, and the parts of them 

are getting mixed together, but somehow you do have to 

straighten that part out too.  Because if the people go into labour 

legislation with blinders over their eyes, it can't serve your 

purpose to trick people into breaking a new law.  And I allude 

back to that lady I talked to you about.  If she doesn't know 

what's going to be the law, how can she not do anything but 

break it?  You have to inform people what's going on.  We've 

got to know what these regulations are before you pass the law. 

 

So, Minister, I hate to hound you on this but even though some 

business people may be wanting to leave this alone, I think that 

most of the business people that I've talked to, have to have the 

answer.  What are these regulations and how will they affect the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I've already answered the 

member.  I don't intend to dwell on this too long.  Suffice it to 

say that both the business community and workers want to 

participate in developing the regulations so that they are 

regulations which are sensitive to the industry and their needs.  

To the extent that you file draft regulations in the House, it's 

their view that you pre-empt the process and make that decision 

and pre-empt their opportunity to participate. 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1994 

It has been the strongly-voiced sentiment from the groups with 

whom we have dealt they'd rather not see draft regulations 

tabled.  They would rather be left with the maximum amount of 

freedom to draw up and to work on regulations which meet the 

needs of their industry. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, how would they have any 

power to make any changes in the regulations once you've 

passed the legislation.  Wouldn't that sort of like be, you know, 

closing the barn door after the horses ran away? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, the horse is still in the barn in this 

case.  There's every opportunity to participate in making 

regulations which make the legislation effective or ineffective, 

sensitive or insensitive to their needs.  So your use of the old 

saw that it's like closing the barn door after the horse is gone is 

simply not accurate.  In this case, the horse is still in the barn. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm quite sure that we're going 

to have to talk about these regulations a lot because I just cannot 

see the business people of this province being so congenial as to 

suddenly want to have you pass legislation that gives you all of 

the power to do whatever you want and then after the fact, bring 

in the regulations that will mainly determine how people are 

affected and convince the community that they will have some 

input when you've already got the legislation passed and have all 

the power.  That's not the way dictators work.  Somehow I don't 

think you're going to do this quite fair.  And I'm going to get 

after that again but I think I want to ask a few more questions 

while we get into some of these other areas that need to be 

talked about. 

 

This morning we talked briefly about the new fair wage policy 

and how that's going to affect people.  And just to be fair about 

it, I'd like you to explain what, in your mind, that will do for the 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me tell you . . . let me perhaps 

answer your question by . . . let me go back to your comment 

about the regulations.  I may say it was my expectation that they 

would want to see a set of draft regulations so they sort of knew 

where the middle line was.  And I was a little surprised to find in 

fact, that they don't want that.  They want to be left with the 

maximum amount of freedom to draft regulations for 

themselves.  So we are trying to respond to that.  I, like the hon. 

member from Maple Creek, that wasn't exactly what I 

anticipated.  I thought they would want it as I guess you do. 

 

The fair wage policy, if you want to call it that, is still in . . . our 

thinking on this is very, very immature.  We are working on a 

number of options and really being no more specific than that. 

 

Perhaps I can answer the member's question by describing how a 

somewhat similar policy works in Manitoba.  Beginning at the 

time of the building of a 

large hydroelectric project in Northern Manitoba, the name of 

which escapes me right at the moment, about 20 years ago, they 

worked out a wage grid for the entire industry which was 

working on the construction of the hydro project.  That resulted 

in union firms and non-union firms all using the same salaries 

and the same benefits in drawing up their bids because 

everybody paid the same, everybody paid wages at the 

agreed-upon level. 

 

That policy still exists in Manitoba in the electrical industry.  By 

that I mean the construction, the industry which provides 

electricity.  I don't mean by that individual electricians, but that 

policy still exists.  Basically it operates in Manitoba.  The 

industry, the government, and the unions meet, negotiate a wage 

grid, and that's used by everybody, union and non-union alike.  

It puts everybody on a level playing-field. 

 

I'll close this comment by saying that I took the opportunity last 

year to meet with the . . . well 1992 actually, to meet with the 

industry, the trades, Manitoba Hydro, and the minister -- who 

was actually the Minister of Agriculture, and a person who 

impressed me, actually, on an individual basis.  Everybody 

agreed it worked well in Manitoba. 

 

We are simply studying that and a number of other options to 

see if they might work well in Saskatchewan.  We've made no 

decision on it -- I want to emphasize that. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:24 p.m. 

 


