




















































Hansard: May 02, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1979 

 May 2, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And 

Minister and officials, good evening.  I hope we're going have a 

productive period of time here. 

 

We've had a number of opportunities already, Mr. Minister, to 

meet and to discuss various aspects of the problems confronting 

the agricultural industry in Saskatchewan, and obviously that's 

a significant issue here.  Agriculture still is our number one 

industry.  And in spite of your admirable -- I might say -- 

objective of diversification in agriculture so that we are not just 

hewers of wood and drawers of water but actually can do some 

diversification and get some secondary industries and tertiary 

industries developed around our primary industry of 

agriculture, I have given you my opinion of what I think of 

your Ag 2000 as far as a strategy is concerned, and I don't think 

I would have to refresh your memory on that one. 

 

But based on that, I've had some questions asked of me lately; 

how you propose to meet your objective of diversification in 

the livestock industry by increasing the numbers of livestock, 

by increasing the numbers of hogs in the province -- twofold, 

like in hogs for example, going from 1 million to 2 million to 3 

million.  What does your Ag 2000 actually do in practical terms 

to address that goal, to achieve that goal?  What can you 

specifically state:  this is what we think is needed in order to 

achieve a triple-fold increase in the hog production. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

for that question and hope, too, that we do have a productive 

evening tonight.  I think Ag 2000 is a general strategy.  We 

have since then announced our hog strategy which I think lays 

out very clearly what the strategy for hogs is.  We've worked 

with the SPI (Saskatchewan Pork International Marketing 

Group) to develop a hog strategy.  They have put together, or 

are putting together, an industry development fund whereby 

investors will be able to invest in the hog industry through a 

fund which will be on a commercial basis.  They expect to be 

able to raise 10 to $20 million of equity money to put into the 

hog industry -- 10 to $20 million they think is possible to raise 

to put into the hog industry. 

 

For our part, we are working with them.  We are working in the 

environmental area to try to get an ag operation Act passed that 

will help to stimulate the industry.  We're going to do some 

training for people who are needed to work in the industry, and 

all of those pieces we think will help to develop the industry. 

We've developed a one-stop shopping for the hog industry.  

We're having, at the Rural Service Centre in Saskatoon, a plan 

to have several people from my department; some federal 

people from PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration); along with somebody from Economic 

Development; and we think that will help to facilitate the hog 

industry in terms of extension so that they can go to one-stop 

and get the engineering that they need and the help with 

business statements, and the extension and production 

information that they need.  So I think in that particular area we 

have been fairly specific as to some of the things we think we 

can do to facilitate the hog industry. 

 

We're also working with the beef industry.  We have a $2.7 

million beef development fund which we think will go a long 

ways to help with research and development and marketing to 

promote the beef industry.  I think the prices for these 

commodities are good right now and we certainly expect that 

with a little bit of help from the industry -- working together 

with government -- that both those industries will grow. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, anywhere in the hog industry 

when you start talking about numbers and the amount of capital 

needed in order to achieve your goal, when you start talking 

about equity or whatever fund you're going to be talking here, 

whether it's a debt fund or equity fund, $10 million sounds like 

a lot of money to us.  But when you consider that a turnkey 

operation can cost you $5,000 per sow, and depending on how 

much the farmer is willing to invest in terms of time and 

inventiveness on his own, you're still looking at somewhere 

between 3 and $5,000 per sow investment.  When you start 

talking about $10 million, that translates roughly to 3,000 sows 

times 20, is 60,000 porkers at the end of the year.  That's $10 

million what you were just telling me. 

 

Now if you want to double that and say 20 million, which was 

the extreme of your figure, that's 60,000 porkers.  That does not 

quite make 1 million yet.  So I think we're going to have to be 

taking a look . . . unless there's some multiplier factor here 

that's at work that I'm not aware of, that you're looking at. 

 

Now you could double that by saying, well the investor's going 

to have the same amount of money as he will take out of this 

fund and therefore you double that.  We're still quite a ways 

off, Mr. Minister. 

 

What is your government prepared to underwrite in this whole 

issue?  Like you're telling farmers right now . . . and I'm getting 

phone calls left and right, and that's why I'm raising this issue.  

Because I am a hog producer and that we're trying some 

innovative things on our farm right now that I think is going to 

be a go and I think that those shelters and so on is going to be a 

big seller that will make us more and more competitive yet in 

this industry where indeed we will be able to compete against 

the southern States. 

 

What is your government prepared to do in terms of 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1980 

helping and assisting the farmers that get caught up in this 

euphoria of expansion?  The word right now is that if you want 

to make money -- wheat, you're not getting too much and 

there's all these threats of trade embargoes and so on -- walk 

your grain off the farm through the livestock industry, be it 

beef as some of my colleagues are, or hogs, like I am. 

 

And if these people all go into it on your say-so . . . I remind 

you about the 1970s, and remember how things were in the 

1970s -- the super '70s -- where we had a tremendous rate of 

inflation.  And no farmer . . . and all my neighbours were doing 

the same thing.  I was still too young at the time and I was 

teaching so fortunately for me I didn't get caught up in this. 

 

But you would go out and you would outbid your neighbour 

because it didn't really matter to you how much you paid for 

that land, whether it was 7,000 at one point, then 10,000, then 

20,000 per quarter, then eventually up to 120.  Because what 

you were doing is you were paying for that land on the inflated 

dollar, 2, 3, 4, 5 years down the road.  And as long as we had 

that rate of inflation, the system sustained itself. 

 

And then we had, of course, when everything broke up, and it 

couldn't sustain itself any more and we know the dire 

consequences of many of the farmers in the late '70s and early 

'80s when interest rate hit through the roof to over 20 per cent.  

Now you're telling and advising and suggesting and 

recommending to the farmers out in Saskatchewan now, 

expand and get into the livestock industry. 

 

And it takes two to tango, because I didn't have that much 

sympathy for the banks myself in the '70s when a lot of them 

found themselves not getting their payments in.  Because the 

bankers always -- as they're doing to the hog people right now 

-- when you go in and ask for a loan, is that enough, do you 

need more?  Because there was this type of optimism.  So the 

bankers were at fault just as much as any of the farmers who 

went out and did this overbidding and overbuying. 

 

But now I see shades of the '70s beginning to approach again 

because right now, yes, the hog market is lucrative and has 

been for the last five or six years.  Quite frankly, I don't know 

why you haven't been recommending this four or five years 

ago.  It was obvious to me at that point already.  But now that 

you have caught on and are recommending this, what if a lot of 

people take you up on your advice and they go make these 

arrangements with the lending institutions, or with ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) and FCC 

(Farm Credit Corporation), since now their mandate has 

changed as well, and then we do get a period of time where the 

input costs rise dramatically or because the situations are 

beyond our control in other areas, the price of the product is 

reduced dramatically, or a combination of both? 

 

Or something that is apparently coming into the future, and I 

want to talk about that a little while later, and that's the closing 

of the border.  Dramatic . . . a 

dramatic . . . a traumatic experience if that happens.  I 

remember what happened back in 1985 when the Americans 

were facing another election and their red herring of the 

chloramphenicol, the medicine, was introduced and the borders 

were literally closed -- bang.  And not one animal crossed the 

border until Jake Epp, the federal minister of Health at the time, 

responded to the pork industry's plea for immediate action. 

 

I remember going on a trip to Ottawa on a lobby effort to ask 

him: ban this stuff so that our animals can continue to go south.  

And when I landed back in Saskatoon from the trip a reporter 

asked: well what do you think of Jake Epp's action?  I said: 

what do you mean, action?  Well he's banned chloramphenicol, 

that quickly.  And that quickly the border was opened again.  

But you, you know yourself, Minister, politics can have a very 

swift and sudden reversal in this whole issue. 

 

So taking a look from the pragmatic, the economical issues, the 

potential; and the political issues, the potential, if this so-called 

disaster does fall upon industries that are dependent upon 

success on your recommendation, what are you prepared to do?  

And what are you prepared to commit now so that producers do 

have some level of comfort, I guess, that what they're getting 

into is something that they will not regret in a couple of years 

or even less period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

makes some excellent points.  I don't have a crystal ball and I 

attempt not to encourage producers to risk their money without 

weighing all the evidence and making a visible effort to look at 

it and make the decisions based on evidence that they see.  The 

member opposite obviously has been a pork producer and 

knows that hog barns, while they might be moneymakers, are 

not printing presses and that hog prices have always gone up 

and down and grain prices go up and down and politics closes 

borders, and so those risks continue. 

 

We certainly think we see, as best we can in our crystal ball, 

that there is a market -- and a growing market -- for red meats 

from this continent.  And we have a comparative advantage 

over almost everywhere else in the world, and so we think in 

the long run that the potential is there.  That's part of the reason 

for the structure of the funding that SPI has designed.  It's 

equity funding, which means that funding will bear a portion of 

the risk. 

 

And while the member says 10 to $20 million is not a lot of 

money, that's true, but it certainly won't be the whole barn, it'll 

be . . . or the whole operation. It will be some portion thereof.  

And having that equity funding is somewhat better than having 

debt funding, if there is a downturn.  I think there's money 

coming from other places.  Certainly we're not the only ones 

who are seeing potential for increases in the pork industry. 

 

The Royal Bank -- at the SPI annual meeting that I was 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

at, Stuart Bond said they've lent $20 million to hog barns in the 

last month or so.  There's a barn that's beginning in Melfort.  I 

think they're breaking ground on that now.  I think they're sold 

on the basis of share units and there's 17 different farmers or 

other businesses who have a share in that barn.  And it's based 

on what they call a spoke and hub, and the feeders will be fed 

on individual farms by farmers who have bought into the main 

operation. 

 

So certainly there's never been any indication from this 

government that there is no risk in hogs.  I think the producer 

will have to assess that.  We just, in fact, are in the process of 

winding down tripartite, which is the safety net that's currently 

in place for hogs.  And that's been at the request of the 

government and from producers because of countervail actions 

on that particular program.  We hope to replace that with a 

whole-farm program that will have level of support and some 

level of safety net.  But certainly there's no ability to 

completely underwrite an industry. 

 

And I think the member makes a good point when he says that 

banks are not always that far-sighted.  I think that's a tendency 

banks have.  When wheat prices are good, they encourage 

everybody to buy land.  And when hog prices are good, they 

encourage everybody to buy hogs.  And I think producers will 

have to assess what the long-term trends are because they 

certainly know that there's no guarantees in any of agriculture. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess that's what I'm trying to pursue here, 

Mr. Minister, because of your strong efforts to expand the 

livestock industry a lot of farmers are taking the bait.  A lot of 

farmers are taking your word seriously and they are expanding 

and they are investing.  Fortunately a lot of them are going the 

equity route that you're saying, which of course spreads the 

risk.  It minimizes the profits but spreads the risk at the same 

time.  And certainly that is the recommendation that I would 

pursue as well. 

 

But I want to just put on record as specifically as possible so . . 

. I know that I had a long dissertation before so I'll keep this 

one at a minimum so we can concentrate on this one issue that 

you responded to at the end.  And that is, for whatever reason 

there is a negative impact on the livestock industry -- and you 

have been the one that's going out and saying expand, we need 

the 3 million hogs, there's money in it -- what are you prepared 

to do? Or do you not have any contingency plan in place other 

than the replacement for tripartite as it stands now?  Because 

tripartite for all intents and purposes doesn't exist any more.  

Right now there's a vacuum out there in so far as any kind of 

production insurance is concerned. 

 

What have you got in mind other than the plan that you're 

working with SPI right now to take the place of an industry that 

would be able to stand on its own two feet in the event of some 

kind of disaster?  Where do you stand on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, 

obviously we don't have -- as I said earlier -- have a crystal 

ball.  There's always a risk in the industry.  We have not been 

saying and certainly I've not been saying to producers, go out 

and produce hogs.  All I've been saying to producers is that this 

province really needs the diversification in agriculture. 

 

And for provincial government and the province as a whole we 

need the red meat industry and we certainly would like to see it 

expanded.  But individual producers will have to make their 

own individual decisions and take some risk. 

 

We certainly are not lending money for hog barns at a 

subsidized rate; we're not giving grants for feedlots or anything 

else.  All we're doing is the government is saying, tell us what 

you want to do and we'll attempt to facilitate that as much as 

we can.  And we're doing it with things like training and 

environmental regulations and information sources and 

extension and so on to help producers do what it is that they 

decide to do. 

 

I don't think it's my role to tell producers to grow hogs or to 

grow cattle or to grow chickens.  All we can do is try to point 

out where we think there is some opportunity and to help 

producers who choose to take advantage of those opportunities 

that they see. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess the point I'm trying to make with you, 

Mr. Minister, is that the words of a provincial government, or 

words of a provincial government Agriculture minister, still 

carries a lot of weight out there. 

 

And whereas producers may have been shy or may have been 

reticent to pursue a particular economic activity, if they hear 

the Department of Agriculture or its agrologists out there . . . or 

if they hear the Minister of Agriculture or the deputy minister 

going out saying it's a great thing, we think there's a good deal 

of potential, the folks will respond.  And those are the ones that 

I'm concerned about. 

 

I guess I'm concerned also about the impact of getting people 

involved in the hog industry that may not be ready for the hog 

industry, that don't have the basics, that don't have the 

fundamentals but rather jump in thinking that it's an automatic . 

. . like you said before, printing . . . to print the money and it 

doesn't work. 

 

The days of the inners and outers have gone.  The days of 

buying high and selling low just don't work.  They never have 

worked and the industry has been noted for that over the last 

period of a while. 

 

I want to pursue, just slightly, a different aspect but still in 

conjunction with this because of the trade.  As you know, 

Minister, the amount of production in Saskatchewan is about 

three times right now what we can eat.  In other words, 60 or 

70 per cent of the product that we produce here has to find a 

home outside of our borders.  We eat about 300,000 pigs a 

year; we produce a million.  So those statistics become quite 

significant when we realize that we must find some offshore or 

continental markets other than 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1982 

Saskatchewan for our product.  And so access to those markets 

is extremely, extremely important. 

 

I want to pick up on a couple of issues here.  And I know my 

mind tends to think along the hog line, but it doesn't apply only 

to hogs, it applies to a whole host of goods from lumber, to 

blueberries, to cattle, and whatever.  The comment by our 

federal minister, Ralph Goodale, was that yes, we may be 

embarking upon some strained trade relations with the 

Americans but we will not give up.  We will stand up to them; 

we will wait till we see the whites of their eyes and we'll fire 

back. 

 

I want you to put on record, Minister, where you stand and 

where your government stands in this respect.  I heard the 

Premier, the other day, over TV or over radio, I can't remember 

which, but he was quoted as having said -- I didn't hear him, I 

heard the quote that was attributed to him where he said -- I 

will support Ralph Goodale in this fight against Americans no 

matter what he does.  I will support him.  You agree? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well just going back to some of 

your earlier points, I wanted to make some comment on them.  

I think you talk to different farmers than I talk to if you think 

that they're going to take to heart what the Ag minister says and 

run out and do it.  Most of the ones I talk to say just listen to 

what the government tells you and do the opposite.  So I don't 

think farmers are that gullible, and when it comes to investing 

money in feedlots and hog barns, that they're going to take my 

word for it.  I think they're going to have a hard look at it 

themselves. 

 

On the trade issue I think Mr. Goodale has adopted our 

position.  I think the Premier particularly was out in front of 

this issue saying . . . when Mr. Goodale was saying, well 

maybe we'll make a deal and have a cap, that we were saying 

don't trade off Saskatchewan wheat for somebody else's sugar.  

We don't mind making a deal but we don't want to sell the 

farm, and I think we're pleased when Mr. Goodale finally took 

that stance. 

 

So certainly we stand behind him in negotiating a tough deal 

with the Americans.  I don't think that we can continually bow 

down to their wishes on each issue, because I think if we give 

up on wheat then we'll end up giving up on lumber and giving 

up on supply management and a whole lot of other issues.  So I 

think the Americans, just having signed a huge new trade deal . 

. . It seems ironic that they would even consider at this point in 

time using farcical actions against us.  I think they have 

absolutely no case in the wheat issue, and if we're in the right I 

think our long-run benefit is to withstand the pressure and to 

fight back. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Fight back -- I want to pick up on that one in a 

few moments.  But first of all I want to say to you that 

essentially, basically, fundamentally, I concur with what you're 

saying although I want to pick apart your arguments just a little 

bit.  But to set the stage about what we're talking about, I have 

a Leader-Post article here.  It goes back to April 8 

already. It's just one that I happened to find on my desk before I 

came in here.  But it'll do to underscore my point.  And the 

heading is "Goodale ready to match Americans' threats." 

 

Just a few little things here is the Americans' concerns ". . . 

were like water off a duck's back to Goodale." 

 

 . . . after a deeply unsettling meeting in Toronto with Espy, 

Goodale seems to have concluded that reason has little place 

when U.S. politics and Canadian imports mix. 

 

And then he says: 

 

 (Right now) Goodale is . . . matching the Americans threat 

for threat. 

 

 "Canada will stand up for itself," he said . . . (from the 

hustings, as it were.) 

 

 "Those on the other side who think there will be no 

consequences are mistaken.  There will be consequences . . ." 

 

Now that's pretty antagonistic rhetoric, I think you would 

admit, and maybe it's called for.  And like you said before, I 

concur with some of things that you're saying. 

 

But I want to know where you will stand ultimately, 

fundamentally, when this thing shakes down because, Mr. 

Minister, when there's a trade war, war entails firing of shots.  

They're salvos.  Now I understand that if the durum wheat 

going into the States is going to have a cap put on so that 

there's trade restrictions, Goodale is ready to respond. 

 

And the way I heard it -- and I only heard this over the TV -- I 

believe, is that those Californian wines and some other 

commodities might find themselves with hefty tariffs if they're 

shipped into our . . . as a response to what the Americans are 

doing to our durum wheat.  But one shot means that they're 

going to fire another shot back that was bigger than their first 

one, and that's how the escalation of this whole process ensues. 

 

So what I'm asking you is that if you so wholeheartedly and 

fully support any measures that Mr. Goodale may take, then 

what are you prepared to do to reassure the citizens of 

Saskatchewan that they will not face the brunt, that they will 

not have to bear any hardships ensuing from a trade war with 

the United States?  And you can pick any industry in 

Saskatchewan that you want, that needs access to the American 

market, and if they happen to be the next victim in this next 

salvo that the Americans may fire, how will you back up your 

rhetoric in saying that you're going to support Mr. Goodale in 

whatever he does? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well obviously I'm not going to 

commit to support Mr. Goodale whatever he does, because who 

knows what he might do.  Certainly we're supportive of the 

stance that he's taking now.  I think Canada was more than 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

accommodating with the Americans.  I know Mr. Goodale 

phoned the Ag ministers on a regular basis and kept us up on 

negotiations.  There were offers made by Canada that I think 

were more than reasonable.  The response from the Americans 

has not been reasonable, and I think, even though it's a country 

10 times as big, I think there's little advantage in having a trade 

agreement where we live up to our side of the agreement and 

the Americans don't live up to their side.  We may as well have 

an agreement where . . . not have an agreement at all. 

 

Certainly we don't like to see a trade war.  Nobody does.  But if 

we're going to get hit on all fronts whenever something is 

moving south at increasing rates -- that we're going to have the 

border shut because it's got to be unfair competition if 

Canadians are beating Americans -- then we don't have a trade 

agreement, we don't have access to that market, we don't have 

access to any of it. 

 

The same thing may well happen with beef or hogs or lumber 

or steel or anything else.  So I think at some point you have to 

draw the line and stand and take a stand, and I think world 

pressure and reason will prevail.  And hopefully the stance that 

Mr. Goodale has taken now, I think, is very well justified, and 

obviously there could be some serious consequences of a trade 

war, but I think there are also serious consequences of not 

defending your rights in an international situation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh I don't disagree with you at all.  In fact I 

agree with you.  But what I'm getting at is, I want to know 

where your government will stand as this thing progresses from 

one point A to point B to point C. And the message that I'm 

getting from you in both instances that I've raised so far is, first 

of all, if the industries in their expansion mode find themselves 

in some dire consequences for whatever reason beyond their 

own control, you are not ready to stand behind them and 

support them and take any responsibility because it's their 

decision, not yours. 

 

And the same thing here, if I'm reading you correctly, if one 

shot fired leads to another to another to another that the 

consequences of that is unfortunate in your opinion, but you're 

not prepared at this time to state what you're willing to do to 

help those industries that find themselves in trouble because of 

-- let's say -- durum. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that raises 

some interesting points.  We already are in a trade war in the 

grains; the wheat and the barley in particular have been for a 

number of years.  And that -- we have said and have always 

maintained -- is a federal responsibility.  There's a trade war 

going on, and the American government is supporting their 

farmers, and the European governments are supporting their 

farmers, and the Canadian government over a period of years 

backed away from its farmer.  And it's not possible for a 

provincial government to pick up that federal responsibility. 

So if there are consequences, we'll do what we can to help our 

producers, but we certainly do not have the pockets as a 

provincial government to compete with the American treasury. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let's not forget the issue here that I raised 

initially.  My first statement was that your Premier, your boss, 

said that, I will support whatever Mr. Goodale does.  He said 

that, I heard it.  So there is a commitment on your part.  And if 

Mr. Goodale, hearing that kind of support from a Premier 

whose province has almost half or has half of the arable land in 

all of Canada, that must give him a great deal, and a degree of 

comfort to go ahead, and to start fighting this war.  And I'm not 

opposed to that.  That's not my point.  Please don't misconstrue 

that.  But what I'm wanting to find out is what you, as a 

provincial government, are prepared to do to back the 

province's . . . or the farmers, rather, of this province.  That's 

what I'm after. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you've already alluded a number of times to 

the fact that we are in a trade war, that the Free Trade 

Agreement that we have is really nothing more then paper that 

it's written on.  That's the impression I'm getting from you.  But 

if that is the way you really feel, then what about the trade 

settlement or dispute settlement mechanism that is in place?  

Do you not feel that there has been value in that?  Where would 

we be, in your opinion, in these various industries that trade 

with the Americans if it had not been for the Free Trade 

Agreement as it has existed since -- when is it?  '89? '88?  You 

give me your opinion on that. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to introduce 

to the members tonight two people sitting in the Speaker's 

gallery, my daughter Corrine, and her fiancé, Terry Lavallee, 

and I ask all members to welcome them here tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well certainly, there have been 

some positive effects of the Free Trade Agreement.  There have 

also been many negative effects.  The trade settlement dispute 

mechanism has not worked all that well.  We continue to win 

the cases and then we continue to be harassed.  A point is the 

durum issue.  We've been to a trade dispute mechanism two or 

three times and we've won every case but they're still 

threatening that they're going to 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1984 

put tariffs on or close the border, so that hasn't been the 

solution.  And certainly if there's not more will by the other 

side to live up to their side of the agreement, there will be little 

advantage from it. 

 

And certainly what the Americans are practising now with 

wheat is a two-price system.  They have one price off-shore 

where they dump into our markets at very, very low prices, and 

they have a domestic market which is much higher.  And 

they're attempting to shut us out of that market. 

 

We gave up our two-price system for wheat when we signed 

the agreement.  And now the Americans have one in effect.  

And if we're to believe them and if they follow through with 

the threats, they will indeed have a two-price system for wheat, 

which we no longer have.  So while there are certainly some 

advantages for a province like Saskatchewan in trade 

agreements, they need to be good trade agreements. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- When was this two-price system removed in 

Canada? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To the best of my officials' 

recollection and mine, it was probably about 1988 when 

Charlie Mayer was the minister in charge. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What was that last comment?  I didn't 

understand you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm sorry.  It was at the time 

Charlie Mayer was the minister in charge when it was done 

away with. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So what you're saying is it happened some 

time during the reign of Charlie Mayer.  Is that right?  From 

'83, could have been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, that's when Mr. Mayer was 

minister in charge of Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, nothing is perfect.  And I 

don't think anybody would ever agree that what we're 

experiencing with the Americans is perfect.  I think when you 

are a country like they are, bargaining and negotiating from a 

position of strength, as they would like to see themselves, it is 

difficult.  And that's the difficulty that we've had all through the 

'80s that I've been involved with any kind of farming industry, 

is the fact that we've had nowhere to put the Americans up 

against the wall as it were and look them eye to eye and make 

them blink. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I can't see why you do not admit freely that 

finally  through the FTA (Free Trade Agreement), we have 

been able to make then blink. Where we've actually won cases 

that we had no chance of ever winning before and we have the 

countervail reductions in the hog industry as a good example of 

that. 

 

So while it is not perfect, certainly the advantages in my 

opinion far outstrip the disadvantages.  And simply by the fact 

that that agreement has been signed, that 

we have now had the additional agreements on the GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and now that we 

have NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), that 

surely you can see that we have been making progress and 

again obviously not perfect but it is something upon which to 

build as opposed to the vacuum that existed before. 

 

But I guess ideologies are something that we will never be able 

to persuade each other otherwise from those points of view. 

 

I have a question now, and just get your Crop Insurance people, 

this won't take long.  I have a note here that was sent out from 

the Canada/Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Customer Bulletin, 

April of 1994, and could you indicate to me -- there's a section 

here and I like what I see because there's a section that's high 

profile and squared off, boxed in, where it says, compensation 

for crops damaged by big game -- could you tell me what 

amount of damage this compensation program for big game is 

expected to cost the Crop Insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Our estimate on that is $1 million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That would include the 1993 crop year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- This program is just for the '93 

crop year. This is the response to the large amount of crop that 

was left out last winter.  It's designed to cover that crop which 

wasn't harvested last winter, and the deadline for application is 

April 30 which is yesterday, so we will soon have those 

numbers in and fairly close to a final estimate. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay.  Under which appropriation would this 

money, this million dollars come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- To begin with, Mr. Chairman, this 

is funded half by the federal government under an agreement 

we've made with them, so our funding will be a half a million.  

There will be adequate money in our premium base to make 

that payment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Oh, I can't buy that, Mr. Minister.  There's 

something that we're not doing properly here -- either my 

questioning or your answers, and I suspect it's the answer in 

this case. 

 

First of all, you say a million dollars.  Now that million dollars, 

is that your share out of crop insurance?  Or is it 2 million, so 

that the feds are picking up half of the 2 million or half of the 1 

million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- They're picking up half of the 1 

million. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So you're only actually putting $500,000 in it 

as opposed to the 1 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now, Mr. Minister, I forget exactly how you 

answered my question two or three questions ago, but let's have 

another go at it.  You said there would be enough money in 

there to pay for it from the premiums, I thought I heard you 

say, and the word premium didn't come through very loud.  Is it 

the farmers' premium money that goes into the fund that pays 

out for this big game insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, it wouldn't come out of the 

farmers' share of the premiums.  There's enough money in the 

premium subvote that the provincial government puts in to 

cover that $500,000.  So it won't be . . . it will be an additional . 

. . it will be additional premium money.  It will be in the 

premium vote.  There's enough money there to cover the 

500,000.  It won't come out of the farmers' share of the pool. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well obviously I don't understand what we're 

doing here.  This is federal money, what you're telling me now; 

it's federal money that is coming and paying for the big game 

damage insurance.  Is that right?  It's not provincial government 

money nor provincial farmers' premium money that is going to 

. . . but you just finished telling me that the total cost was a 

million.  The feds paid half; you pay half. 

 

Now let's start again from the beginning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think you have it right.  The 

federal government pays half, which is half a million dollars; 

the provincial government will pay the other half, which is half 

a million dollars.  We think there's adequate money in what we 

budgeted for our share of premiums to cover that 500,000. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now where does your share of that million, 

your share which is $500,000 . . . is that appropriated out of the 

legislature here or does that come out of the Crop Insurance 

funds that basically come from farmers' premiums.  Where 

does that money come from? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- What we have appropriated in our 

budget is $54.855 million for our share of crop premiums.  We 

will have enough in that vote to pay the $500,000 of wildlife 

damage. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Is that money that is going to be paid out to 

the farmers any way reflected by farmers' premiums 

themselves?  Is any of that premium money used or is that a 

separate account entirely, that this money is all coming out of 

the appropriation that we will be voting on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, this money is totally coming 

out of this appropriation.  It won't be reflected in farmers' 

premiums.  We pay 25 per cent of the total premiums and the 

vote is 54.855 million.  We think the quarter share of premiums 

will be enough less than that to allow us to pay the 500,000 

which will then go . . . So it will be paid from by federal money 

and provincial money but none of the farmers' share 

of the pot. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I think I'm glad to hear that because I 

understand that for this big game damage fund you don't have 

to be a farmer to get paid out.  Anyone, a farmer or non-farmer, 

has the right to put in an application and actually be paid out 

for damage entailed by big game. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well I guess if there are people 

who are not farmers who have crop laying out, they qualify.  

They don't have to be part of the crop insurance program.  It 

works much the same as the waterfowl damage does, really 

designed along the same lines as the waterfowl. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm glad to hear you say that, finally.  It took 

us a long while to get here.  Because your own little box that I 

was talking about before says that you do not have to be a Crop 

Insurance customer to qualify for this program.  All affected 

farmers must register their claims before harvesting the crops.  

I find that a little bit confusing, I guess, the way that's being 

written there. 

 

One other question on this, Mr. Minister.  Why would an 

individual who has a crop lying out in the field and was 

perhaps not able to harvest it last fall, like in the north-east, let's 

say for an example . . . he would be eligible for compensation.  

Is this correct?  If it was out in the field. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Now then, what about a farmer who was a 

little bit luckier or worked a little harder, or worked till 

midnight and got his crop to a point where it was stacked in his 

yard?  Would he be eligible then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, he would not. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Basically the reasoning for that is 

that we've spent a considerable amount of money on prevention 

and what we've done in the long run is move provincial 

government funding out of compensation and into prevention.  

Certainly it's much easier to do prevention on grain that's in 

bins than it is grain that's lying in the field.  This was a 

one-time shot with the federal government helping us fund this, 

largely as a result of the disaster in the north-east although it 

certainly does apply to the whole province.  And so it's 

designed to compensate farmers whose crop laid out over 

winter. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes.  I understand that we're talking about 

grains.  We're not talking about hay crops and so on.  Is that 

right?  Yes. 

 

So what about the farmer that, instead of leaving his grain out 

there on the field in swaths, where he would have gotten big 

game damage, he did perhaps, for whatever reason . . . he may 

have combined it wet but he got it on the yard and he got it in a 

pile, and now the deer are running through the pile.  What 

would the 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1986 

difference be, and why would he not be compensated for that 

kind of damage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well for that particular farmer, 

there is help available to do prevention through serum to get 

blood meal and to have help with fencing and so on to prevent 

the damage.  And that's the route we took, and I think that's the 

long-term route that we're going to go with in this area.  But 

with the serious situation we had this winter with the crop lying 

out, this was an additional program that was designed to handle 

that particular situation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It's like my colleague said here, Mr. Minister, 

it's almost . . . you might as well start putting salt on their tail 

and hoping that's going to get them away. 

 

Mr. Minister, one other aspect to crop insurance and it came 

out on this same sheet that I have here.  And you say that the 

corporation would like to remind wheat producers to take 

appropriate measures to prevent loss, and then it goes on to say 

that failure to attempt to minimize damage may result in denial 

of insurance liability. 

 

And what we're talking about here is the wheat midge.  Is this a 

new rule?  How long has something like this been in?  I'm not 

quite familiar with it and I've asked a few of my farmer friends 

and they say they've never heard of this.  For example, I 

imagine now what you're telling me, if there was midge on the 

field the previous year and you reseeded into wheat again, that 

you would then have the option of saying to the farmer, 

application denied. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The concept of uninsurable causes 

is certainly not new.  Crop Insurance has always had the 

principle that we only insure for natural hazards and that if 

farmers do not produce and attempt to produce in a reasonable 

manner that coverage may be denied. 

 

The wheat midge certainly is new; we've never assessed 

uninsurable causes for wheat midge, but we have this year 

some scientific evidence that shows very high concentrations of 

wheat midge.  We know that if in those areas wheat is seeded 

on wheat stubble that there will almost certainly be a problem, 

and if there isn't some action taken, that there will be severe 

crop losses.  And in an attempt to prevent losses to the farmers 

and the corporation, we are warning farmers that in those 

circumstances they should take some measures to prevent 

losses. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What mechanism is in place, Mr. Minister, to 

make sure that the farmers who are in potential jeopardy of 

losing their insurance have been informed, or do they just get 

this little sheet in the mail and they have to read between the 

lines?  At what point do they know they are in jeopardy?  Like 

how many midges do you have to find on a per square-foot, or 

what mechanism is there that . . . or is it just a by gosh, by golly 

kind of a feeling, or is there something specific that somebody 

has tested it the previous year? 

Because it would seem to me that farmers want to have a 

higher comfort level than this.  You mentioned the word 

reasonable.  You say they may be denied.  Well if I was a 

farmer who was going to be insuring my crop, I'd want to jolly 

well know more than, well you have to take a reasonable 

precaution or you may be denied.  That to me is just not 

acceptable in the world of business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly all the marketing agents 

have been informed and are telling the customers as they sign 

up to be aware of this.  It won't be an arbitrary assignment.  

Some adjuster will assess a crop, and if it is indeed wheat on 

wheat stubble, and if it is an area that's known to have large 

midge populations, and the crop is destroyed, and the farmer 

has made no attempt to control the midge, then certainly there's 

a possibility of assigning uninsurable causes.  This is no 

different than we have done for many years in regards to proper 

use of proper weed control, proper seeding dates, and so on.  If 

the farmer is not farming in an acceptable practice and that's 

obvious, then Crop Insurance has from time to time denied 

coverage or partial coverage on some of those crops. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, by the time the adjuster 

comes out to make the assessment, it's too late.  It's a done deal.  

The facts are there and now it has to be determined.  Now you 

mention that the agent would have this information. 

 

So what you're telling me now is that every farmer out there 

who's contemplating seeding wheat on wheat, he should feel 

free to do so unless his agent warns him and says -- in the 

contract -- you better not, you may be in jeopardy of losing 

your coverage because I saw some midge evidence there. 

 

What I'm saying is, how specific can we get so that the farmer 

knows whether he's in jeopardy of losing his insurance or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The only farmers who would be in 

jeopardy of having uninsurable causes assessed would be 

somebody who had wheat midge last year, and that we knew 

about it because of our claims and who hasn't taken any 

measures to control it this year.  And that measures might 

include seeding early or seeding early varieties or spraying or 

taking some measure to control. 

 

And I think most farmers who had wheat midge last year will 

not be seeding wheat on wheat stubble where they know there's 

a problem.  And I think part of it is the information so that the 

farmer realizes the risk.  I don't think there are farmers out 

there who are going to want to seed a crop that they know is 

going to be in danger, particularly if they don't plan on taking 

some steps to control it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- One more question on this, Mr. Minister.  

When it comes to canola, has it been the practice in the past, if 

a farmer seeds -- and I know it's not good practice, but there 

may be some who do that 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

-- seeds canola on canola?  Now you're telling them you won't 

get covered for that.  Has that been the practice in the past, or is 

this a new determination on your part? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again this is new primarily 

because of the huge increases in canola acreages last year and 

expected increases this year.  We've known this is not a good 

agronomic practice.  We've had two or three wet years which 

means the instance of disease is greater than it has been, so I 

think again we're doing this to protect all farmers. 

 

One of the things that I hear when I travel in rural 

Saskatchewan and talk to farmers is that they don't like to pay 

premiums for people who are not going to farm expediently.  

And it's certainly hard for us to judge, and we don't want to get 

into the business of judging who's a good farmer and who's not 

a good farmer.  But there are some of these things that are 

obviously not good farm practices, and we want to warn people 

that in case that is obvious that we very well may assess 

uninsurable causes. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, the 

last time we met I asked you a couple of questions.  You were 

going to provide me with some information.  One was dealing 

with trichominiasis in bulls in the Grainland pasture, and you 

were going to provide me with the ear tag numbers and the 

history of those particular bulls.  And the other question was 

around a former Crop Insurance employee who has not been 

settled with yet, and you gave me the assurance that you would 

speak to your officials, and update that particular file for me 

and report back on its progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I did send over the 

ear-tag numbers on the bulls and their history in the pasture. 

 

With the Crop Insurance situation, the employee, there has 

been no settlement as of yet.  My understanding is that we've 

had an offer that's been put forward to the former employee for 

about two weeks, and haven't had a response.  I understand that 

our offer is certainly with . . . about the top of the limits that fit 

in our criteria for making those sorts of offers and we're 

certainly not holding this up.  We're prepared to settle or to go 

to court to get it ended one way or another as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you said the ear-tag numbers 

weren't here and you're going to send those across? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I think I did.  Those are the . . . I 

can go over some of those.  I think there were . . . just some of 

the facts.  There were seven bulls used in the Grainland 

breeding field; three of those tested positive for trich in  

December of '93.  All the other bulls were clean.  All the bulls 

were wintered in the Valjean in '92-93.  One of the three 

infected bulls in '92 was at Grainland; the other two were in 

Valjean in 

two different fields.  In 1992 at Valjean in the field, of nine 

patrons there were three that had above-average open cows.  

All bulls had been checked and semen evaluated where 

necessary. 

 

What we really are saying here is that we had no reason to 

know that these bulls were infected, in fact may have been 

infected by a cow that was brought into the pasture in '93.  So 

that's basically the record that you had asked for. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you missed one.  My 

information is, and you've confirmed it, that there wasn't one at 

Meyronne in 1991.  And I've done a little checking and there 

are people that would allege that that particular pasture had 

over 20 per cent failure rate back in 1991 with . . . this would 

be 258-8 you've got down here would be the number. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- That is correct, that one of these 

bulls was apparently in the Meyronne pasture in 1991.  We had 

no complaints from that pasture that we're aware of.  And 

certainly different breeding fields in different pastures often 

have low conception rates for a whole number of reasons.  But 

certainly we had no complaints on that pasture in '91. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I won't ask any more questions on the 

issue, Mr. Minister.  I'm going to provide this to the patrons 

and I think they will probably have some questions for their 

pasture managers and people in the department.  I understand 

some of them may want to see you in court some day so we'll 

let that process unfold as it should. 

 

On the other issue, Mr. Minister, I just want to inform you that 

the individual in question is watching tonight and I'm going to 

go back to my office and check with the individual about the 

offer that you say has been made to him.  And I will be back 

before my colleagues are finished and if that isn't the case then 

maybe we'll have to have some more conversation about this. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I've 

got a couple of questions regarding the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program.  How many producers continue to 

be involved in the GRIP program, and where are we going with 

the GRIP program as far as provincial involvement?.  And 

when is it . . . I understand, I believe it was last year.  It was a 

two-year phase where the province was going to get out next 

year.  Where will producers be when the program ceases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are 43,479 

producers still in the GRIP program.  The member is absolutely 

right; we have given notice to end the GRIP program, and this 

will be the last crop year, and at that time the provincial 

government and the producers will all be out of the program. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, everyone is quite well aware of the 

significant changes in the program last year, and with 43,000 

producers still in the program that would indicate to me that 

there's a substantial premium has been paid into the program.  

Now the 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1988 

way the changes came out, there really hasn't been a pay-out 

out of the GRIP program.  And I realize you could argue, well 

there was a shortfall in the first year, and no one disagreed with 

the fact that there wouldn't be a shortfall the way the program 

was implemented. 

 

I'd like to know where the program stands today as far as the 

funds in the program and what you anticipate you'll have by the 

end of the year in the program, considering that there possibly 

will not be another pay-out under GRIP this year, but there are 

going to be substantial premiums continuing to be collected 

under that program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. As of the last 

audited number we have on there, the balance in the fund is 

$43,319,512.  That has another year to run.  We don't know 

again what the final balance will be, whether it could be . . . if 

the projected prices that are there now were to hold for the 

coming year it could be around $300 million surplus in the 

fund.  Certainly I think a fairly small shift in grain prices would 

reduce that to nothing or to a deficit.  And so it's very difficult 

to predict the final balance that may be in the fund when we're 

out of it at the end of this crop year. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we realize that 

there's going to be a substantial surplus in the fund whenever 

it's said and done and I would . . . as you've indicated, there's 

roughly 43 million, $43.3 million of surplus there right now.  

And there will be an additional substantial sum of money 

coming into the program because when you look at the number 

of producers, just factoring out, when you're in GRIP all your 

crops are included; you're going to be paying on all the crops 

that you put in this year so there should be a substantial sum of 

money in there. 

 

Mr. Minister, when it comes to the end of the GRIP program 

and we've got a surplus in the program, will you commit to 

distributing those funds back to the producers who were 

involved in the program and stuck out the program, versus just 

taking the surplus and then beginning another program and 

building a program for the rest of the producers -- now all of a 

sudden they have a free ride on a program that's been initiated 

through funds that have already been created through a surplus 

in the original GRIP.  Will you commit to do that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that 

the member opposite is so confident in grain prices.  His 

colleague was lecturing me shortly that I shouldn't be confident 

that hog prices won't go down in the future.  I think it's also 

true that grain prices are not something you can take to the 

bank until you see the cheques.  So I don't know with all the 

amount of certainty that he does that there will be a surplus in 

this fund.  Certainly that's what we're predicting at this time.  I 

can make a commitment that we would pay producers' share 

back, at least as much as it's within our power to so do. 

 

This is a federal-provincial agreement.  And the agreement is 

fairly clear on how deficits get divided 

up.  It's not all that clear on what happens to surpluses.  I would 

agree with what I think the member is saying, is that it 

shouldn't be rolled into a new program where farmers would be 

forced to sign up to a new program in order to get their share of 

the surplus that's in there. 

 

So if we can work the deal . . . and again this is a 

federal-provincial agreement, any changes to it need the 

approval of the federal government and six other provinces.  

But I think I can assure producers with reasonable certainty that 

their premiums share would be paid back to producers at some 

point. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I appreciate 

that, the comments you've made, some of your views on it.  I 

think it's only fair that the producers that stuck with the 

program and certainly will have put the funds in, should be the 

ones that at least should get back their portion of whatever is 

there or at least get some pay-out out of it. 

 

Now if you think we're going to have a pay-out this year, in 

view of the grain prices as we see them today, they're going to 

have to fall a long ways in order to trigger a pay-out even next 

year because they are up substantially.  And where the long . . . 

that average is in there, it was dropping off. One year's increase 

will not raise it enough to trigger a pay-out, especially under 

the way the program was changed. 

 

Mr. Minister, a question regarding the head office.  How many 

employees are presently employed, full- and part-time, in the 

head office in Melville today, and how many were there in 

October of 1991? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there are 153 

employees at the head office of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

to date.  We don't have the number here for 1991 and I don't 

have anybody in the House with me tonight who was around in 

those days, but we can certainly get that number. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Just one question, Mr. Minister, that's full- and 

part-time, the total number working at head office at the present 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes that's the total, full- and 

part-time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I just went and phoned that 

individual and we got a problem here.  Either you don't know 

what your people are up to or else you're trying to get me off 

somewhere else where I don't want to be, because he phoned 

and was talking to his lawyer as late as last Thursday and there 

is no offer. 

 

So I don't know what the legal help that you've been paying for 

the last two and a half years on this issue are doing, sir, besides 

wasting the taxpayers' money, but they have seen nothing in 

writing.  He himself has heard nothing verbally.  And his 

lawyer said, if anything comes in on Friday, I will contact you 

on Monday, because of the conversation we had in here last 

week. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

And like I said to you before, the longer this goes on the 

taxpayer pays the money, the lawyers get their chunk and the 

individual goes on and on and on and on without settlement.  It 

doesn't make any sense to drag this thing out.  And every week 

that's frittered away, Mr. Minister, costs the taxpayer more 

money. 

 

I don't understand what the reluctance is to get on and settle 

this thing and why you would tell me tonight that there was an 

offer made two weeks ago when there is no such offer.  That is 

absolutely bizarre, absolutely bizarre and unacceptable.  If 

there is no offer, just tell me there is no offer and we'll be done 

with it. 

 

But in all fairness to the individual and the whole process, I 

would think when you give me a commitment that you're going 

to get on and settle it, it would get settled.  So can you give me 

some kind of commitment that your high-priced legal help that 

you've got working on this thing, aren't going to fleece the 

taxpayer any more and you're going to get on and cut this thing 

off and get done with it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm told that 

our solicitor has informed us that within the last two to four 

weeks, there has been a verbal offer.  There have been written 

offers at various dates.  Certainly I don't think this is a place to 

get into negotiating a settlement with an individual, and if it's 

going to end up before the courts, I think that will be 

counter-productive. 

 

Again, I will certainly check into that information, but as of 

now that's the best information I have -- that there has been a 

verbal offer made, and we are waiting on a reply. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you know full well that when 

these things are done, especially after it's gone through the 

legal process, people put their best shot down on a piece of 

paper and the lawyers go back and forth.  I mean verbal . . . 

You don't negotiate that way and neither do I, nor does 

anybody else into these issues. 

 

All I asked you last week, and you can check Hansard, is if 

you're going to go to court, fine, go to court.  Let's get the thing 

settled.  Let's not drag this thing on and on and on and make 

life absolutely hell for the individual; cost the taxpayer all sorts 

of money with ongoing legal fees.  If court's where you want to 

be, let's go to court.  Get her done. 

 

But there are no written offers.  The individual has heard 

nothing verbal.  I mean that simply is not the proper way to 

negotiate after two and a half years, Mr. Minister. 

 

Can you give me the assurance tonight that if that's where we're 

going, let's get to court and get it done; have your lawyer say 

that's it, let's go to court, let's get it in front of a judge, and let's 

get this thing sorted out so people can get on with their lives, 

and we quit spending the taxpayers' money.  Can you give me 

that 

assurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I can give you the assurance that 

we certainly have no desire to drag this out, and I will once 

again attempt to, attempt to hurry it along.  However I cannot 

guarantee that this can come to a quick settlement.  Obviously 

there are two sides in every dispute, and this has been a long 

and difficult process.  Certainly if I can speed it along I will do 

that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to give 

you a little bit of a quiz here, a 50-question quiz -- fill in the 

blanks and multiple choice.  And if you give me the right 

answers, we can move along here with a fair amount of 

alacrity. 

 

I noticed, Mr. Minister, that since last year, you've had a 

complete change in your ministerial staff.  And there's . . . the 

following people have been quit, due to relocation to new 

positions.  But, however, they don't seem to have gone 

anywhere in your department.  I refer to Joanne Buhr, Gord 

Nystuen, G. Treleaven, Linda Ungar, and Judy Samuelson, and 

I notice the first three of those that I mention all left on the 

same day which was in September of '92.  Could you explain if 

these people were relocated to another department of 

government and, if so, what their new positions are, and their 

new responsibilities and salaries. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the first three 

individuals that the member opposite mentioned were 

ministerial staff to the previous minister of Agriculture and 

went with him to be ministerial assistants in the Department of 

the Environment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you answer part B of that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I've forgotten part B. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What are their new positions -- you partly 

answered that -- and their responsibilities and their salaries?  I 

think, now that I reflect upon what your answer was, I'll pursue 

more appropriate channels to get that type of information, so 

we can just leave it at part A. 

 

Your new ministerial staff is Tom Halpenny, Andy and Don 

and Deanna, Elaine and Wendy, to save me the agony of going 

through some of those names.  All of these employees were 

reclassified when the government revamped its MA (ministerial 

assistant) classification system.  Explain how the new duties of 

these assistants differ from their previous duties under the old 

system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, there were no 

change in the duties.  This is the same staff doing the same job, 

and other than some shuffling around within the office, 

basically they continue to do the same jobs after the 

reclassification. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well what was the hiring process that 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1990 

was followed in hiring these people?  Was there any open 

competition, or how did you manage to come up with these 

from their old job, as you say? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- When we reclassified we did not 

look for new people.  It was simply a matter of classifying and 

setting pay scales and classifications uniformly across all 

ministers' offices, and not a change of personnel. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well the following assistants received salary 

increases in the course of being reclassified, and there was 

Andy got a 9.7 per cent increase; Elaine got a 7.4 per cent 

increase; and Wendy got a 12.2 per cent increase.  So what I'm 

asking you: what justifies what appears to me to be a rather 

extreme salary increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure where 

the member gets his numbers from, but there were no increases 

to anybody in my office as a result of the reclassification. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the information that you have 

supplied us in the global questions was the basis for this 

interpretation. And when I start taking a look at anywhere from 

seven and a half to a twelve per cent increase in the amounts of 

monies that these people are receiving, especially as the 

colleague back here said, in zero-zero-two times, then it poses a 

question that I think has to be answered. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what the 

member is referring to is the reclassification that occurred at 

the time that I became Minister of Agriculture, and that is a 

result of, indeed, changes in duty when we went from a new 

staffing system and they were reclassified from . . . I think 

Wendy was reclassified from an intermediate secretary to a 

senior one, and Andy was reclassified to an intermediate 

ministerial assistant at that time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I notice then, Mr. Minister, that Mr. 

Halpenny and Ms. MacIntosh started about the same time as 

the others, and they were included in the reclassification, yet 

neither received any kind of increase in salary.  So would you 

explain how the extra duties of reclassification warrant a raise 

in some cases but not in others. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Halpenny started at that time 

and came in as the junior assistant, whereby Mr. Prebushewski 

was promoted to an intermediate assistant, and that's why he 

got the raise.  Tom had just started at that time, so there was 

obviously no reclassification. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm sure you've done this already, Mr. 

Minister, but I'm going to ask you now whether, if you don't 

have it here tonight, whether you would be willing to commit 

to detailing all the travel undertaken by ministerial staff 

including total cost, cost per staff member, the destination, and 

the purchase of . . . the purpose, pardon me, of each trip.  Now 

these are standard questions that are normally asked, so you 

may have that information.  While you're at it, also 

give me the comparison of how those travel expenditures 

would compare to the previous year so that we can have kind of 

a rolling perspective of what your expenditures really are. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, we do have that information 

on the travel expenses.  I don't know if we have the previous 

year's here, but we have this year's.  We have the in-province of 

$3,603.43 . . . pardon me, that's the out of province.  And the 

in-province, 8,856.02 for a total of 12,459.45.  And I'm just 

getting the sheet photocopied and I'll send it over to you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a question that I would like to ask and it would maybe 

take a long time if we started going through all this.  It's 

pertaining to a quarrying problem that's been going on since 

1983 till now.  And if I can just get a commitment from you, I 

won't spend time on it tonight.  I just want to run it by you 

because I just want to ask this question: is the Department of 

Agriculture completely responsible for quarrying leases 

pertaining to lands branch land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Could you repeat that -- what 

leases you were referring to? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Just to give you a little scenario of the 

problem -- in 1983 till 1988, there was a problem with a 

constituent of mine, a Mr. Bakken that they had purchased 

some lands branch land.  But lands branch retained the 

quarrying rights. They only bought the surface rights. 

 

And they had to get a quarrying lease through Energy and 

Mines. And there was an outfit, construction company called 

Squaw Creek Aggregate, that had a quarrying lease till 1988.  

This land was purchased in 1986 so the Bakkens couldn't get a 

quarrying lease until 1988. 

 

Then there was a problem, and this has nothing to do with 

who's in government or whatever minister because it's been 

through several ministers.  There's always been a problem.  

Lands branch would not allow Squaw Creek Aggregate to have 

the lease, so there's where the problem arose. 

 

Energy and Mines wanted to continue their lease with them but 

lands branch wouldn't allow it.  Because Bakkens in the 

meantime bought the land and the Squaw Creek Aggregate had 

made some slip-ups and they were not going to be allowed.  

They had broke their quarrying lease contracts and they were 

never going to be allowed to rent this land from lands branch. 

 

So I went through this in long, long detail -- pages.  This is a 

Hansard from 1992 with the Minister of Energy and Mines in 

1992 -- the member from Swift Current. And so he had some 

people there that pulled the files, and when Energy and Mines 

came back on, he explained to me that we couldn't solve it at 

that time, that it was going to . . . by January 1, 1993 it 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

would be transferred into Rural Development.  Well then, it 

went till '93 in estimates, with the member from North 

Battleford was the minister. And I'm not going to take the time 

to get into all these details because it would take hours here, I 

know. 

 

And it just didn't happen and so he said there was a delay.  And 

it was going to end up in Agriculture, he thought.  And I 

understand now that lands branch has complete control and this 

is the question I was asking, that lands branch has complete 

control now of these quarrying leases. Is that right, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite is right in that there was legislation which changed the 

quarrying rights -- on the new leases at least -- to our 

department.  My officials are not sure just where this one is at 

and I will certainly undertake to look into this particular case as 

it seems to have been a long-standing problem.  And we will do 

our best to look into that particular situation and get back to the 

member opposite. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, is 

there any of your officials with you tonight that knows 

something about this ongoing problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Some of the officials are vaguely 

familiar with it but they certainly don't know any of the details 

and we don't have any here tonight. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well so we don't have to . . . I just want to 

get this commitment from you, Mr. Minister.  This problem 

was almost solved in '92. Like we got through with all the 

barricades with the member from Swift Current when he was 

minister of Energy and Mines, and there wasn't going to be any 

problem with the Bakken brothers -- the one lives in Estevan 

and one lives in Arm River. 

 

There was no problem in them receiving this here quarrying 

lease because they own the land now; they own the service 

rights; and all the other problems were taken care of.  It was 

just the technicality of getting it . . . of lands branch would 

always say: well you've got to take it back to Energy and 

Mines; Energy and Mines said take it back to lands branch; and 

I understood.  I finally understood it from the minister.  He 

made it very clear to me from the officials that it was a problem 

that would be taken care of once it got settled into the right 

department. 

 

So I just need your commitment because I can't go back to the 

Bakkens like I did in '92, and say it's going to be taken care of 

by January 1 and then in January it didn't happen until 

estimates came up in '93.  And then I just can't go back to them 

now, and this is '94, and say well, here it can't be taken care of 

again. 

 

Now we know where it's landed.  It's landed in Agriculture.  I 

just need a commitment that you will put someone with me that 

you can let me know . . . put someone with me in your 

department that can sit down and go through all the details, 

because this Mr. Bakken, Ronald Bakken has went to see a . . . 

(inaudible) . . . I believe -- I may not be pronouncing 

his last name right -- and applied for . . . talked about it, and he 

said why don't you put in an application, which he did, and he 

has heard nothing.  So if you can give someone that has the 

authority to settle this, which I don't think is a big problem, if it 

can just . . . somebody can sit down with cool heads, I think it 

can all be taken care of.  Can you give me that commitment, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I can.  It sounds like a 

problem that fell through the cracks in the reorganization of 

government and we will get on it and I'll certainly have 

somebody get in touch with you who has the authority and 

knows the details. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, thank you very 

much.  That's all I'm going to ask you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

looking over the information that you passed across a few 

moments ago, I asked you a question about all in- and 

out-of-province travel by your ministerial staff, and I received 

your page 52 from your document from Don, and he has taken 

four trips and he's the only individual mentioned here.  I 

understand that he's your senior ministerial assistant and he's 

the only one that had in- or out-of-province expenditures paid 

for by your department.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, that's not quite correct.  Don 

was the only one that had out-of-province travel, so the 

out-of-province travel . . . the in-province travel, the $8,000 is 

all ministerial assistants within the province, and certainly all 

of them have had . . . yes, all the ministerial assistants have had 

some in-province travel. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well you warded off my next question 

because from that I thought that Don was quite a high flyer 

here with that kind of expenditure all by himself, but . . . and 

that makes sense, that he would be the only one going out with 

you on these trips. 

 

Mr. Minister, I notice that his out-of-province travel amounted 

to $3,603.43, and he's gone to Vancouver with you and he's 

gone to Victoria with you and he's gone to Winnipeg with you 

for legitimate causes, I would surmise.  And yet I find it very 

interesting that he would go with . . . well I don't know who he 

went with, but he did go to Prince Edward Island, and it was 

over half the total cost, over $1,740, and you're telling me the 

purpose of that trip is not available.  Now I know they've got 

good lobsters and so on in Prince Edward Island, but I . . . you 

know, give me some better reason to believe that the money 

was more well spent than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I don't know why it says on the 

paper not available.  That was the three-day provincial and 

federal Agriculture ministers meeting in July of last summer, so 

that's the reason for that travel.  Don does usually travel with 

me out of province.  When they send a farm boy like me out of 

province, they send some experienced traveller or 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1992 

else they're afraid I won't come back.  So that's one of the 

reasons why. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I trust, however, the lobsters were good.  

But for now, Mr. Minister, that will be the extent of the 

questions for this evening.  We'll pick this up at a future time.  I 

believe your House Leader wants to make an announcement 

here to the chairman.  If I could have the Government House 

Leader's attention. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, just to speed 

up the process, I've had the pages take a photocopy of the 

Hansards for '92 and '93 so you'll know why they're being sent 

to you.  Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the committee report 

progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, the impeccable cooperation 

that we are having from . . . between the Government and the 

Opposition House Leaders appears to have broken down.  And 

we were under the impression, at this time, that we were getting 

ready for estimates of Social Services, and our critic is ready, 

and I noticed the surprised look on the Minister of Justice 

who's all raring to go here so we have a little bit of a problem.  

Perhaps the government House Leader . . . have you got your 

Social Services officials ready? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. In speaking with the member 

from Morse before supper, he was relatively clear that we were 

going with SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat) and then with Social Services.  I don't know that 

the Minister of Justice is hung up on the matter.  If the 

opposition wants to go to Social Services, or if you want to 

spend a few moments on this and then go to Social Services or . 

. . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes, we could do that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  Why don't we, since there has 

been some . . . Yes, the member from Morse is fairly clear, I 

say to the member from Rosthern, the member from Morse is 

fairly clear about what we should be doing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give us a minute and we'll get a Justice 

critic in here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- What . . . or SIMAS?  Why don't you 

let -- this is SIMAS -- why don't you let the member from 

Regina Northwest go first?  She had some questions and then . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it is SIMAS, Saskatchewan 

Indian and Metis association, not Justice. 

 

(2045) 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The best line of questioning, Mr. Minister.  

What are the major objectives of the programs that your -- the 

programs themselves -- that your department delivers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I think 

it's correct to say that we don't actually deliver a program as 

such, but we are the coordinating agency and the policy agency 

with respect to Indian and Metis people and the government's 

relationship with them.  And so we will get together the right 

people on the provincial side to deal with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indians, for example -- the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations -- and facilitate the discussions, 

and provide some leadership, and deal with the policy 

questions and that sort of function.  We don't deliver a program 

as such. 

 

In the past we have done so.  In the past we have delivered a 

grant program to Indian and Metis organizations, but as of last 

year that program was transferred to the Department of 

Economic Development, and we don't actually deliver a 

program as such. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The total budget for the 

department is increasing by $10.1 million which is an increase 

of 75 per cent. That's a considerable increase.  Aside from 

treaty land entitlements, there is still an increase of 600,000 or 

25 per cent.  I would expect this has meant some considerable 

changes in the operations at the secretariat.  What benefit will 

the people of Saskatchewan receive as a result of this increased 

spending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not certain I know how to answer 

the question in the terms that the hon. member asked, Mr. 

Chair.  There are two new person-years of employment 

included in the figure, and those have to do with the 

implementation of the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement, 

land selections, and the problems related to that. 

 

And we have an additional $470,000 in the budget to help fund 

the bilateral processes that we have set up.  Now the member 

will recall those are the agreements that the government has 

entered into with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations) and with the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, a process 

whereby we can identify and work on issues of common 

concern. 

 

And we fund the Indian and the Metis participation in that 

process.  It's a process that is greatly to our advantage because, 

as I mentioned before the supper break, we have finally learned 

that in order to reach viable solutions to some of these 

problems we have to work very closely with the Indian people 

and the Metis people, and they have to be involved in working 

those things out so that we have to provide them with some 

funds so they can participate in that process.  But those are the 

two items of increased expenditure. 

 

Of course you had correctly identified that the major sum is for 

the treaty land entitlement process. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd like to ask you some questions on the 

subvote areas.  The salary budget is increased by 131,000.  You 

said there are two new full-time equivalents.  Is this how the 

money is being spent, and what roles do those new positions 

fulfil? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Those are the two positions that I 

mentioned in my previous answer.  They are both analysts.  

One is a senior position.  The other is a junior position, and 

they're both concerned with treaty land entitlement 

implementation. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- As you say, the staff will administer the 

treaty land entitlements, and the total budget for treaty land 

entitlements is going up by 86 per cent.  But your budget to 

administer a larger program is only going up 8 per cent, and the 

operating expense is frozen.  This is admirable.  How was it 

possible for you to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I think that it was a matter of good 

management, if I may say so without embarrassing my 

officials.  They have really focused hard on the core things that 

we have to do and eliminated all the other things, and their 

focus has helped us to contain expenses in this area, and I think 

it's probably just as simple as that.  We've given them a 

mandate and provided them with the bare essentials of support. 

 

I might just mention that this is a very small unit to be doing 

such a big job, and if you consider the size of the Indian and 

Metis population in Saskatchewan, it's really quite remarkable.  

We deal a lot with other provinces on these questions, trying to 

ensure that the developments across the country are more or 

less done in harmony with each other.  That brings us in contact 

with some pretty big governments.  And in the case of the 

Government of Ontario, there were more people in the 

minister's office, as part of the minister's staff, than there is in 

our whole secretariat.  So we're quite proud of the efficiency 

with which we're dealing with these questions. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Again I congratulate you on that efficiency.  

How much of this policy and coordination budget will be spent 

on public consultation and outreach? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We can't identify any particular sums in 

the budget that relate to public consultation and outreach as 

such, but the member's question is still a fair question because 

the whole operation is geared towards that. 

 

We, as I mentioned earlier, are the contact point between the 

government on the one hand, and Indian and Metis 

organizations and communities on the other.  And that means 

that we are out there all the time.  For example, in the land 

acquisitions that are taking place under the Treaty Land 

Entitlement Agreement, our staff - our senior staff - is out in 

the communities around Saskatchewan dealing with little 

problems that arise, and trying to work out an accommodation.  

And a good example is the Bronson forest that the member 

from Rosthern was questioning 

me about just before supper tonight. 

 

Our staff has been . . . several trips out there to meet with the 

Thunderchild Band and with the people who are concerned 

about the Bronson forest, to try and mediate an understanding 

between them, and develop a co-management agreement and 

related kinds of arrangements that can ease that passage, and 

result in the community being whole -- being in good shape, 

being able to deal with the situation without tearing at the 

fabric of the community. 

 

So we're kind of out there all the time and we think practically 

all of our staff apart from secretarial and clerical spend a good 

deal of time out in the community.  So we kind of are 

outreaching and consulting more or less steadily. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The accommodation budget is 

frozen.  Where is this money going and how much of the 

budget will be transferred to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That entire amount in item 2, the 

$237,000, all goes to SPMC.  It's for rent and for mail and for 

the other things that SPMC does. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  In the subvote on aboriginal 

organizations and issues, the budget is increasing 470,000, or 

up by 70 per cent.  Can you detail which organizations will 

receive grants? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We haven't made these announcements 

yet, but I can describe them in rather generic terms.  To what I 

will call Indian developments, will be 330,000; to Metis 

developments, 265,000; to Indian, Metis, aboriginal women, 

170,000; other aboriginal, 74,000; and that totals 839,000 

altogether. 

 

Now when I say Indian developments, that would include 

funding for the FSIN, for example, to participate in the bilateral 

process, as well as to some of the tribal councils for some 

specific projects.  These are all project-related functions.  

Similarly with the Metis, although that's a somewhat confused 

situation at the present time, it was intended at the time the 

budget was struck that some of it would be for the Metis Nation 

of Saskatchewan and some for other Metis organizations, 

community-based organizations of one sort or another.  And of 

course the other items, I think, speak for themself. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Do your officials know how much of this 

funding will be used for salaries and overhead and how much 

will be used for programs delivered by the third parties? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The answer is a little bit of each.  Each 

of these organizations has presented to us a budget with respect 

to the particular project.  For example, in the FSIN bilateral 

process they presented us with a budget.  We are budgeting for 

a fraction of their request because we simply can't . . . we don't 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1994 

have the money to meet their request fully so we provide them 

with a level of funding which is a fraction of what they've 

asked for. 

 

Most of that would go into salaries for staff that will permit 

them to participate in that bilateral process.  To some extent 

they'll use their existing staff and try and reallocate their time 

so that they can devote time to the project and they may bring 

in contract employees or temporary employees or some 

arrangement like that so that in that case it would be probably 

pure salaries. 

 

In others, with respect to our funding for Aboriginal Women 

for example, we know that they are using that money for 

particular projects, probably outreach projects to aboriginal 

women or counselling or that sort of thing.  But in each case 

they present a budget to us and in each case we make an 

allocation which I'm sorry to say is only a fraction of the 

amount that they need and ask for, but it's a lot better than 

nothing and recognizes that the government appreciates the 

validity of the proposed project that they have, and we're doing 

the best we can. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The allocations to Indian and 

Metis organizations is increasing over 100 per cent but the 

budget for aboriginal employment development is dropping.  

How long has this employment program been in existence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This kind of program is, I'm advised, 

about seven years old.  It started out as a grant to employers so 

that they could hire individual aboriginal people, and it was 

quite a big and expensive program at that time.  We've swung 

away from that now to encouraging employers, and assisting 

employers, to develop programs whereby they will employ 

aboriginal people as part of their normal workforces without 

any subsidy so far as salaries are concerned.  We are prepared 

to put some money into their planning process and help them in 

their planning process to encourage them to develop these 

special programs for the employment of aboriginal people. 

 

We also provide some grant money to post-secondary 

institutions like the Indian cultural college and the like to work 

on strategic links between employers and aboriginal people, 

and try and make that process work a little more smoothly. 

 

So it's been a change in the focus of the plan.  That means that 

we're spending a lot less money on it because we're not paying 

the wages.  The employers are paying the wages, but we like it 

because it has a more permanent quality about it, leads to the 

kind of jobs that are likely to last beyond the program, continue 

indefinitely into the future, and we're quite satisfied with the 

results. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Demographic profiles indicate a large 

increase in the aboriginal school population over the next 10 

years.  Could you describe for me the programs and initiatives 

this agency is undertaking to support the needs of aboriginal 

school children. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a very good question, and the answer 

is that we're not directly involved in the problem that the hon. 

member raises.  It is, in the final analysis, a school division 

problem, with the assistance mostly of the Department of 

Education. 

 

We do a lot of work with community organizations, and those 

organizations, or some of them, are directly connected with 

aboriginal kids going to school.  And we fund some of those 

organizations or fund them to some extent, and we encourage 

them, and we facilitate them.  And they are concerned with the 

kids going to school and some of the problems that the kids 

encounter and try and . . . So in other words, we encourage the 

aboriginal organizations which in turn deal with the problems 

that the hon. member has referred to.  We're not directly 

involved in the little-kids-going-to-school questions. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In November 1993, the Public Service 

Commission co-sponsored a one-day seminar in which Ted 

Gaebler, author of Reinventing Government, was the guest 

lecturer.  In the course of his presentation, he commented that 

the whole exercise of reviewing expenditures and budget plans 

hinges on one simple question that I would like to ask of you 

now: how is the quality of the life of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan better as a result of your department's activities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I was present during some of that 

conference, and I met Mr. Gaebler, and of course most of us 

have read his book, I guess.  I think that this is one of the key 

functions of government.  I say that because of the 

demographics of Saskatchewan which the member has referred 

to, and the trend lines. 

 

There is simply no question that the relationship of aboriginal 

groups to the larger Saskatchewan community is going to 

become increasingly important as time goes on.  I believe that 

we have allowed the situation to deteriorate to the point where 

the problems, the social problems being encountered by Indian 

and Metis people, have become so large that they really 

overwhelm other social problems that already exist in this 

province. 

 

So what we're doing in this secretariat, performing some of the 

functions that we have discussed already, and pursuing our 

mission and following our principles as we were discussing 

before supper -- I believe we're doing one of the key functions 

which is important now and will become increasingly 

important in the future.  We are touching upon and involved in 

processes that will spell success or failure in our ability to deal 

with these issues and these problems. 

 

So I can answer Mr. Gaebler quite directly that what we're 

doing here is an enormously important and necessary function 

of the provincial government in relation to these issues we've 

been talking about.  I believe the federal government has a 

huge responsibility as well that includes Saskatchewan but 

includes other parts of Canada also.  And they must be -- and I 

know they are -- very concerned about some 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

of the same things that are concerning us in this Assembly. 

 

I am quite satisfied that this is a vital and necessary function for 

government to be performing, and I would be pleased to answer 

Mr. Gaebler on this question in exactly those terms. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Just as a last note, previous 

ministers have agreed to respond in writing to a number of 

written questions submitted by the official opposition, and I am 

asking you today if you would please ensure that we too are 

provided with copies of your answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes of course. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for your time and the time of 

your officials; I appreciate it. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 25 agreed to. 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, on behalf of the Assembly, 

I'd like to thank Mr. Hendrickson and Mr. Reid for coming here 

tonight and assisting the committee in its work and for coming 

here so often in the past as we've called on them, I think, five or 

six times to come in order to complete these estimates.  We 

really appreciate their efforts. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to extend my thanks to the 

officials and the minister as well for being here and responding 

to the questions over time to this portfolio.  Thank you. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time the minister to introduce 

the officials who have joined us here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

To my right is the deputy minister of Social Services, Conrad 

Hnatiuk; behind Conrad is Neil Yeates, our associate deputy 

minister; behind me is Bob Wihlidal, our budget director; and 

behind Bob is Phil Walsh, our director of income security 

programs. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I would start 

off by welcoming the officials here tonight.  We have a few 

questions we'd like to develop with the minister and I'm sure 

he'll need your help. 

 

Mr. Minister, we got started once a few days ago and we got 

hung up a little bit on our interpretation of . . . or at least my 

interpretation of what I thought was abuse 

of the system and things like that, but I think I'll leave that for a 

minute and I would like to start off probably with a new series 

of . . . a new approach. 

 

And could you start off by letting me know how many people 

are on welfare for March in 1994?  What's the numbers now, in 

March? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman -- 40,993 cases 

representing 82,000 people. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Say that again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- There are 40,993 cases representing 

82,000 people in total. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- The numbers seem to be still going up at about 

a thousand a month, Mr. Minister, and I think if you remember, 

we were arguing a little bit about what you would call levelling 

off, and I suggested that levelling off at a thousand a month 

was not what I would consider a good thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, you suggested in the Star-Phoenix that I was 

being a little hard on the poor, as you put it.  I would like you 

to indicate to me, sir, any place in any of the conversations we 

had that indicated that I was concerned in anything but the 

folks that need help, and I was trying to develop with you what 

I thought was the fact that there was abuse of the system, and it 

was the abuse of the system that I was concerned about. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes.  I think your member, the hon. 

member is referring to the article written in the Leader-Post by 

Mr. Murray Mandryk.  And I won't repeat the words that he 

used, but I think that's the article that you're referring to.  I'm 

not aware of any article where I'm quoted as saying that, but I 

stand to be corrected. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Well 

Dave Traynor is the reporter that I'm referring to, and you deny 

that your department was soft on security.  You also said that 

you had hired 30 additional investigators.  You stated that in 

the same article, Minister.  So I would ask you, is this true?  

Have you hired 30 new investigators? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Let me say, first of all, that I'm aware that 

I've made some comments in question period during our 

discussions that would concern me in terms of a perception that 

abuse is higher than it really is and that we've got significant 

controls in place to ensure that people who are receiving 

benefits are entitled to receive them.  We have 31 of those 

verification officers as you had referred to -- 31. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Were they hired?  

How did you get these people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, they were hired in July 1993, and 

they are in place and they are . . . This is a response, since the 

last audit report came out that I was just talking about the other 

day, in terms of one of the measures that we've taken that 

would ensure 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1996 

greater accountability. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have received some information that came from your 

department on the investigators that you say you hired, and I 

would like to quote from the letter that I received, and I quote: 

 

 When the NDP came into power, they wished to give a caring 

and competent image and fired all of the investigators and 

auditors for the entire year.  There was absolutely no balance 

in checks.  The case-loads were frantically increasing due to 

word that it was particularly easy to be granted assistance in 

Saskatchewan.  Not faulting the workers, as they did not have 

time to follow up or if they refuse an applicant there was no 

backing from government and management, but rather 

instructions were given to issue funds. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Did you hire or did you . . . Were these people brought in from 

another department?  I have the information, Mr. Minister, that 

you got these out of clerical staff.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say that what we did is we 

dismantled what you were calling the fraud squad, which cost 

the taxpayer about $600,000 a year and saved about 300,000 or 

just a little bit less.  And we replaced that fraud squad with 

other accountability measures that, by the way, we believe are 

in fact more effective. 

 

These people are called case verifiers.  And the verification 

occurs before the cheque goes out which is where the 

verification should occur, not once the cheque goes out trying 

to make sure that the situation was done correctly. 

 

So there are case verifiers, and the follow-up is before the 

cheque goes out rather than after and we think that is an 

improvement. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, you're 

talking about $600,000 costs but if you look at the records, and 

it's authenticated by the auditor, under that so-called fraud 

squad they saved $23 million.  That's a pretty fair return on 

600,000. 

 

My question is to you, Mr. Minister.  If you look at the 

numbers of people that are on welfare since you were elected, it 

indicates that this anonymous letter that I received, is right on 

the money.  It came out of your department, Mr. Minister, and 

you talk about an investigations unit.  Well do you have a 

full-scale investigative unit now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Let me make it very clear to the hon. 

member that the increases in case-loads have nothing to do 

with the issue of fraud and abuse, and I would prefer that that 

not be perpetuated because that isn't the situation.  The 

increases in case-loads are due to changes in the UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) program.  We've been over this many times.  

Yes, they are, in April of 1993. We can document this -- 

changes in the treaty offload in July 1, 1993.  Now you know 

that. 

 

We support the FSIN to reverse that decision.  And also the 

changes in the recent federal Liberal budget, which have taken 

another $40 million in benefit reductions from UIC, will impact 

on our case-loads.  People will come on social assistance earlier 

and that takes $40 million out of our economy and it also will 

increase our case-loads.  So if you take away those three major 

federal offloads, the case-load is actually stabilizing.  And I'd 

be happy to go over those numbers for you again. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I think, when you do 

that, maybe you should compare the UIC numbers at the same 

time with the case-load that you have here.  You cannot 

continue to blame the offloading from the federal government 

for the amount of people that are on welfare in Saskatchewan 

today.  You can't do that.  You've only got, you told me one 

time, eight thousand, then you told me it was nine five.  So you 

take nine five from 82,000 and you can't blame it all on the 

federal government.  It just won't wash. 

 

Now if you don't have abuse of the system, you're trying to tell 

me that there's 82,000 people in the province that need welfare?  

I can't believe that and there are many people who are phoning 

me, Mr. Minister, who don't believe it either.  And I'd like to 

read some more from the letter I received.  It says: 

 

 Possibly to appease some public outcry of welfare abuse but 

mainly to satisfy the Provincial Auditor, the department 

seconded 30 staff in April of 1993. 

 

And that's the end of quote.  You said you hired them. These 

people tell me you seconded them.  Mr. Minister, is this true 

and if it is true, why didn't you report that to the information 

you provided to my office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me say that I'm not 

blaming anyone for why the case-loads are up.  I'm telling you, 

I'm stating a fact, as to why the case-loads are up and I'm 

surprised that you're still not willing to see some relationship 

between those decisions to federal offload and increase in 

case-loads. 

 

Now what I hear you doing though, what I hear you doing is 

you're not willing to blame the federal government, but you're 

positioning yourself to blame low income people for being on 

assistance.  Yes you are; you're making the claim that the 

case-loads have gone up because of welfare fraud and abuse, 

ignoring the accountability measures that are in place, ignoring 

the fact that people are honest basically, that they're looking for 

opportunities.  You're ignoring the broader situation, and so I 

would hope that your analysis doesn't lead you to continue 

blaming people who are 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

unemployed. 

 

And that's maybe why the Leader-Post and Mr. Mandryk and 

the social justice groups are viewing you as somebody who . . . 

they use the term mean-spirited.  I'm not saying that.  But 

maybe that's why they've come to that conclusion because you 

continue to . . . the only issue you've raised with me in several 

hours of estimates is the issue of fraud and abuse.  So you're 

feeding into that notion that that is responsible for the 

case-loads.  And you've got the Prime Minister feeding into the 

notion that people are home drinking beer who are on 

assistance.  Now that does nothing to deal with the situation in 

a constructive and helpful way. 

 

I can assure you -- absolutely assure you here -- that the 31 

verification positions are brand-new positions.  Now that's not 

to say that some of them weren't filled by secondments, but 

there was no back-filling to those positions.  So those are 

brand-new positions, despite what that letter you have might 

say. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, you keep on insisting that the 

numbers came out of the federal off-loading, and I will accept 

them.  I accepted your 8,000 the first, and I accepted your 

9,000, but we're talking 82,000.  So you can't blame the whole 

thing on to the federal government, and I've got no problem 

making the federal government face up to their shortcomings 

either. 

 

But what I'm trying to tell you is that I am getting letters, and 

I'm getting phone calls that tell me that there is abuse out there 

in the system.  In the system when we were in government -- 

and I pointed this out to you -- we brought the . . . there's errors 

in your department.  The auditor pointed that out to you.  You 

were doing nothing until July 1993 -- nothing -- to try and cut 

down the abuse of the system. 

 

That's what I'm trying to tell you, and you keep coming back at 

me and trying to beg off on the numbers.  And I'm telling you, 

if you could cut the abuse out, you could give those people that 

need it more money.  And I brought a case to you today where 

you were underfunding one person who needed it.  That's what 

I'm trying to tell you. 

 

And I will like to just go to another letter that you should have 

that was sent to your Premier, by another person who was 

willing to sign his name, about abuse.  And he's saying you 

won't pay any attention.  He says, part of the letter and I quote 

from this letter: 

 

 The abuse within the system is atrocious.  The yet ruling 

body, according to Mr. Murray Gross, believes that this is 

airtight, is all right.  He said, Mr. Gross, who is the man to 

talk to in Mr. Pringle's office, believes that only three to 

seven per cent of the people on social assistance are 

dishonest.  And according to you, Mr. Britton, (talking to me, 

I'm reading from the letter) Mr. Pringle believes that all 

people are honest. 

And that's what you told me and that's what I told him in a 

conversation.  Well it says here: 

 

 Wake up, Mr. Pringle and Mr. Gross.  Mr. Gross says these 

people should have the dignity to spend their money the way 

they want.  The key word in the sentence is "their" money.  I 

would like to ask Mr. Pringle, if he isn't too busy, exactly 

where does their money come from?  I always assumed it was 

from the taxpayer.  However, I've only lived here for 30 

years, so maybe I could be wrong. 

 

This is the kind of letters I'm getting. And phone calls.  And 

you're telling me that I'm beating a dead horse because I 

suggest that there's abuse out there.  Well, Mr. Pringle, 

according to him, Mr. Pringle, wake up, he says. 

 

So it's not just my own personal vendetta against a few people, 

as you put it.  Mr. Minister, according to what I am being told, 

and I have other people calling me, there is serious abuse out 

there and you had no control over it.  You didn't even start on it 

until 1993 and that was because the auditor got after you. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will ask you another question.  In July of 1994 

were you on budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say respectfully, we don't 

know.  It's not July 1994 yet.  When it comes July 1994 then I 

can respond to that. 

 

Let me say that if anyone has names of people they believe are 

abusing the system then they should give them to me.  And I'm 

not asking for names here tonight, but you should give that to 

me.  We talked this afternoon.  You're welcome to give that to 

me at any time and we look into those. 

 

Obviously we're concerned to make sure that people who 

receive social assistance are entitled to it.  Now we happen to 

believe that that means the vast, vast majority of people.  And 

we are well aware that we've got an obligation to make the 

program efficient and accountable.  And we're doing that. 

 

Now you're generalizing tonight about welfare fraud and abuse 

being rampant.  And you're using selected letters from here and 

there, but every time you come to me with a case -- and you 

would admit, I'm sure, that this is true -- your concern is that 

they're not getting enough to live on.  Well how come it is that 

the cases that you bring to me are all legitimate, but then you 

generalize that everybody else's case is not legitimate.  You 

can't have it both ways.  And I take very seriously any case that 

you bring to me, and we try and respond as quickly as we can. 

 

So what I would say just to refer you to . . . you've mentioned 

the auditor two or three times tonight.  And I know you've read 

the report, but I'll just review here that the auditor believes . . . 

now this is the report ending in 1992 

_93 year -- fiscal year.  As you know that's over a year ago.  

The auditor notes that the Department of Social Services had 

adequate rules and 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1998 

procedures to control social assistance payments except one in 

the area of random sampling of clients; and secondly in the area 

of a written and tested contingency plan to ensure that the 

computer could respond . . . if the computer went down, we'd 

be able to continue to run the program and be accountable. 

 

Now I've indicated to you in many other occasions that since 

that report which is over a year old, that Social Services had 

complied with the recommendations made over a year ago by 

reintroducing the random verification process.  We hired 31 

staff as verification officers.  We've entered into agreements 

with other western provinces in terms of assuring that people 

are not eligible . . . do not collect in different jurisdictions.  And 

we've provided additional support to Legal Aid for family law 

to pursue maintenance.  And I could go on and on. 

 

I gave to you -- the last time we were in this forum -- two pages 

of accountability measures that are in place.  And what I would 

say to you is that we take the position that we need to have 

adequate controls in place and that we have made adjustments 

to the recommendations made by the auditor.  Now if you read 

that report again you'll have to admit, to be fair to us, that if 

you combine these things I've outlined to increase the 

accountability, that we will have a very favourable report, with 

the next auditor's report. 

 

Now I don't know what else you want us to do.  I really don't 

know what else you want us to do.  But we're certainly not 

going to, in a punitive way, start dumping on welfare recipients 

and give them one-way tickets out of the province.  We're not 

going to do that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

agree that I did have the date out just a mere year, so it wasn't 

too bad I guess.  But the question was: were you on budget then 

in July of 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well yes, we were until the federal 

government made a decision on July 1, 1993 to make us 

responsible immediately for the social assistance of all treaty 

families off the reserve.  So we were but this is how the federal 

offloading has contributed in subsequent months to sending us 

off our budget so to speak. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

will talk about the net cost to the province from the federal 

offloading a little later on but I want to quote from this letter I 

got from your department.  And the letter goes on to say: 

 

 considering what they offered to pay in comparison to work 

expected, they recruited mainly clerical staff who were 

looking for an opportunity to move beyond secretarial work.  

By most accounts and statistics these folks have done a fine 

job.  In going into it, they were advised that the department 

was $3 million over budget and needed to recoup this.  

Reports show that these staff have effected a saving of $2 

million. 

That's the end of the quote.  Can you comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well these people are classified as 

assistant social workers.  I'm not familiar with those figures 

that you're using, I'm sorry.  That doesn't fit for us here. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- You're saying that you were not $3 million 

over budget in July of 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I think that the hon. member could 

appreciate that we don't do a forecast every single month, and 

what you do is you have to look at the whole year.  I mean we 

attempt to live within our budget as best we can.  We attempt to 

do a quarterly, I guess quarterly, projections, monthly budgets, 

but it changes from month to month and new features sort of 

add into it.  In 1993, in April, there was the first federal offload 

by changes to the UIC program.  Now that's well established; 

that's not blaming anybody.  That's a well-established fact 

which ended up dumping additional UIC claimants that lost 

their benefits early on to social assistance provincially. 

 

Now that probably about July would have been building a little 

bit.  Three months later, July 1, another federal offload, and 

we've documented the numbers of those two offloads into 

1993-94, and lo and behold with the federal budget another 

offload.  So these things obviously will put pressure on the 

provincial budget, on the social assistance budget.  But as for 

where we were in that one month of July of 1993, I think a 

more relevant number is to where we were at the end of the 

year and why. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

the letter went on to say that you were able to effect a saving of 

$2 million by bringing these people on staff which is exactly 

the point I'm trying to make with you.  You did, by bringing on 

these 31 -- call them what you like -- you were able to get a 

saving of $2 million, and this comes right out of your own 

department. 

 

So far as I'm concerned they make my point.  When you 

disbanded what you called was the fraud squad you allowed 

things to get out of hand to the point where there was abuse.  

There was errors that you didn't have control over; the auditor 

brought it to your attention.  And in fairness to you, you went 

out and you got 31 people and they saved you 2 million bucks 

already and I compliment you and them for doing that.  And 

that's exactly what I'm trying to say.  You need some controls 

and the auditor told you that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you and I are not going to agree, I'm sure, 

but I'm going to leave this for a little while.  And I want you to 

comment on this: you told me that your staff . . . you have an 

investigating unit of 31 people.  Would you provide me with a 

list of those employed within the department investigating unit, 

and please include when the individual was hired and 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

their salary, will you please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We don't have that with us, but we'd be 

happy to send it over to you as soon as we get it in the next day 

or so, if that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, we'll accept that. 

 

Now these 30 individuals, if they were not seconded, were the 

positions advertised?  And if so, in what papers?  Could you 

tell me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Initially those positions, because we 

wanted to fill them quickly, they were by and large through 

secondments, and we back-filled behind those people on a 

temporary basis.  But subsequent to July 1993 there were 

competitions along the way and they were filled one or two 

positions at a time.  We'll summarize all of those for you, 

including how we advertised those positions and who filled 

them when we get the information over to you in the next day 

or so, if that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, that 

will be fine. 

 

And I understand from what you said that these individuals are 

referred to as verifiers; I think that's what you call them.  And 

do verifiers have a job description within the department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, they're case verifiers, and we will 

send a job description to you as well with that information. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If the information I 

received from your department is accurate, these verifiers are 

conducting house calls on clients, calls which are extremely 

risky being that some of the clients they call on actually have 

criminal records.  It is also my understanding that these 

investigator-verifiers work with the police on some of these 

calls.  What I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, what kind of 

training and experience do these 30 new verifiers have?  Are 

these individuals in any sort of danger while conducting their 

work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well in terms of the training, basically 

these people are trained in the program and service 

requirements to ensure that people meet eligibility.  I can assure 

you that we would not support sending people into dangerous 

situations.  If there were such an occasion where a verifier 

wanted someone else to go along, that could be accommodated.  

That would be very, very, very, very rare because I don't want 

to create a perception that by and large people are dangerous.  

That would not be an accurate reflection of the situation. 

 

But I want to stress again that the verification, unlike the glory 

days you're talking about earlier, occurs now before the cheque 

goes out -- that's the key -- not after the cheque goes out.  And 

we are confident that these people have the proper training to 

ensure that we're picking up errors, and many of these 

inaccuracies are errors, and we should keep that in mind.  I 

mean there are high workloads, and there's a lot of work to do, 

and we try and do that extra check before the cheque goes out, 

and we believe that we catch most of the errors. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, again 

I refer back to the information I got from your department, and 

I asked you if there was a job description.  Now in the 

information I got from your . . . leaked information I guess is 

what you call it -- they're saying to me that . . . part of it, and 

I'll just quote part of it "and yet the department refuses to 

recognize their job description and continues to pay most of the 

verifiers clerical wages."  Have you a comment on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- As I indicated earlier the jobs are 

assistant social worker positions.  These positions in terms of 

the salary and benefits are part of the classification system of 

the Public Service Commission.  So that's the way that these 

are determined.  And you know if you're operating from a letter 

there, an anonymous letter apparently that I haven't seen, so I 

mean, I don't know what else it says. 

 

If you want to send me over a letter I can try and respond to . . . 

if you want to send me a copy of that I can try and respond to 

other questions that might be on there, either tonight or in the 

summary that we're going to send over to you.  And I'll be 

happy to try and do that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I may just do that, Mr. Minister, because it 

seems to me that you don't agree with what has been given to 

me as being authentic.  And I would suggest that it is.  I didn't 

solicit this information, it was sent to me.  And it was sent to 

me as the saying goes, leaked.  Anyway, maybe we would go 

on. 

 

And can I ask you, how effective is the unit that you now have?  

I think we looked at it here a while ago.  You've managed to 

get 2 million bucks in, so I guess it's fairly effective.  So can I 

ask you this: how much money was collected by your verifier 

unit in the years of '91, '92, '93 and '94 to date. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all, let me say that it's not a 

matter of collecting money; it's a matter of making sure that 

money that goes out is going out in the intended amounts to the 

intended people.  So it's prior to sending the cheque out that we 

verify the information. 

 

Now we don't have here with us tonight the information you're 

requesting, back to '90 or '91.  Now again, we'd be happy to 

provide that information to you.  But I just want to clarify 

again, the glory days -- as you refer to them -- in terms of 

saving the taxpayer money, I'm telling you that it cost, in the 

last year of your administration, the fraud squad cost $600,000 

to operate.  And it's estimated that that saved something just 

under $300,000.  In other words, it was cost-inefficient. 

 

Well you're shaking your head; you don't agree with 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2000 

that.  Well I don't know why you don't trust that information.  

I'm getting the information based on some analysis.  And I 

mean you're giving no legitimacy to the additional control 

measures that we've brought in, but somehow you're not 

prepared to accept that, just because you had a system in place, 

that it ended up costing more than it saved the taxpayer.  I'm 

telling you that that's the reality. 

 

You're basing your entire facts tonight on this anonymous letter 

that you received from somebody.  I don't know who you 

received it from.  It's not a matter of . . . it's not leaked 

information.  That unit is public information.  It's not a secret 

fraud squad. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Well I gave you the figures, Mr. 

Minister, in our last session, that showed you over the years 

that that so-called fraud squad you're talking about brought the 

error, the error factor, from 14 per cent down to less than 2, 

from $27 million of abuse down to, I believe it was 2 million.  

It was 4 million, 27, 23 -- $4 million.  That was $23 million 

savings just by having somebody out there looking.  And your 

own figures show that it does work. 

 

But you're flopping around over there trying not to admit that 

you've got yourself in a bind by discharging all those 

investigators.  And the auditor brought it to your attention and 

told you to get your act together, is what happened.  And in 

1993, July, you did.  So you don't have those figures.  Well in 

1991, '92, '93, and '94, you should have some figures.  Why 

don't you have them?  You should have had those kind of 

figures and that's what he's telling you. 

 

Can I ask you another question?  How many individuals have 

been charged with defrauding the department and how has this 

number changed from 1991 to 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I mean, when we started tonight you 

were feeling hurt, your feelings were feeling hurt and you were 

wondering why somehow you were perceived as beating up on 

low income people.  Well for the last half-hour it's become 

clear to everybody in here and anybody listening at home why, 

because you continue to equate everything to welfare fraud and 

abuse, which reflects on people who require assistance.  Well 

that's what you've done. 

 

You're confusing error rates when you talk about what was 

done, the 27 million.  You're confusing error rates with the 

issue of abuse.  Yes, and you're saying abuse because that's 

what you're hanging your hat on because you don't trust people.  

You don't trust people except your rich friends. 

 

Now the reason that the error rate is increased has nothing to do 

with the fraud squad.  I'm telling you that the fraud squad cost 

$600,000 a year and it saved about $280,000 a year.  So don't 

attribute a whole bunch of things to that that aren't valid. 

 

(2200) 

 

The reason the error rate was reduced had to do with 

many things -- enhanced procedures, an automated system, 

better training, better procedures.  And we've enhanced the 

accountability measures.  We've built on -- in a more humane, 

sensitive way, but more effective -- we've built on to the 

control measures.  We know that we've got to be accountable.  

We are accountable. 

 

Now you asked in terms of the fraud referrals.  As of May 1, 

1994, there were 124 active fraud referrals to police forces, 

involving about $650,000 in overpayment benefits.  So let's put 

that into perspective. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you don't tell us 

the year that this $300,000 return was.  You don't tell us that 

the fact that the fraud squad was there, as you call it, cut down 

on the fraud.  It cut down on it.  The error and abuse factor was 

14 per cent.  I told you that last time we were together and I 

showed you what had happened, and the fact that the fraud had 

gone down indicates that the fraud squad was doing their job.  

Now you . . . you're talking here . . . you had 124 fraud cases 

that involve $600,000 -- $600,000. 

 

You also -- and I'll go by this question because we talked a 

little bit about this one -- you brought back the verification of 

the landlords' cheques which was getting out of hand where 

they have to have two signatures now.  That was a check that 

was in there when you took office which you got done away 

with and you found out you had to bring it back because we 

found that there was landlords that were abusing the system as 

well as other people. 

 

So all I'm trying to say is that there is a need for a watchdog out 

there and I don't care what you call him.  You tell me you trust 

everybody.  Well you better grow up because I've been around 

a few years longer than you have and I found you can't do that.  

There are those that will take advantage of you; they'll take 

advantage of me and anyone else they can.  And you better 

believe that because they'll do it, and that's why you need a 

system out there to check those folks. 

 

And I've got another couple of questions I'd like to ask on 

behalf of the person that sent me this letter, and they're 

wondering, if the Department of Social Services did away with 

the investigating unit, why did they keep two men on staff, 

management, who were paid approximately $77,000 a year to 

head the unit.  The names provided to me were William Robert 

Duncan and Neil McDonald, and according to the letter I 

received, these men have no staff and they have no work.  And 

I'm not pointing any fingers at these people; I'm simply asking 

you the question, why were they kept on when there was no 

work for them to do and they didn't do anything? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all, let me say that there 

were several things there.  Let me say first of all, that Mr. 

McDonald was hired by your administration to head policy 

procedures, and he is working with these cases that I talked to 

you about that are over for referral. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

Now Mr. Terry Duncan works for us, not Mr. Bill Duncan.  He 

was also hired by your administration and works with the audit 

and verification staff in terms of these cases as well, and 

around the province works with the eleven regions.  So that's 

what they do.  Now let me say that, on a personal note, I mean 

I'm a little bit offended for you to tell me to grow up.  I say that 

with respect. 

 

I think that the people of Saskatchewan would not be pleased to 

hear that they're not trusted which is basically what you said 

tonight.  And I think you're getting your facts mixed up, hon. 

member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, you are.  You're 

getting your facts mixed up.  You're talking about that your 

administration had shelter cheques in joint names.  That simply 

is not true.  I say, with respect, that is not true.  I'm telling you 

that it cost you $600,000  

_- $600,000 and the former premier is chirping from his seat.  

It cost you, sir, $600,000 to collect back 280,000.  That's why 

this province is in a mess because that's the way you did 

business. 

 

But not only wasn't it sound economically and financially but 

you had trucks and cameras and electronic equipment in back 

alleys and so on.  That's what your fraud squad was all about.  

Yes, we dismantled that.  We dismantled that.  Well we can 

verify that.  We dismantled that because that's not the way to 

ensure that there's enhanced accountability in a way that allows 

people to have dignity and not to be attacking low income 

people.  Why won't you accept . . . Why won't you accept that 

by and large the Provincial Auditor was satisfied with our 

accounting, was satisfied with our accounting, and we have 

made adjustments and improvements to that accounting since 

his report came out.  So why can't you accept that? 

 

You grab a letter from here and you grab a letter from 

somewhere else and you quote selectively to it.  And you 

continue to reinforce that low income people on assistance are 

dishonest.  And you did that tonight.  You tell me to grow up 

because I don't accept the fact that you can't trust people. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You always read the whole letter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- So read the whole letter in the future. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:10 p.m. 

 


