




















































Hansard: May 05, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2063 

 May 5, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Acting Deputy Clerk: -- Ms. Lorje, chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Crown Corporations, presents the fourth 

report of the said committee which is hereby tabled. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, I will at the conclusion of my 

remarks be moving, seconded by the member from Moosomin, 

that the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to table the fourth report of the 

Standing Committee of the Crown Corporations Committee, a 

committee that I've had the privilege to chair for the past six 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past year the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations has completed its examination of the 1992 

annual reports of Saskatchewan's commercial Crown 

corporations.  We have found that these Crown corporations 

have properly reported their financial position to the legislature 

and to the public. 

 

We also found that in general these Crown corporations are 

being well run.  The employees of these corporations are 

working hard to deliver vital services to the people of 

Saskatchewan at the lowest possible cost and to contribute to 

the province's economic and fiscal recovery. 

 

The tabling of the annual reports of these Crown corporations 

and their examination by the legislature was conducted in a 

timely fashion.  This alone has increased the level of 

accountability in the Crown corporations sector over what has 

been provided during the past decade.  It is a direct result of the 

reform initiatives implemented by this government and a 

specific outcome of the passage of The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations have not been content to stop there.  We 

have worked hard and debated vigorously to develop new rules 

and procedures that will contribute to a meaningful reporting 

and examination of the operations of our Crown corporations. 

 

During the past year several practices for improved 

accountability and openness have been implemented by the 

committee.  For example, the salaries of senior Crown 

corporation management have been provided to the committee. 

 

The ministers responsible for the various Crown 

corporations have been allowed to designate corporate officials 

to directly address the committee or directly answer the 

committee's questions. 

 

The auditors of the Crown corporations have appeared before 

the committee to comment on their audit findings and to 

respond to questions from committee members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes have greatly improved the ability of 

the committee to conduct a meaningful examination of the 

operations of our Crown corporations. 

 

The committee, though, has not stopped with these changes.  In 

this report the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations is 

proposing a number of other significant changes in its terms of 

reference and operating procedures.  We are recommending 

that the Assembly implement the following changes in our 

terms of reference. 

 

First, we are requesting that the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations be empowered to permit questions respecting 

operations outside of the year under review.  In the past, 

committee members have been strictly limited in their 

examination to events that occurred in the year under review.  

We are proposing to change this practice so that the committee 

can examine long-term trends in indicators of corporate 

performance and can ask general questions about key 

challenges facing the various Crown corporations and about the 

strategies that are being planned to deal with these challenges. 

 

Second, we are requesting that the reports and financial 

statements of Crown corporations provided to the Assembly 

stand permanently referred to the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations.  This will streamline the committee's 

processes and will allow the committee to conduct its 

examination of these reports on a timely basis. 

 

Finally, we are requesting that the Assembly mandate the 

convening of meetings of the Standing Committee of Crown 

Corporations within four weeks of the commencement of 

sessions of the Legislative Assembly.  This will ensure that a 

government will not be able to avoid scrutiny of the operations 

of the commercial Crown corporations sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

has also adopted other changes in operations.  We will be 

fine-tuning our mandate by focusing our attention primarily on 

those government organizations, commissions, as well as 

commercial Crown corporations, which generate significant 

income from sources outside the General Revenue Fund.  We 

will be assisted in this matter by the presence of the Provincial 

Auditor at committee meetings. 

 

We are proposing to work with the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts to eliminate the duplication in our respective 

committees' work.  This 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

will enable both committees to better focus their attention.  The 

Public Accounts Committee will continue its focus on past 

performance and review of administrative matters.  The Crown 

Corporations Committee however, will now move to a much 

greater future orientation with an emphasis upon policy 

matters. 

 

We are requesting that the Crown Investments Corporation 

give written notification to the committee of any significant 

transactions.  This notification will outline the objectives of the 

transaction, the financial implications and change in taxpayers' 

liabilities, and the authority under which the transaction 

occurred.  This notification is to be made within 90 days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this provision will ensure that the Crown 

Investments Corporation will disclose to members of the 

legislature any significant business deals that it makes on 

behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

One very major and innovative reform that we will implement 

will be to have the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations ask the Crown Investments Corporation to 

provide the committee with an annual statement outlining the 

corporation's mandate, goals, objectives, and performance 

indicators.  CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) will also be 

asked to outline the structure of its investments and the 

rationale for the retention or divestment of investments. 

 

These initiatives, which are major initiatives, Mr. Speaker, will 

improve accountability and openness and will facilitate 

forward-looking financial planning, scrutinized by the members 

of the Legislative Assembly as represented by the members of 

the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes will allow the members of the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations to conduct a much 

more meaningful review of the operations of our Crown 

corporations sector. 

 

In order to enable the citizens of Saskatchewan to learn of the 

results of this review, we are proposing that the Assembly grant 

the news media unrestricted access to make audio or 

audiovisual recordings at meetings of the Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations, providing that the committee has not 

made an order to sit in camera. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations have worked hard.  We have conducted an 

examination of the operations of our Crown corporations on a 

timely basis.  We have also been working to establish a 

framework for the future so that the work of the standing 

committee can be improved and strengthened. 

 

In the future, the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

will continue to provide the vital function of scrutinizing 

"where the money went."  However we will also be able to 

provide another vital role, a forum for debate amongst elected 

representatives about the challenges facing our Crown 

corporations and what the future should be for 

these important instruments of public policy. 

 

I am very proud of the innovative reforms the committee has 

developed.  At times, Mr. Speaker, we had lengthy and spirited 

debate on the government initiative motions for reform.  At the 

end of the day, the report of the committee is unanimous.  I 

thank all committee members for their diligence and 

conscientiousness. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to present the fourth 

report of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I do now move, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin, that the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a few 

short comments regarding the report that has been submitted by 

our committee, and I would like to thank a number of the . . . 

well the government members for their involvement in the 

committee and some of the initiatives that have been brought 

forward. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that on a number of occasions 

government members talked about the initiative that had been 

taken and how the committee was working in a much more 

cooperative fashion.  I would think, Mr. Speaker, that that just 

points to the fact that you had a more constructive, rather than 

obstructive, opposition in committee allowing for more open 

and appropriate debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, I'm pleased that the committee was able 

to come up with recommendations that would allow the 

committee to operate with a little broader mandate.  In view of 

the fact that the Premier, in debate on February 28, indicated 

that it maybe was appropriate for members to earn their keep 

and attend committee meetings, and at that time, we raised the 

problem that we were facing, that it was difficult to bring up 

some of the more pertinent issues.  And the committee has 

certainly recognized that, and it appears in the report that is 

before you today; something that we discussed this morning 

and we were assured that the report did give that and the 

member from Saskatoon has indicated as well that we will have 

that broader purview.  And we appreciate that. 

 

I guess the one area that we weren't able to convince all 

members on the committee of and that was that fact that 

possibly the chair of the committee should be an opposition 

member.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think at the end of the day the 

report we have tabled before you is one that's forthcoming and 

certainly we seek approval of the House for the report.  I thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

add a few brief remarks to the concurrence motion. 

 

The report that the committee presents to the legislature today 

is a significant advancement in the way the committee does its 

work, and accordingly, a significant amount of advancement in 

the accountability of Saskatchewan Crown corporations to us 

as legislators and to the public as shareholders. 

 

Previously the monitoring and scrutiny of the Legislative 

Assembly over the activity of the Crowns has been purely a 

post-decision nature.  Today's report contains some modest 

moves toward changing this tradition by requiring Crown 

Investments Corporation to file statements of mandate with the 

committee and notification of significant transactions. 

 

This marks the first incursion of the Crown Corporations 

Committee into the domain of pre-decision monitoring and also 

the first significant change in its terms of reference since it was 

founded.  I think that is to be commended, Mr. Speaker. For 

this accomplishment all members of the committee, past and 

present, should be commended as well. 

 

However, the veil of secrecy cloaking government enterprise 

decision making has not be lifted in any significant way.  We 

are still far short of the Provincial Auditor's call for a complete 

financial plan detailing anticipated revenues and expenditures 

of Crown corporations. 

 

For their part in today's report, I want to thank the Provincial 

Auditor and his department who have participated in the 

committee's meetings and provided much well-meaning 

guidance on all the many issues the committee has tried to 

address.  Their professionalism as well as the professionalism 

of the Clerk to the committee and the staff of Hansard on 

behalf of the people of this province are very much appreciated 

by me and by my caucus. 

 

Some of the procedures which I as a former member of this 

committee found to be helpful, such as the designation of 

corporate officials to directly address the committee and 

answer our questions, have been continued.  Among the notable 

measures that will provide the public with greater opportunity 

to examine the proceedings of this committee is through the 

ability of the media to make audio and visual recordings of the 

meetings. 

 

On behalf of our caucus, I want to say that we look forward to 

future meetings of the Crown Corporations and Public 

Accounts committees and discussions of the two committees 

that will address overlap between the two.  I am pleased to have 

been part of this process and I do look forward to further 

reforms in the near future. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank my 

colleagues in the Legislative Assembly for their kind words 

about this report of the Crown Corporations  

Committee.  I want to acknowledge that the report was possible 

and these new, democratic reform initiatives that open up the 

Crown Corporations Committee in a way that has never been 

even contemplated in the past is very consistent with what my 

party talked about in terms of democratic reforms both before, 

leading, and through the election of '91.  And this is the latest 

rose in the bouquet. 

 

I want to give credit to the chair of the committee, the member 

for Saskatoon Wildwood, for her tremendous leadership in 

making this possible and leading us through this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of the report, and what we're 

proposing to do, have been spoken to at some length.  I just 

want to end by saying how proud I am of the huge opening that 

this provides, and the accountability that Crown Corporations 

now have for evermore on behalf of the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, and that's who we're here to serve. 

 

This accountability has been enhanced beyond anything I 

would have dreamt possible a few short years ago.  And I think 

it can best be summed up by a conversation with the Provincial 

Auditor where he has complimented the Crown Corporations 

Committee and the report for being so forward-looking and 

having made such significant changes. 

 

I know that those words were not spoken lightly, and I know 

that the auditor's department is also looking forward to the 

coming year and years even beyond as we review Crown 

corporations, but I again want to congratulate the member for 

Saskatoon Wildwood and thank all for their involvement in the 

creation of this very future-looking, forward, progressive 

report.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to move a 

motion now. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I do now move: 

 

 That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan be amended by incorporating a new 

standing order 94.1, as recommended under paragraph 24 of 

the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations and; 

 

 That the said committee be authorized to permit the news 

media to make audio or audio-visual recordings of hearings, 

provided the committee has not made an order to sit in 

camera. 

 

I do so move, seconded by the member from Moosomin. 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

happy through you to introduce to the members of the House 

two students from Thom Collegiate here in Regina who are 

visiting the legislature today on a history project. 

 

I had the privilege of spending a half hour with them before 

question period and hope that their visit here during some of 

the proceedings that have taken place and as long as they can 

stay will further enhance the kind of work that they're going to 

be doing in order that they can make sure that they impress 

their teacher before the end of June. 

 

So I would like for them to stand as I introduce Andrea Murphy 

and Erin Shiplack in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and ask you 

and the members of the House to join me in extending them a 

warm welcome and best wishes for every success in the project. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the members today two very good 

friends who are visiting us from Melfort who are in your 

gallery.  Ken McGowan and Josh Storey are in to discuss items 

of interest with the caucus committee.  And we met with them 

this morning and I hope they have a very good day in Regina.  

And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today 

it's an honour and a privilege for me to introduce to you, sir, 

and through you to other members of the Assembly 27 grade 5 

students from Lindale School which is located in Moose Jaw.  

They're in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  These children are all 

from the riding of Thunder Creek and are bussed in to Lindale. 

 

This class is kind of special to me today, Mr. Speaker, because 

my oldest son, Andrew, is there and also my wife, Carol, is one 

of the chaperons today.  They also have with them their 

teacher, Mr. Tom Findlay, and Ms. Terry Wendzina also 

chaperoning today.  And they've been touring around Regina 

and are now in for a view of the Legislative Assembly and 

what goes on here in question period. 

 

So I would ask all members to please join me in welcoming the 

Lindale students here, and we'll answer any questions you 

might have a little later. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a great pleasure 

that I'm able to introduce to you, and through you to the rest of 

the members of the Assembly, 51 

grade 8 students from St. Henry's Elementary School in 

Melville, sitting in the west gallery.  And they're accompanied 

by Garth Gleisinger and Nick Rogalski, and bus drivers Al 

Schatz and Clarence Rathgaber. 

 

I'll be meeting with them for a photo opportunity and some 

refreshments afterwards, and hopefully be able to answer some 

questions.  And I'd like all members of the Assembly to 

welcome them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a lot of pleasure to, on behalf of our colleague Mr. 

Muirhead, the member from Arm River, introduce 48 grade 8 

and 9 students on his behalf.  Mr. Speaker, they are 

accompanied by teachers Mr. Barry Peters and Ms. Debbie 

Okrainetz. 

 

And on behalf of the member from Arm River, I will be 

meeting with these students in the east gallery and try and 

answer any questions they might have in regards to what 

they've noticed in the building.  We will also be taking photos 

and, I believe, having some drinks. 

 

So I'd ask the Assembly to help me welcome, on behalf of the 

member from Arm River, the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would 

like to introduce to you and through to the members of this 

Assembly someone who is very, very special to me.  I'd ask her 

to stand along with her friend.  This is my daughter Carey and 

her friend Anita Young. 

 

They are both graduates of the UBC (University of British 

Columbia).  Anita is now doing her master's in nursing.  My 

daughter Carey is in her Ph.D. program.  They are just passing 

through today on their way to the Northwest Territories where 

Carey will be supervising a bison study. 

 

And I'd ask all of you to join with me today in welcoming them 

to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say how pleased I 

am that you recognized me.  And I'd also like to join with the 

Leader of the Opposition in recognizing and welcoming the 

students and guides from Lindale School. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I stood expressly to introduce six students 

from Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw who are seated in your 

galley, Mr. Speaker.  These six students are members of the 

government club at Central Collegiate. 

 

For the information of members, the government club meets 

weekly at noon hour to discuss current matters of political 

interest at all levels -- federal, provincial, municipal, and 

sometimes even school board.  And their visit to the legislature 

has become an annual 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

event, which I'm very pleased to see them repeating again this 

year. 

 

They're accompanied by a teacher at Central Collegiate who is 

also a city councillor at the city of Moose Jaw, Brian Swanson.  

Following question period they will be taking a tour of the 

building and I look forward to meeting with them after their 

tour for pictures and a visit and refreshments and to respond to 

their questions at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd ask all members of the Assembly to join in 

welcoming the members of the government club at Central 

Collegiate. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to join with 

the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in welcoming the 

government club from Central Collegiate here.  I had the 

opportunity to speak to one of their noon-hour meetings about a 

month or so ago; and Mr. Swanson is always very kind in 

extending invitations to people in public life -- whether they be 

civic, or provincial, or federal -- to go and speak to their club.  

And I can attest to the fact that his club are very well-rounded 

in their knowledge of political events in Saskatchewan and 

indeed Canada. 

 

I particularly would like to recognize a constituent of mine, 

Miss Jenny Clothier today, who's been a very active member of 

that club and would ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Pork Exports to Cuba 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

colleagues.  I want to make a comment today on some very 

good news for Saskatchewan agriculture, in particular, 

Saskatchewan pork producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, world consumption in pork is growing at a very 

dramatic rate and to meet that new consumption and demand, 

Saskatchewan export markets are also expanding.  Worldwide, 

44 per cent of all the meat consumed is pork.  There has been 

since 1991, a 37 per cent increase in world exports of pork. 

 

In Canada, hogs account for 30 per cent of all livestock and 10 

per cent of all farm revenue.  In 1992, Canada exported 

275,000 metric tons of pork and pork products.  Mr. Speaker, 

this is indeed big business.  In Saskatchewan this great 

opportunity . . . great opportunities exist for Saskatchewan 

producers to expand new markets but also retain traditional 

markets.  Some of these traditional markets are the U.S.A. 

(United States of America), Japan, and Mexico.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, recently since 1992 we have gotten a new market and 

we are the central supplier or primary supplier to Cuba.  1992 

pork exports to Cuba . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Meadow Lake Declared National Forestry Capital of 

Canada for 1995 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder if there 

should be a limit to the amount of good news one community 

can receive in a month.  I've been on my feet with reports from 

Meadow Lake constituency pretty often lately, and today I 

would like to make one more announcement. 

 

This is, as you know, National Forestry Week, so this 

announcement is very timely.  Therefore not wanting to keep 

folks out on the limb, as it were, Mr. Speaker, the town of 

Meadow Lake has just been declared the national -- and I 

repeat the national -- forestry capital of Canada for 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- This is a title conferred by the Canadian 

Forestry Association and carries with it a great deal of prestige, 

and also a great deal of responsibility to promote sound forestry 

practices.  With the world's first effluent-free pulp mill, the 

employee-owned saw mill, and the forests which contribute to 

tourism in our area in a large way, one can see that we were a 

natural choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the campaign to win this designation was truly a 

cooperative one, involving representatives from the town, 

government, local business, and forestry people, the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, local 

Scouts, Minister of Environment, the Premier, myself, and 

many others. 

 

I particularly congratulate Mayor Dave Bridger, and Councillor 

Donna Aldous, who deserve special recognition for getting the 

ball rolling.  Now all the organization and preparation is being 

coordinated by Ernest Lorne through the Northwest tourism 

association, and he has done a marvellous job. 

 

I invite all of you to plan to visit Meadow Lake -- forestry 

capital of Canada for 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Shared Family Farms 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

recently there was an article in the Leader-Post about a group 

of farmers who deserve even more attention than a front-page 

story provides. 

 

Last year the HOH shared family farm near Lipton pioneered 

the concept of community-shared agriculture.  Under this plan 

the farm owners sell shares in the farm's harvest to urban 

dwellers who 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

then are provided with a portion of the season's produce -- 

vegetables, fruits, and chickens, in the case of HOH. 

 

The share owners also have the opportunity to visit the farm 

and perhaps help out with the chores, such as seeding, weeding, 

and harvesting.  This may sound a bit like Tom Sawyer selling 

shares in the opportunity to whitewash his fence, but for city 

people the chance to be in the country and truly sense the 

rhythm of farm life can be a valuable experience. 

 

This year three farms in my constituency are joining the 

community-shared agricultural experiment.  The member from 

Meadow Lake won't mind me mentioning that his twin sister, 

Maureen, and her family and her partner, Clara Ferner, are 

involved in one of the two shared farms near the town of 

Kronau. 

 

The other, Harvest Community of the Prairies, deserves special 

mention because it combines the shared-farm plan with its 

sheltered workshop on site. 

 

Sam Bogdan of Edgeley with his organic market garden wants 

to forge a closer link with the people who eat his food. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the share farm idea is a good one, sharing scarce 

dollars and, more importantly, sharing the experience of our 

basic Saskatchewan industry.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Social Safety Net 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to report to the 

Assembly that last night I travelled to Saskatoon where I 

attended a public meeting at Mayfair United Church in my 

constituency.  And hundreds of people were there, Mr. Speaker, 

to hear about the federal Liberal government's plan to change 

our social safety net in Canada.  Among the speakers was 

Linda McQuaig, who is a noted journalist and social 

commentator. 

 

And seeing the people there, Mr. Speaker, I realize that more 

and more people in our province and in our country and 

certainly in my community are very concerned about the 

emerging agenda of the government in Ottawa, which appears 

to be to continue the Conservative policies of gutting 

unemployment insurance, old age security, Canada Pension 

Plan, Canada Assistance Act, and the Canada Health Act. 

 

And the point was made at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, that our 

deficit problem is not going to be resolved by attacking social 

spending.  It wasn't caused by social spending; it's not going to 

be resolved by attacking social spending. 

 

And I want to say to the Liberal government that a lot of people 

in our communities are starting to look at your agenda as it 

emerges, and they're watching and they're starting to speak up.  

And so should we, Mr. 

Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Trade Union Act Amendments 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This afternoon I 

want to direct my questions to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. 

Minister, yesterday you announced -- and with a great deal of 

fanfare, I might add -- that you would be making some 

amendments to your ill-advised Trade Union Act.  But as usual 

and is your practice, you have refused to table those 

amendments in this legislature so that we could look at them 

before the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you are prepared like you did yesterday to issue 

a news release on the matter, you obviously have those 

amendments on paper.  So the question is very simply this: will 

you table them this afternoon so that the opposition, the official 

opposition, and the business community can have a look at 

those amendments before you try to ram them down our 

throats? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, they certainly 

won't be rammed down the opposition's throats; you'll have lots 

of opportunity to discuss them in Committee of the Whole 

where they're normally presented.  When we get to Committee 

of the Whole, we'll present the amendments and you can then 

debate them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, there 

are a lot of people disappointed in your answer because I would 

submit to you that your intentions are painfully obvious, 

painfully obvious.  You intend to release them clause by clause 

as we go through them in this legislature.   You're going to be 

using those amendments as a club over the heads of the 

business community that if they dare have the audacity to 

complain about any one of them, you are quite prepared to 

withdraw the rest, Mr. Minister.  And that is simply not 

acceptable. 

 

The most appropriate time for you, Mr. Minister, is to table 

them in the legislature now so that we'll have opportunity to 

look at them and to assess whether or not they are appropriate.  

So, Mr. Minister, on behalf of the business community, on 

behalf of the employers in this province, I ask you once more, 

would you do the fair and just thing and table those 

amendments to show that you have nothing to hide? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The process which we used in labour 

standards was when the Committee of the Whole was called, all 

of the amendments were then presented to the Clerk and I 

assume the Clerk made them available to the opposition. 

 

When we begin Committee of the Whole I would anticipate 

we'll follow the same procedure.  We can 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

get to it this afternoon if the opposition are anxious to get the 

amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That won't do, Mr. Minister, that simply 

cannot do, Mr. Speaker. So much for open, honest, accountable 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, your excuses are simply inexcusable and they're 

an embarrassment to this institution, Mr. Minister. 

 

There's absolutely no reason why you cannot table those 

amendments right now, like the business community and the 

employers of this province are asking you to do.  But you are 

going to use them as a club to browbeat them to your 

submission so that they have no opportunity to object to the 

amendments, the so-called amendments that you are proposing, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

The business community, Mr. Minister, the employer 

community have told you in spades that if The Trade Union 

Act and The Labour Relations Act are passed, those are going 

to be counter-productive to your wishes and to the wishes of 

many of the people in this province. 

 

So why won't you show them?  Why won't you release them 

right now, to show that you have fixed the problem, Mr. 

Minister?  Or is it that you continue to believe that these people 

in the business community are ruthless extremists -- in your 

words -- and yet they don't have a shred of proof of what your 

Bill will do to the economy of this province, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I must say, Mr. Speaker, as generous 

as I try to be to the member from Rosthern, it's not obvious to 

me how not tabling in the House enables us to use them as a 

club to beat them into some sort of a pulp.  I do not follow your 

comments. 

 

I've said to the member -- if you were listening to the response 

instead of preparing your next question -- I said to the member, 

I would anticipate we'll follow the same procedure we did in 

labour standards.  They will be tabled as a group.  That's what 

we did in labour standards and I anticipate when we start in 

Committee of the Whole, that's what we'll do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, that's exactly the 

problem.  For the people who are listening and don't know how 

this operation works in here, when that clause by clause comes 

forward we have only that specific moment in time to react to 

an amendment that is going to be tabled just at that particular 

time and then we must continue on.  There's no opportunity for 

the business community to react, to try to change your mind, to 

show you the error of your ways, Mr. Minister. 

That is why the people of this province are demanding to see 

those amendments ahead of time -- ahead of time.  You have a 

secret agenda, Mr. Minister, and that's the whole problem.  You 

have that kind of a problem. 

 

Mr. Minister, another train has left the station.  And I think 

now, Mr. Minister, that the faxes that we are receiving in our 

office on a daily basis from businesses throughout the 

community of Saskatchewan are indicative of what you are 

trying to do. 

 

I am going to give you, Mr. Speaker, just one short example of 

one of those letters that we get, and I quote: 

 

 If your new legislation passes and becomes law, I can assure 

you, Mr. Romanow, that as an ND supporter in the past, my 

family business will be closed and we will move to Medicine 

Hat.  Unless you people choose to make some positive 

changes in this province, starting with listening instead of 

dictating, Moose Jaw will suffer another business closure of 

10 lost jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, unquote.  That's just one example of hundreds of 

letters that are coming in. 

 

The Speaker: -- Will the member please put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, show the province that you have 

nothing to hide, that your amendments are what you claim them 

to be.  Be upfront, be honest, table those amendments so that 

we can take a little bit of time with the business community to 

assess them and then we will go through clause by clause, as is 

normal procedure, so that we know indeed what we are facing.  

Would you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I simply want to remind the very 

indignant member from Rosthern that we are using the 

procedure, same procedure in this Bill as is used in every other 

Bill, as is used I think in every other legislature in the country.  

Nothing unusual about the procedure. 

 

Indeed, by giving you all of the amendments when we start 

Committee of the Whole, we're giving you an extra break.  And 

there'll be all the opportunity you want in Committee of the 

Whole to discuss the amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance). 

 

Mr. Minister, our office has been contacted by Mrs. Judy 

McBride of Eston who is very concerned about your no-fault 

insurance scheme.  A few months ago 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

Judy and her husband, Blain, lost their son, Shawn, a 20-year 

old university student.  Shawn was killed in a car accident in 

which the other driver was impaired.  The compensation 

package she received from SGI was quite small so the 

McBrides are suing for additional damages.  They are very 

concerned that your no-fault insurance will take effect before 

their case is heard and they will lose their right to go to court. 

 

Mr. Minister, when your no-fault insurance plan is passed, 

what effect will it have on cases that are currently before the 

courts, and can you give us the assurance that the McBrides 

and others who are in a similar situation have the right to 

continue their court action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, on all cases that are 

proceeding right now, there will be no effect.  It is only for 

accidents that are happening after January 1, '95. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, Judy McBride wanted her 

case brought to your attention because she feels the insurance 

system is unjust in its handling of such cases, and it will get 

even worse under the no-fault insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, under no-fault the McBrides would receive at 

most $15,000 for the loss of their son's life -- $5,000 for funeral 

expenses, and $10,000 for the estate, for a total of 15,000.  

These figure were confirmed by SGI officials at your 800 

information line.  The McBrides would receive $15,000, less 

any amount received from any other insurance coverage, and 

they would have no right to sue for further damages.  

Meanwhile the impaired driver who caused the accident could 

receive significantly more compensation for loss of income. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other day you said you would bring forward 

an amendment to address this fundamental inequity in the 

handling of impaired drivers.  What specifically is that 

amendment going to do to address this situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in regards to the issue on 

youth, and I will say that again for the member just in case he 

didn't understand yesterday, we are looking at $13,000.  Right 

now the no-fault section of the insurance provides absolutely 

nothing in regards to the youth on the part II benefits. 

 

When we look at this new plan we will be looking at up to 

$13,000.  And as well, and for the member, it's $13,000 a year.  

As well, the youth, after training, when they're at the university 

and they're trained in different fields, whether they're in law, 

they will get the average industrial salary of the law at the 

introductory level when that person continues on in life and 

that injury continues on in life. 

So we're looking at not only for the time that they're at school, 

but also for life, in regards to loss of income.  I think that's a lot 

better than the discriminatory way that exists at the present 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Costs of Labour Legislation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Finance.  The top 10 companies of 

Saskatchewan based on revenues, Madam Minister, include 

co-ops like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Federated 

Co-op; private sector firms like Cameco and IPSCO; and public 

sector agencies such as SaskPower and SaskTel.  Increased 

labour costs will affect their bottom line and yours. 

 

As Finance minister, have you requested an analysis from them 

as to what their proposed labour legislation will cost them -- 

both government agencies and private sector employers -- so 

that you can assess the impact on the provincial government as 

its Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Madam 

Minister, I have.  We contacted some of the largest businesses 

in Saskatchewan to ask whether they had been able to work out 

the costs of The Labour Standards Act, and without exception, 

they indicated that they had not been able to.  They had started, 

but they haven't had time to complete an examination of the 

costs. 

 

It is an incredible burden that has been placed on business in 

this province, Madam Minister.  Will you commit today to 

show us the calculations done by your department as the 

Minister of Finance, the calculations done by the Department 

of Economic Development, as well as the calculations by the 

Department of Labour to assess the cost of The Labour 

Standards Act and The Trade Union Act on the top 10 

employers of the private and public sectors in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  As I had 

explained previously to members opposite, we did do a 

professional, scientific study of the costs.  The costs in the 

macro are minimal, and therefore the costs upon the 

Department of Finance will be minuscule. 

 

Now with every respect to the member from Greystone's 

survey, I think the survey done by Price Waterhouse is more 

reliable.  It's available to all members.  It suggests, in the 

macro, that the costs are minuscule.  Therefore, the effect on 

the Department of Finance will be minuscule.  The member 

might want to refer to the Price Waterhouse study. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

and Madam Minister,  surely you don't expect me to believe 

that this study is still valid after you've changed the legislation 

since the study was even done.  The variables have changed.  

Surely you know basic validity and reliability of research, 

which obviously you do not. 

 

It is obvious that none of your government departments have 

done their homework.  The Minister of Finance has now 'fessed 

up to that.  Representatives from every sector of the economy 

are scrambling to do a costing analysis.  Every single time you 

make a change, Mr. Minister, they have to start all over again 

to try to estimate the costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, and Madam Minister, will you guarantee 

that this legislation will not be put to a vote until a complete 

costing analysis has been done to the satisfaction of the 

affected public and private sector employers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- On every conceivable occasion the 

members opposite want to throw the legislation out.  Why?  

Not because you have evinced any concern at all about working 

people.  I've never heard the words cross your lips.  All you are 

concerned about is to destroy what we are trying to do for 

working people.  The member opposite cares nothing for that.  

She's trying to score cheap political points. 

 

I suggest, instead of doing your survey, you address the Price 

Waterhouse study.  The Minister of Finance was accurate.  

They didn't do the study; we did.  We did the study through 

Price Waterhouse.  It suggests the effect is minuscule.  Nothing 

has changed that. 

 

I recognize that you don't want to deal with that because that's 

facts, and you want to deal with rhetoric.  Well I suggest to the 

member, try the facts and leave the rhetoric behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

that's precisely what we want, are facts.  The employers of this 

province employ people.  We are concerned about employees.  

We want them to have jobs.  Employers want to be able to be in 

a position to provide them with jobs, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Liberal Party and the employers of this province are asking 

you not to pass the Bill until you have added up the bill.  That's 

what we're asking.  And I'll ask you again, sir: will you 

guarantee a satisfactory cost analysis will be done and made 

public by the Department of Finance, by the Department of 

Economic Development, as well as the Department of Labour, 

before you put this to a vote? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If the people we hired had divine 

powers, they couldn't produce a study which would satisfy the 

member from Greystone, because you don't want the facts.  

That gets in the way of scaremongering.  And what the member 

from Greystone is doing and members opposite are doing, 

is scaremongering. 

 

Well I want to tell members opposite that this legislation will 

go through, and that I think will rebound to the benefit of this 

government, because this legislation is going to work well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is for the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, 

yesterday we brought forward the concerns of Vicki Lissel and 

58 other individuals who have contracted hepatitis C through 

contaminated blood.  After question period, you met with Vicki 

and apparently told her you would look into her situation and 

the issue as a whole. 

 

Madam Minister, could you elaborate on just what 

commitments you gave in that meeting yesterday?  And as 

well, Madam Minister, keep in mind that Vicki and many other 

families need assurances now.  They don't have much time to 

spare.  Will you give them a definite commitment today what 

your government will do for those people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

First of all, I did meet with the individual referred to.  And my 

commitment is to look into, to have the Department of Health 

look into, her own personal circumstances and situation, and 

also to look into the broader issue.  That is the commitment I 

gave yesterday and it's the extent of the commitment I gave 

yesterday. 

 

As to the larger issue, I simply want to say that it's not as 

straightforward as the member opposite points out.  I am 

waiting to hear from the Department of Health, and I expect I 

will be hearing from them fairly soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, Vicki 

said this morning, that with all due respect, for you to say that 

you will look into the situation isn't good enough.  She's been 

hearing that line for the past two years and is understandably a 

bit sceptical. 

 

Madam Minister, you have stated in this House that you would 

see to it that individuals will not face hardship as a result of 

high drug costs.  Could you then explain why Vicki was 

covered for two six-month periods under the drug plan and then 

dropped?  Why she and her husband carried the majority of 

almost $13,000 in medical expenses last year and further, why 

you told her yesterday that you couldn't do anything about her 

Intron A being covered under medicare? 

 

Madam Minister, the time lines here are very, very important, 

particularly to these people.  Can you give 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

some kind of commitment to these people today that you will 

indeed do something on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak 

to the individual's circumstances and start dealing with an 

individual case on a point-by-point matter in the Legislative 

Assembly, so I will not do that.  I can say that if there is any 

drug coverage that's available under the present plan that it will 

be made available for the individual in question. 

 

On the larger question of the Interferon that the member 

opposite raised, it's my understanding that there is funding for a 

period of time for the use of that drug.  After that the funding 

ceases, and the reason for that is because it has not been 

demonstrated that the drug is effective after than point.  In fact 

it is considered to be ineffective. 

 

I have asked the Department of Health to look into the entire 

issue, to look at whether or not there is any help available either 

in Health or Social Services for the individual in question, and 

they are in the process of doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Indian Celebration Debts 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for Indian and Metis 

Affairs. 

 

Mr. Minister, back on April 11, I asked you a couple of 

questions regarding the powwow held last summer at Moose 

Jaw.  At that time, Mr. Minister, you gave us the assurances 

that you would have your officials look into this matter and 

clarify to who the bill should be sent and who was responsible 

for payment. 

 

Mr. Minister, has this taken place?  Could you provide us with 

that information so that we can pass it along to the people in 

Moose Jaw who have $200,000 in unpaid bills on their hands? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I had inquired of the federal 

Minister of Indian Affairs, Ron Irwin, as I had told the member 

I would, as to whether the . . . what was the position of the 

federal government.  He had received similar representations 

and had inquired into the matter fully and confirmed his 

position that the federal government is in no sense responsible, 

including of course his own department. 

 

I went through the matter with officials in the provincial 

government and there is no basis upon which we're responsible 

for the payment of any of those bills at all.  So it's a tough 

situation, I sympathize with the creditors; but they're going to 

have to look for payment to the organizers of the powwow. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, for the individuals and businesses in 

Moose Jaw that have outstanding bills on their account and are 

wondering . . . they're wondering who do they look forward to, 

especially if the organizers are not in a position to make 

payment or if the organizers are . . . or if some of the people are 

not even available. 

 

Mr. Minister, who do these people look to if they don't look to 

your department and the federal minister?  I think if there's 

provincial or federal funding involved, the government should 

have some responsibility as well regarding the program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We didn't provide any funding for the 

powwow nor did the federal government.  And I just can't think 

of any basis upon which we would now step forward and 

volunteer to pay the bills for a function in which we played no 

part.  We didn't hold out in any way that we would be 

responsible for these bills and we simply . . . there's no legal 

basis on which we could. 

 

If I may say so without offending them, the creditors really 

ought to have taken steps to ensure that the organizers were 

creditworthy before they got too far into this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Deadline Extended for Partnerships '94 Program 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, today I rise to inform the House that effective 

today, in our ongoing effort to create jobs for students, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has extended the application 

deadline for the Partnerships '94 program to May 18. 

 

When this program was first announced in February, the intent 

was to create 2,000 summer jobs for students.  Mr. Speaker, 

that original target has been met.  By extending the deadline 

and through the approval of applications already received, we 

hope to approve a total of 3,200 positions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Job creation, Mr. Speaker, is a top 

priority of our government, and the extension of this program 

confirms our government's commitment.  Partnerships '94 will 

allow students the opportunity to gain work experience and 

skilled training in addition to earning money for continuing 

their education. 

 

Employers such as businesses, farms, municipal governments, 

and non-profit organizations who create jobs for students this 

summer will be eligible to receive a wage assistance from the 

Department of 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

Education, Training and Employment.  Interested employers, 

Mr. Speaker, who would like to apply should contact the 

Partnerships '94 office in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is this government's intention through our 

Partnership for Renewal plan to create new employment 

opportunities for the citizens of our province.  The Partnerships 

'94 program is one such example of how our government is 

partnering with employers to create employment opportunities 

for our young people in Saskatchewan.  By working together, 

in cooperation with employers and communities, in this way 

we can stimulate local employment which contributes to the 

overall well-being of our society and the economy and creates 

jobs for students.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister's 

comments were quite interesting and it would have been even 

more interesting, Mr. Speaker, if the minister had had the 

courtesy to send over a copy of her statement as she presented 

it. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we look at this new program that the 

minister has presented we have to think about another program 

that is in place dealing with students being hired by local 

businesses and the government's providing some assistance for 

that.  But what the government did in this particular case is they 

had the cut-off date fairly early and a lot of businesses didn't 

even know that this was happening, and therefore missed out 

on these opportunities that they had had in the past. 

 

Now the minister is saying businesses that are interested in this 

program can contact her now about this.  Well that's very well, 

Mr. Speaker, but who is she notifying about this?  Who is 

going to be given this information?  Where is it going to be 

advertised?  Is it just a selected few that receive this 

information?  Or will the businesses, who in the past have 

utilized a program such as this and hired students with 

government assistance on wages, be also notified that this 

program is going to be available, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This kind of program is very important for a lot of students 

because they have difficulty in finding jobs in the summertime.  

Monies from those jobs aid those students in carrying out their 

education.  And it's very important that this continue. 

 

And it's also very important that the students take advantage of 

these opportunities because it gives them experience in a field.  

And when you go and apply to an employer for a position they 

ask very often, what do you have for experience?  For a lot of 

students that means they do not have that experience, but this 

type of program does give them that opportunity.  But it's 

important, Mr. Speaker, that everyone be given the opportunity 

to find out that these programs are available.  And I would 

advise the minister to make this information known to those 

people who have used this type of program before.  Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Amendment Act, 1994 (No. 2).  Mr. Speaker, this 

amending legislation is brought forward in an effort to 

guarantee the security of tenure of all Saskatchewan farmers 

under this government's six-year leaseback program. 

 

It does this in two important ways:  number one, by fulfilling 

the government's commitment in its agreement with FCC 

(Farm Credit Corporation) through which FCC's farm clients 

will be provided equal or improved leaseback protection to that 

provided under the legislation; and number two, by adding a 

farmer's right to leaseback and the right of first refusal on sale 

to the list of exempt property under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1992 this government moved to introduce a 

six-year leaseback program to protect Saskatchewan farmers 

who were experiencing financial difficulties by providing them 

with some security of tenure in their family farm while they 

sought to address their financial problems.  Since its inception, 

this program has seen more than 1,200 farm families enter into 

leases with Saskatchewan lenders for in excess of 500,000 

acres of farm land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these farmers have truly earned a new lease on 

their lives and have, through this program, been provided an 

opportunity to regain a sound financial footing and hopefully to 

repurchase their property at the end of the leaseback period. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at the time of introducing this 

program the Farm Credit Corporation could not see its way 

clear to cooperate with the Saskatchewan government or even 

comply with the Saskatchewan legislation.  This led to a 

protracted legal battle between the Farm Credit Corporation 

and the Government of Saskatchewan, as the Government of 

Saskatchewan fought to enforce the legislation while 

Saskatchewan FCC clients watched with concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to advise the Assembly that in this 

amending legislation, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

completing its requirements under an agreement with FCC and 

the federal government, which will see FCC provide its 

Saskatchewan farm clients leaseback protection not less than 

equivalent to that provided under the six-year leaseback 

program. 

 

In general terms, this agreement provides for 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

equivalent six-year leaseback protection, equivalent eligibility 

criteria for the program, and a parallel independent 

dispute-resolution board process for eligibility and rental rates 

disputes, which will see provincial representatives serving on 

the FCC dispute-resolution board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this agreement will see leaseback protection 

extended to some 2,100 additional farm families -- over 1 

million acres of farm land.  I strongly believe that this 

agreement is a reflection of this government's commitment to 

Saskatchewan's agriculture and to its farm families. 

 

I am pleased to note that FCC has indicated that they will be 

adopting the Saskatchewan approach of extended leaseback 

protection nationwide.  It was FCC's change in philosophy 

which allowed this agreement to be made and which allows the 

Saskatchewan government to make this amendment to 

complete the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amending legislation also provides that a 

farmer's right of first refusal and right to leaseback under the 

Act are property exempt from seizure by creditors.  This 

amendment became necessary as a result of a recent adverse 

ruling by the Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan in which the 

statutory rights were determined to constitute property in the 

eyes of the court.  By adding these two important rights to the 

list of farmers' exempt property, we will ensure that farmers 

who undergo bankruptcy proceedings will not be denied this 

important protection for their security of tenure. 

 

I would note more specifically, Mr. Speaker, that this 

amendment will address both the right to lease and the right of 

first refusal and will also protect those rights when assigned to 

a family member under terms of the Act. 

 

With these amendments, Mr. Speaker, this government is 

ensuring that the important security of tenure which it has 

provided under the Act will apply to all Saskatchewan farmers.  

As the agreement to adopt this program by FCC reveals, this 

government's six-year leaseback protection policy is a program 

that works for Saskatchewan because it allows Saskatchewan 

farmers to work for themselves and for the future of their 

families. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers are the best farmers in the world, and 

enabling them to continue to farm can only benefit all the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair: -- At this time, I would ask the minister, before we 

proceed with consideration of estimates, to introduce the 

officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  On my 

right is the deputy minister of Finance, John Wright.  On my 

left is the associate deputy minister, Bill Jones. Next to Mr. 

Wright is the Provincial Comptroller, Gerry Kraus.  Behind Mr. 

Wright is the associate deputy minister, Craig Dotson.  Behind 

me is Jim Marshall, who's executive director of the economic 

and fiscal policy branch. And seated at the back are Bill Van 

Sickle, who's executive director, administration division; Brian 

Smith, who's the executive director of PEBA (Public 

Employees Benefits Agency) and Annette Vandonk, who's an 

analyst in taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a number 

of questions that I want to ask you about Saskatchewan's 

economic growth, and I want to lead off with those kinds of 

questions. 

 

Madam Minister, the Canadian real economic growth in 1993 

was 2.5, according to your budget book.  Would you be able to 

tell us what the department's estimate for that real economic 

growth in Saskatchewan was last year as compared to what 

your forecast was?  And would you be able to provide for us 

the added benefit that came into the Department of Finance 

because of that increased economic growth? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, we projected last 

year that the Saskatchewan economy would grow by 2.8 per 

cent and we, like everyone in Saskatchewan, was pleased that 

the economy in fact grew probably by about 3.5 per cent.  I say 

probably, because the final statistics aren't in, but the growth 

was significant.  We believe that Saskatchewan in 1993 had the 

third highest growth of all provinces in Canada. 

 

And you can see some of the areas in which this growth 

affected our finances.  If you look in the area of oil and gas, the 

mid-year financial report outlined that we did much better in oil 

and gas than we had anticipated.  Also corporate capital tax 

would be increased. 

 

The one caution I would add when you look at revenues is 

some of the increase in areas like retail trade would be in areas 

that are not directly taxable such as agricultural . . . supplies in 

agricultural-related purchases. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that those are the items that had the most 

economic growth in the province.  Is that what I am led to 

assume? And could you give me a list of those that led the way 

in providing economic 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

growth in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can give you 

some more specific details if you'd like.  Consumer spending 

increased by 4.2 per cent in 1993; we had anticipated an 

increase of that magnitude.  Consumption growth was led by 

durable goods, which increased by 7.1 per cent; non-durable 

goods, which increased by 6.3 per cent; semi-durables, which 

increased by 4.8 per cent; and services, which increased by 2.2 

per cent. 

 

Farm inventories also increased to 497 million, compared to -- 

and this is probably a key number . . . because 497 million for 

1993; if you compare that to 1992, 1992 was negative 238 

million.  Residential construction increased, or investment 

increased by 3.9 per cent. 

 

So I think what we're saying is that those are the main areas in 

which there was a growth in consumption and a growth in the 

economy.  It doesn't always translate directly to money for the 

government because, as I say, there's the caution that a 

significant number of purchases are, for a variety of reasons, 

tax exempt. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You mentioned, Madam Minister, that 

agriculture had moved from a minus 238 to a positive 497.  

Was that in consumer spending that that related to, or was that 

inventory growth, or would you describe that volume or the 

value and how it was calculated? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, what that means is 

because there was a record crop in the province in 1993, the 

inventories that are being held by farmers increased by that 

amount.  But it's directly related to the size of the crop; in fact 

that farmers were increasing their levels of inventory because 

of that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does this include the volume of agriculture 

equipment purchased as a part of the overall impact that this 

had?  Is this included in this number? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no, I think to the 

member opposite, the distinction is this: inventories is basically 

crops in the bin.  So what we're saying is because the crop was 

a record crop, what is in the bin has increased dramatically. 

 

Increases in purchases of farm equipment would be included in 

increases in retail sales.  And I keep coming back to that 

caution.  An increase in retail sales doesn't necessarily mean a 

corresponding increase in revenue to the government because a 

lot of those agricultural purchases are tax exempt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  And the retail sales in the area of that 

volume of increase you said, I think, was 2.2 per cent.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure 

that I understand the question, but let me give you this answer 

and we can go back at it if we're not on the same wavelength. 

 

Last year retail trade increased 6.2 per cent.  What we had 

projected in the budget last year was an increase in retail trade 

of 4.2 per cent. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much of that was assignable to 

agriculture equipment being purchased in '93? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, unfortunately we 

don't break it down that finely.  We understand that there was a 

significant level of purchases of that kind, but we do not have 

those breakdowns.  We do not automatically do those sorts of 

breakdowns. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A couple of points I want to make, Madam 

Minister, on that issue.  Last December 31 was the last year 

where the 10 per cent tax credit was a part of the federal 

budget, and that significantly contributed to that retail sales.  

And I know that it has some significant impact in '93 tax year 

for revenue for the government.  So it has a significant negative 

impact in that dynamic. 

 

I would also say, by asking you a question, what proportion of 

the 3.5 per cent real growth did those two factors . . . And I will 

say that a fair-sized volume of that positive on the 6.2 per cent 

in retail sales came from agriculture purchases.  How much of 

that and the impact of the 497 million-plus on the plus side of 

agriculture and inventory, how much did that contribute to the 

3.5 over the 2.8 that you estimated? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, yes I agree with you that certainly the federal tax 

credit, especially with the December deadline, did have an 

impact.  We can't give you the number though, because 

Statistics Canada doesn't break that aggregate number down 

finely enough. 

 

I think we have an estimate though with respect to your other 

question.  You asked the effect of inventories.  It would be less 

than .5 per cent.  It would be not quite .5 per cent, just below 

that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So on the 3.5 per cent, it would be the 5 per 

cent -- not 5 per cent of the 3.5 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I think what we're 

saying -- and this is a rough estimate, this is not something 

you'd want to go to the bank on -- the rough estimate is this:  if 

you took out inventories, instead of the growth being 3.5 per 

cent, it would have been in the neighbourhood of 3.1, 3.2, 

something like that, that range. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you.  I want to talk a little bit about the 

debt and its relationship to the volume of dollars cost in 

interest.  You have estimated the dollar to be moving at about 

77 cents U.S.  And you did that last year, and it might have 

been pretty close last year, but this year it's down quite a bit 

from that. 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

There are some unusual circumstances developing in the 

Canadian dollar and the Canadian economy or political climate 

that have to do with the election in Quebec, have to do with the 

likelihood of the Qubcois winning in the election in Quebec.  

Can you tell me what the average has been in the dollar up to 

this point? 

 

And then can you also tell me what you project the dollar to do 

if we have a serious step taken by the Parti Qubcois in 

Quebec as it relates to the turn-down in the dollar?   Because it 

will seriously impact on interest rates, and it will seriously 

impact on the payments that we need to make to other 

currencies not only the U.S., but also to the Germans and to 

various European payments that we have to make, and also to 

the Japanese.  And would you be able to tell us what kind of an 

impact that would have in light of what we have to plan for? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll give you a general 

answer first and then we can go back to some of the specifics. 

 

With respect to the dollar, our estimate was just below 77 

cents; it's now at 72.  This is not a major problem for the 

province of Saskatchewan for two reasons.  First of all, as an 

exporting economy, although we have problems because some 

of our money that we borrowed has to be repaid in American 

dollars, this is offset by the benefits we receive because as an 

exporting economy our exports have a higher value.  So for that 

reason it is not a major concern. 

 

The other reason it isn't a major concern is relative to other 

jurisdictions in Canada, we have a very low percentage of our 

debt in foreign dollars.  It would be well under 20 per cent.  If 

you look at the federal government, it's in the neighbourhood 

of, say, 40.  So we're not as exposed as other jurisdictions. 

 

But the member does raise a point which is a problem.  So as 

far as we're concerned, for a province like Saskatchewan, when 

the Government of Saskatchewan goes in June to meet with the 

Governor of the Bank of Canada, we're going to be saying to 

him, let the dollar slip. 

 

Because what we really do not want in Saskatchewan are high 

interest rates.  High interest rates affect all Canadian 

governments -- not the Government of Saskatchewan as much 

as the Government of Canada, because we in our interest rate 

assumptions have been very conservative.  The Government of 

Canada has not been as conservative; they're much more 

exposed. 

 

But all governments are affected by high interest rates because 

we pay more in interest.  But . . . (inaudible) . . . that one can 

have in a country. 

 

So the dollar, my general answer is, the dollar is not a major 

concern of ours; high interest rates would be a major concern.  

And we're very concerned about what the federal government's 

agenda is with respect to the deficit, the debt, and interest rates. 

Mr. Martens: -- So your projected dollar for 1994 is 77.3.  If 

the dollar slides, it doesn't slide free-wheeling I don't think, 

Madam Minister.  And if it were to do as you I think suggested, 

that the Bank of Canada should move to put less dollars against 

the Canadian dollar against . . . for supply on the U.S. side so it 

stays fairly stable, that's going to cost us jobs because of we 

selling a lot of our products to the United States. I understand 

that. 

 

However, what the Bank of Canada generally does is it buys 

dollars and then it tries to prevent the dollar from sliding, and 

that drives up interest rates.  And that is what I'm concerned 

about.  It's not that the dollar goes down to any kind of a level 

-- being reasonable of course -- but it has to have that slide on 

the basis of delivering it on its market value, not on what the 

Bank of Canada is prepared to support it. 

 

And if I have anything to suggest to you, Madam Minister, it is 

that the dollar slide on its own rather than on a bought-up dollar 

and preventing it from moving to where it's supposed to be.  

And I would encourage you to tell the Bank of Canada that that 

is in our best interests and I believe in western Canada; I also 

believe in Ontario -- it is in their best interests to have it do 

that.  And there it is consumer goods that move into the United 

States, and here it is raw products and consumer goods. 

 

And I think that we need to be fairly firm on that; that we have 

to have the federal government not interfere in the market-place 

as to make a significant difference on the interest rates.  And 

the interest is going to cost us more jobs and more decline and 

more inflation and all of that just keeps on growing.  And 

traditional Liberal policy has always done that. 

 

And so I would suggest that, not only with the Bank of Canada, 

that you speak with Mr. Martin and ask him to consider that 

same point.  And when you're doing that in June, would you be 

prepared to do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  Yes, thank you very much for that position.  

Essentially it's exactly the same as the government's position. 

 

What we're saying to the Governor of the Bank of Canada and 

to the federal government is: stop buying dollars to try to prop 

the dollar up at the expense of interest rates, because it hurts a 

region like ours.  And so we're saying the same thing. 

 

But I think the other thing that we all have to be clear about is 

that until the federal Liberal government develops a plan for 

the fiscal problems and an economic development strategy for 

this country, we're in for more of these bumpy rides. 

 

We can blame it on Quebec or we can blame it on the 

Americans, but I think we have to be absolutely honest with 

each other.  Until there is in place adequate fiscal and economic 

plans in Ottawa, we will be into these bumpy rides.  And it's 

just a matter of 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

when the bumps are coming. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I believe . . . I'm going to lay out a scenario 

that I think is fairly straightforward.  I've talked to a number of 

people about this and they probably fall in line somewhere 

along the line.  I believe we're going to have an election in 

Quebec.  I believe the PQ (Parti Qubcois) are going to win.  

Immediately after they're going to win, they're going to come to 

the place where they say, we want to set a motion before this 

Assembly that we negotiate with the federal government to deal 

with how we split this country up. 

 

And in those cases, Madam Minister, we are in very serious 

problems as it relates to international confidence in our 

markets, in our ability to meet the export market and import 

markets that we have, not only because of the dollar in but the 

dollar out.  We have to be very conscious of that. 

 

Have you put in place or have the Department of Finance, 

through the various examinations that you have done, have you 

taken and made any contingency or put into place any plans or 

contingency plans in view of that happening?  There is a very 

strong likelihood that this is going to be a part of . . . and I'm 

not trying to be a prophet; I'm just trying to analyse the political 

system in Canada the way it is.  Have we put into place in 

Saskatchewan a means to cope with that situation when it 

comes up? 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Chairman, leave to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, this 

afternoon I want to introduce in the Speaker's gallery, Mr. 

Sheldon Senft and six of his students.  Sheldon has been over 

in Japan for some three years, I believe it is, teaching English 

over there, and he's been back into Saskatchewan for a year 

now.  He comes from Lipton originally, and six of his students 

have come over here to visit with him.  And I want to introduce 

Sheldon and the six students to you today and ask the members 

to please welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Yes, just to answer your question, 

first of all generally and then more specifically, I think with 

respect to the situation we're in, perhaps it's best to quote Helen 

Sinclair, who was 

in the province yesterday, the president of the Canadian 

Bankers' Association, because I think she said it very well. 

 

She said, "The Saskatchewan government is doing an excellent 

job with controlling spending and debt."  Sinclair says, "While 

some of the Romanow government's recent decisions were 

unpopular, they're on the right track."  But she says, "This 

province has shown tremendous leadership.  Unfortunately, that 

alone will not do it for us."  She said, "Until Ontario and the 

federal government get their finances in order, Canada's 

economic growth will be held back." 

 

So I think what we're saying is that nationally, you have to 

make the same difficult choices.  You have to come out with a 

plan, as we did in Saskatchewan, and you have to make some 

choices that are not going to have the political appeal that doing 

nothing has. 

 

But with respect to our strategies to protect ourselves -- 

because I agree with you; we should be thinking of how we are 

going to protect the people of Saskatchewan from some of the 

uncertainties that may be in store for us because of the 

problems at the national level -- we've done a number of things. 

 

First of all, we continue to have very little money invested in 

the short term.  We are going for long-term investments in 

excess of 10 years, up to 20, 25 years, so that you're not 

exposed on a regular basis to any dramatic increases in interest 

rates.  And as I mentioned before, the other thing that we're 

doing . . . I guess there's two other things we're doing.  One is 

to limit our foreign exposure so that we have, of all 

jurisdictions in Canada, we would have among the lowest 

amounts of dollars which we've borrowed and owe to people 

outside of the country. 

 

And the final thing we're doing is we're being very conservative 

in our assumptions.  For example, if you compare our recent 

budget to the recent federal Liberal budget, one of the 

differences is we do not feel quite as concerned about the dollar 

and interest rates, because our assumptions were very 

conservative.  The federal government wasn't as conservative 

in its assumptions and therefore is much more exposed. 

 

So those are our three basic strategies: be careful about foreign 

borrowings, do long-term borrowing instead of short-term, and 

be very cautious in what your assumptions are. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The federal government have, I believe, 

initiated at least 20 studies; I think it's 26 studies on various 

aspects of finance and finance-related items in its budget.  And 

I know that they are seriously looking at changes in the social 

structure of the country and how to handle that. And how it's 

impacting into Saskatchewan is going to be very significant if 

some of those things are done. I know that that is a concern of 

ours. 

 

I realize too that in the '80s that this province was in a position 

where, I think four out of the seven or ten 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

years, maybe even five, that this province did not receive any 

money from the federal government in equalization payments 

because they had become, on the balance, a have province.  

And that was . . . those are significant dollars that flow into 

Saskatchewan because of that. 

 

And if the federal government decides to cut third-party 

funding, which we in the province are, we are going to have a 

significant loss in many of those areas.  Not only in 

equalization; we're going to have a loss in the social network, 

we're going to have a loss probably in many of the other things. 

 

In that decision that they take as it relates to negotiating with 

Quebec and as it comes back into Saskatchewan, that volume 

of dollars, have you calculated that volume of dollars that Mr. 

Martin is talking about and Mr. Axworthy is talking about?  On 

that volume of dollars, have you calculated any volume of that 

so that we could be prepared for that when it comes? 

 

And if there is anything that has threatened this province over 

the years, it's that funding that has come from Ottawa and it 

being reduced over the years, in the '80s as well as in the '90s.  

And that, Madam Minister, is very serious to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And I believe that we need to be very aware 

that in order for the federal government to reduce its spending, 

to hold itself accountable to the taxpayer and not increase the 

taxes, it is going to have to cut our funding. 

 

And do you know what that would be?  Do you have an 

estimate of what that would be?  And if you do, we would like 

to hear it.  And I know that you do projections; you do monthly 

assessments of where we are.  Does that also include in 

projecting where we will be a year from now when we talk 

about this very same thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  First of all, I want to be very clear about what the 

commitments of the federal government are, the commitments.  

They've signed a five-year agreement for equalization which, 

from the point of view of the provinces, is like a contract.  

That's one of the main transfers. 

 

The other main transfers are EPF (established programs 

financing) and CAP (Canada Assistance Plan).  They have 

assured the provinces in their budget, and the Minister of 

Finance again publicly assured us, that there is a freeze for two 

years; there will be no cuts this year, there will be no cuts next 

year, and in '96-97 they will take out $1.5 billion. 

 

Let me first of all be very clear from the point of view of the 

province of Saskatchewan -- and I will tell also we have 

consulted with other provinces in terms of their general 

position -- there will be major problems in this country if the 

federal government tries to renege on those commitments to the 

provinces.  It would be the same as us saying to Education, by 

the way next year you're going to have a zero and then coming 

along and saying oops, I'm sorry, when we said that to you we 

had no plan in place and now we're going to have to reduce that 

to minus five. 

 

There would be major problems in having on ongoing working 

relationship with the provinces of Canada if the federal 

government were to renege on their existing commitments to 

the provinces.  They've made these commitments, they made 

them publicly many times, and there is no scope here for 

reneging on those commitments. 

 

Now you ask me what, in '96-97, the impact on the province of 

Saskatchewan would be.  We're not sure because what they're 

saying is in '96-97 they're taking $1.5 billion out of two areas, 

post-secondary education and social programs. 

 

What we've said . . . I've met with the presidents of the two 

universities and I've said go to the federal government, don't 

talk to us about post-secondary funding.  We've given you our 

commitment.  We're not going to cut you any more.  It's the 

federal government which is talking about cutting you.  Go to 

them, and assume that if they cut, we pass the cut on to you and 

tell you to direct your complaints to the party doing the cutting. 

 

With respect to social programs, as one of our members said 

today, the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld -- I thought put it 

quite well -- we approach the reform of the social safety net in 

a very open-minded way.  Sure, social programs need to be 

reformed.  Unemployment insurance, welfare, these systems 

aren't working as effectively as they should. 

 

Sure, we believe that they should be reformed in the interests of 

being affordable and effective.  But it has to be done in 

consultation with the provinces. 

 

What we're hearing, not from our government but from other 

agencies in this province, is that they are losing faith in the 

commitment of the federal government to actually carry out 

this reform, first, in consultation with other people.  The Prime 

Minister of Canada said publicly they're willing to do it on their 

own.  And we have to remember what that means. 

 

If that were the case, the federal Government of Canada would 

be reforming the province's welfare system without our 

consultation and input.  And there is a growing concern by 

social activists in the province that this is just a money grab.  

We're not sure. 

 

But I'll tell you, we are putting the federal government on 

notice that if they plan to do the reform unilaterally and if they 

plan to do it just as a way to yank money out without some 

broader vision, they're going to have problems with us. 

 

We still think it is possible to have a reform modelled on the 

health care reform in this province, which the goal is long-term 

sustainability, and that there are savings because there is excess 

administration and there are better ways of doing this. 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

So we're still open, but we're becoming much more concerned. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you been given a list of those studies 

taken by Paul Martin and the Department of Finance and the 

various agencies that he's suggested that they're going to study?  

Have you been given a list of those in order to realize what 

impact they could have as a part of redoing the Department of 

Finance in Ottawa?  Have you been given any idea of what 

they are? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  Those are 

entirely internal. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I realize that they're internal, and we've heard 

of them on the news.  But I think it would be in our best 

interests in the province that you find out for us what they 

would be so that we can know with some degree of certainty 

what they're talking about. 

 

Also with some degree of certainty how they are going to 

impact on our volume of dollars that are going to flow into this 

province -- the volume of dollars that are going to increase 

because of taxation because they change a few things, and the 

volume of dollars that are going to be reduced as a part of 

grants to the provinces or in any way.  I think we need to take a 

real serious look at what those various studies are going to do. 

 

I would also say that at some point in time the people in 

Saskatchewan should make representation in those areas to the 

federal government indicating our position in each of those 

studies.  And I would think that it was an important part of your 

department's responsibility on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan to do that. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I think that's a very helpful suggestion.  I think that's a 

good idea.  We haven't met with the federal minister since the 

federal budget.  We'll be meeting in June.  And I think that I 

will ask the federal minister for information of that kind.  And I 

will make the commitment to the member opposite that if we 

do get that information we will share it with you as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There are another group of questions that I 

have regarding the price of oil.  I know that is a major part of 

discussion usually.  And it has been estimated that the average 

oil price last year was 18.50.  Was that close to what it was, or 

was that under or over? 

 

And then your assumption for 1994 at 16.50; I have noticed 

that it's trading somewhat less than that.  And I also know that 

this is an average.  And I don't believe we have any indication 

that it's going to move any higher.  Now that is going to 

seriously reduce the volume of dollars flowing into the 

treasury.  You've got a significant volume coming from 

non-renewable resources.  And I think that we need to take a 

look at oil contributing the most and what that impact is going 

to be if it stays less than the 16.50. 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to last 

year, the actual price was 17.40, so the price was less than 

estimated but the volume was greater.  So we estimated the 

volume at about 80 million; in fact it was 95 million.  So there's 

a balancing mechanism there. 

 

With respect to the estimate for the price of oil this year, I have 

to say that that was a very difficult budget number to come up 

with because there was no real certainty as to what the price of 

oil would be.  It was almost . . . very difficult, if not impossible, 

to predict. 

 

We estimated 16.50.  We talked with Alberta and looked at 

where they're at; they are in that range as well.  Somewhat less, 

but very close to that.  So our estimate is that the price would 

be 16.50.  Today it's at 16.85. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The potash, I'd like to have the last year's 

average price and what you anticipate the . . . or what the price 

is today in 1994.  Did it generate -- and give me those same 

numbers -- did it generate more income last year over what it 

was forecast?  And what's your view as to whether it will meet 

that demand this year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- With respect to the revenue estimate, 

we estimated revenue of 58.6.  In fact the actual, we estimate 

now it will be about 51.7 -- so less that what we had estimated. 

 

In terms of volume, the volume was down some.  We had 

estimated a volume of 6.1; it was in fact 5.8.  With respect to 

price, we had estimated a price of 139; in fact it was 134. 

 

Now with looking forward to this year, we're estimating 

revenue at 49.1, which is less than in the previous year.  And 

the price that we're estimating is 138. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When you did your assumptions on volumes 

of dollars, revenue in individual income taxes, did you include 

in that projection of dollars the expected revenue increase that 

you anticipated in the growth of the economy to be included in 

that volume of dollars that you have of $1.104 billion?  Did 

you use the anticipated growth in the province to be included in 

that volume of dollars? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, when we do our estimates for 1994, we base it 

primarily on receipts from 1993.  So it's more based on the 

economic performance in '93 than in '94.  So in that sense you 

could say there's reason to believe those estimates may be more 

optimistic than could be justified, because last year was a year 

of tremendous growth relative to other parts of Canada and 

relative to other years in Saskatchewan. 

 

But to look forward to a question the member opposite 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

may be asking me later, there's a balancing mechanism there 

because although we did not know where the measures would 

be exactly, we knew the federal budget would probably affect 

our income tax numbers as well.  So in terms of growth in the 

economy, perhaps a little bit optimistic but balanced out 

because we did not take into the numbers federal tax increases; 

but because we knew they were there, they were generally 

assumed . . . we assumed there was some cushioning. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I will be asking that question but not yet.  And 

did you use the same projections in sales for taxes -- sales 

taxes, fuel taxes, corporation taxes, tobacco taxes, and others?  

Did you use that same assumption when you dealt with the 

others? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  No, those taxes are based on the economic 

assumptions in the budget for 1994. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Have you noticed a decline in the tobacco 

taxes -- month to month, year to year?  Have you noticed a 

decline in any way?  And I noticed travelling home not this 

past week but the week before, that the police had a barricade 

on the No. 1 Highway, and I would assume that that's the 

reason they had it.  They had semi-trailers pulled over to the 

side and were doing a check. 

 

I was wondering whether you had noticed any changes in the 

volume of tobacco moving into this province that was not 

having taxes collected on it? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  No, we have seen no significant decline in tobacco 

tax revenue.  I think a large part of the credit for that goes to 

the Government of Manitoba.  We have been helping the 

Government of Manitoba in terms of financial help, resources, 

and sharing of information, that sort of thing. 

 

But they have done really quite a spectacular job in ensuring 

that the problem stops at their border.  So that they have been 

very, very diligent in ensuring that the Trans-Canada, as it 

comes from Ontario to Manitoba, is not becoming a major 

transport line for tobacco products coming in. 

 

There is an issue though that we still have in this area 

outstanding with the federal government, and perhaps at some 

point we will seek the cooperation of the members opposite in 

pressing the federal government.  All western provinces have 

written to the federal government and said one of the 

outstanding problems we have is tobacco products coming into 

the Prairies or into western Canada through the mail.  The 

federal government can take action to deal with that problem, 

and we're kind of disappointed because the federal government 

has been very slow to react. 

 

I guess what we're concerned about is when there was a 

smuggling problem in Quebec, the federal government was 

quick to act.  Now that in western Canada we have this problem 

of products coming in by mail, we expect the federal 

government to give 

more serious and fast attention to our problem as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I noticed in the papers an article about a 

gentleman, I think in British Columbia, that was making 

significant inroads into this very thing, Madam Minister, and 

that raised a lot of concerns on my part. 

 

And I guess I don't have the same connections with the federal 

government that I used to have, but I think that it would be of 

some interest to us if, on a private members' day, that we could 

provide some direction in this to the Assembly and to the 

minister.  It would be of significant interest and it probably 

would be of assistance. 

 

The other area that I wanted . . . or another area I want to talk 

about is the liabilities of the province.  And I'm going to talk 

about it from the aspect of some information that the auditor 

has provided. 

 

The auditor states that in general programs the assets of the 

province are 3 billion, the user-fee enterprises which he 

classifies as Crown corporations and those Crown corporations 

providing services for remuneration, those total assets are in the 

neighbourhood of $10 billion. 

 

The liabilities, on the other hand, are, in general programs, 14, 

almost 15 billion; the user-fee enterprises, a little over five and 

a half; for total liabilities of $20.471 billion.  And year to year, 

Madam Minister, we have had a significant change.  Even 

though your deficit and your budget has gone down, the deficit 

in the province has gone up.  And that is, I believe, 

significantly more than the 5.7 . . . or .57 billion dollars that 

you projected in your -- or 5.9, I believe it was last year -- it is 

significantly more than that.  And so the liabilities in the Crown 

corporations have gone up considerably, and that is of some 

concern to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that is relative to another graph that the auditor provided to 

us.  And that one I thought -- and it's on page 19 of the auditor's 

report -- that raised some very significant issues in my mind.  If 

you take the revenue from the general programs, you have 55 

per cent of the revenue is raised from general programs; the 

user-fee enterprises raise 45.  When you come to the 

expenditures under those programs, you have general programs 

spending 64 per cent when they generate only 55 per cent.  

When you come to the user-fee enterprises, they raise 45 per 

cent of the revenue and they use 36 per cent of the revenue. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, says one thing: the money is 

flowing from the Crown corporations into the payments for 

general programs in the province.  That's traditionally been 

done; I don't argue with that.  That volume of dollars however, 

in my opinion, is even going to be significantly different next 

year.  As we go through this year, those user-fee enterprises are 

going to significantly increase the volume of dollars that they're 

going to contribute to general programs. 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

And that, Madam Minister, has a lot of people in this province 

very concerned about how they are going to be able to do 

business in this province and in a substantial way be able to 

contribute to the pay-down of debt in this province. 

 

And those are very fundamental questions that people in the 

business community are raising with me.  They are concerned 

that telephone, power, natural gas, increased costs in insurance, 

are all driving the dollars into user-fee programs which they 

may or may not be participating in.  And they say: don't do that 

any more, we can't afford that; allow me to earn an income that 

is going to generate a revenue on the sales tax and on the 

income tax rather than have it come directly as a part of a 

utility rate increase.  And that, Madam Minister, is very 

significant in my view. 

 

In fact, the Crown corporations are not only reducing their own 

debt, but those Crown corporations -- and I'm using the four 

main ones as an example; some of the others are not -- using 

the four main ones: Power, Tel, Energy, and SGI . . . I'll leave 

SGI out because it isn't really doing that any more either, 

according to your statements.  But those three are reducing 

their debt load, increasing their utility rates, and at the same 

time, Madam Minister, are contributing to the tax revenue of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say that people in this province are concerned.  Why not 

let them have lower utility rates, compete on the international 

markets because we are an exporting country, compete with our 

products in a market-place that will deliver a relatively cheap -- 

not cheap -- reasonably priced product.  And then in turn, from 

the income generated, allow the people to spend it and sales 

and have the sales tax and the revenue come in through the 

sales tax side.  That is far more legitimate -- far more 

reasonable -- to consider that than to raise the utility prices and 

utility rates. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is clearly what is outlined.  And 

this, Madam Minister, is 1993.  And it is going to be 

significantly higher in 1994.  And that has raised very serious 

concerns, not only by us, but by the business community in this 

province.  And I'd like to have you respond to that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all, it is 

impossible for money to be taken from the Crowns and from 

any profits of the Crowns to subsidize the government without 

it showing up in our financial statements.  And if you look at 

our financial statements for last year, in fact the opposite 

occurred.  The government was still subsidizing the Crown 

sector.  So money did flow between the Crown sector and the 

government, but it flew . . . it went the other way; it went from 

the government.  We subsidized them to the tune of $4.9 

million. 

 

So it's quite inaccurate to say that we're raising utility rates and 

we're using that money in the General Revenue Fund or for 

expenses of the government.  We're not.  They were subsidized 

last year. 

With respect to utility rates, you'll want to get into that in more 

detail probably with the Crowns, but I will make one point.  

Saskatchewan has the cheapest package of utility rates of any 

jurisdiction in Canada.  And with respect to what that means, I 

don't ask you to even take alone our budget numbers. 

 

Let me refer you to the budget of the province of Manitoba, 

which was just recently released.  What that budget shows . . . 

because there's a table in the budget which they go through 

exactly what we go through.  They say, well let's take an 

average family.  The family that they're talking about, that I'm 

talking about, is a family of four with an income of $60,000 a 

year.  Manitoba looks at all the taxes and the utility rates that 

that particular family pays and they come to an interesting 

conclusion.  What the Manitoba budget says is that the cheapest 

place to live in Canada, in terms of taxes and basic utility 

charges, is Saskatchewan. 

 

So rather than going out and saying, my gosh we can't take any 

increase at all, why don't you look at the positive side of this?  

Other governments in their own budgets are saying, if you want 

to look at an inexpensive place to live in terms of taxes and 

basic charges, look to Regina.  That's where families are being 

treated most fairly of any place in Canada. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Manitoba at 60,000 to the average, in this 

province isn't $60,000 on an average family.  And so they 

maybe did conclude that a family with 60,000 annual income 

did have it cheaper to live than in Saskatchewan, but that's not 

what I'm saying.  People are saying this to me, Madam 

Minister: they don't believe that we are cheapest. 

 

When we come to the place where we have to go into July to 

pay for the financing of government, whether it's federal, 

provincial, or municipal, and it's into the middle of July that we 

have the first tax-free day, and other provinces around us are 

way less than that, then, Madam Minister, I'm saying to you, 

it's costing us a significant amount of money to live in this 

province.  And that is real. 

 

And I want to say to you that that is very significant, and I want 

to say too, that SaskPower Corporation had earnings, net 

earnings last year considerably higher than the volume of 

dollars that they spent in paying their bills.  They had a 

significant income, a net income.  SaskTel had a significant 

income and SaskEnergy also had a significant income, over and 

above their costs. 

 

That, Madam Minister, was paying for a lot of these services 

that other people don't want to have.  They don't think they 

need them. 

 

And as a matter of fact if I would make a suggestion, Madam 

Minister, and that's this:  it's time to review agencies of the 

Crown like STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) and 

see what really could be done with STC.  Could in fact the 

employees purchase STC and then we'd be rid of that?  It has 

been 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

a drain on this economy whether it's been a Liberal 

government, whether it's been an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government, whether it's been a Conservative government.  It 

has been a drain on the economy of this province. 

 

And, Madam Minister, there are significant people out in the 

country that would take that service over.  It might not be 

exactly the same, but there are significant groups of people who 

would be prepared to take that over and probably run it on a 

competitive basis.  And that, Madam Minister, is important. 

 

The other thing that I wanted to say in relation to this and it 

deals with the liabilities of the province, and the liabilities of 

the province neighbour $20.4 billion, almost $20.5 billion.  

Madam Minister, that is $800 million more than last year.  This 

year, and you add your Crown corporations sector, and add in 

your dollars in relation to the deficit of this budget, and you're 

going to have significantly more dollars added to that $20.4 

billion. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is very serious when we're talking 

about what's going to happen in relation to Quebec; what's 

going to happen in relation to the dollar; what's going to 

happen in relation to what the federal government is going to 

deal with Quebec.  And that's what I'm talking about when we 

have to have significant input as to what we do in relation to 

what the federal government has in it's studies and it's review 

of the various agencies of the Crown, whether it's departments 

or corporations, what they're going to be doing with it.  I'd like 

to have you respond to that, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member opposite, a couple of points -- first of all tax freedom 

day.  What exactly tax freedom day is has to be part of the 

discussion.  Tax freedom day is something concocted by the 

Fraser Institute, and it is a totally inaccurate measure of what 

the average person pays in taxes.  Because what they do is they 

take the number of people in the province and they divide it by 

the amount of revenue that you get from taxes. 

 

And of course Saskatchewan has a high level of taxes, because 

they don't just take income tax and sales tax, they take resource 

royalties -- taxes we get from companies.  Saskatchewan is, 

fortunately, very rich in resources so we get a significant level 

of income -- of tax revenue -- from resources, unlike Maritime 

provinces which have a very sparse resource base. 

 

So it is quite inaccurate when they say July is tax freedom day 

and it means something about the taxation that average people 

pay relative to other provinces; simply not true.  And you know 

my maxim: if you want to know where the highest tax rates are 

in every category, it's a Liberal government -- basic income tax, 

sales tax, fuel tax. 

 

You asked a question here with respect to the auditor's report 

on liabilities.  You've got to remember though, this is talking 

about '92-93, so in a sense this is two years back from the 

current budget year, so it's two 

years old.  And the problems in that year are exactly the 

problems that our balanced budget plan is addressing.  The two 

problems, that if you run deficits, your debt increases; the other 

problem being, as long as you have troublesome projects here, 

which our government inherited, you're going to have big 

write-offs. 

 

So two years ago, you're right, deficits that were too high, 

hence the balanced budget plan to bring them down; projects 

that were not stabilized and required significant write-offs, 

hence the efforts to renegotiate deals and to stabilize them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The year ending 1994, what's that $20.47 

billion figure going to be -- 21.4, $21 billion?  Have you got an 

estimate of that number, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, no.  It's far too early 

in the year to know that.  We'll know that closer to the summer 

or fall period. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Going into the . . . one more observation.  The 

auditor said he is considering making two statements every 

year.  Is the second statement that he makes -- six months after 

this -- is that going to include those numbers that he has, and is 

the Department of Finance going to make them available to 

him? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

opposite, I can't speak for the auditor, but I can speak for the 

government.  The government has passed legislation to ensure 

that financial statements are made available to the legislature 

and the public on a timely basis.  The Public Accounts have to, 

by law, be released to the legislature and public by October 31.  

And I can assure you that we will certainly live up to that 

commitment and have the Public Accounts released on a 

timely basis and within the legal guidelines. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The federal budget made a significant impact, 

I believe, in Saskatchewan in a number of areas.  And a number 

of them I want to address.  The employer-provided life 

insurance benefits is one area where the federal government 

have made changes.  And I believe in the majority of these 

what the change does, the change makes available the focus of 

attention so that the volume of dollars that people can use as 

deductions in filing their income tax are going to be less.  The 

majority of these deal with that function. 

 

And as they do that, it increases not only the dollars that the 

individual has to pay income tax on, but it reduces the . . . or 

increases also the rate at which he has to pay income tax.  And 

all of those will impact into the provincial Department of 

Finance in the volume of dollars collected.  You raised that 

point earlier. 

 

Have you got any idea on what employer-provided life 

insurance benefits will provide in the province?  Have you any 

idea what the difference in age credits 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

for senior citizens will provide?  What changes in the RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan) program that the federal 

government are going to implement in relation to only having 

first-time home-owners purchase with RRSPs?  Have you got 

any idea what the variable in charitable donations under the tax 

credit are going to do?  And that probably works the other way, 

as I've been given to understand it. 

 

Another one that is significant is meals and entertainment is 

going to be . . . businesses are likely going to have that 

deductible reduced.  Well they are -- from 80 per cent of the 

expenses to 50 per cent.  The big ones come, however, in 

changes as it relates to the $500,000 capital gains tax, or the 

100,000 -- I'm sorry -- the $100,000 exemption under capital 

gains. 

 

The other one comes in debt forgiveness; income paid for . . . 

the income tax is going to have to be now paid on forgiveness 

of debt; income tax is going to have to be paid on that. 

Different areas, small-business deductions, a claw-back in that 

area; and also an increase in a part 4 tax on dividends, that's 

going to change there as well. 

 

Have you measured what this is going to be in its total volume 

of impact in the Department of Finance in Saskatchewan and 

what it will take out of the provincial economy in order not 

only to deliver it to the federal government, but also to deliver 

it to the provincial government treasuries? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

question posed by the member opposite, we don't have precise 

numbers because they don't give us Saskatchewan's share of 

these different changes.  But what we have done is we have 

estimates and we've taken a general view of, here are the 

positive changes where we actually have more revenue than we 

had before; here are the negative changes.  And what the 

impact is for the province this year is $5 million more than 

what we would have had if these changes hadn't occurred. 

 

But if you project that two years out and you look at '96-97, the 

changes turn out to be negative $38 million to the province 

because of the other changes coming into effect. 

 

So in the short term it's approximately $5 million change to the 

advantage of the province of Saskatchewan, but by '96-97 it's a 

negative $38 million. 

 

Again we don't have precise figures in terms of how much this 

will take out of the Saskatchewan economy, but when you 

consider that the volume of the economy is $20 billion, these 

withdrawals of funds relative to some of the other changes that 

have occurred will not have a dramatic effect. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be able to provide a list of those 

that provide a positive impact to revenues and those that 

provide a negative?  And the reason I ask is 

that I'd like to know the reason why there is over a $30 million 

negative over the long haul on what those items will be that 

will deliver that.  Would you be able to provide us a list of 

those taxes and refunds and deductions and all of that that will 

cause that to happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite.  I'll give you the list, the itemized list for '94-95, and I 

can tell you where the money comes from in '96-97. 

 

When I talked about the commitments of the federal 

government some minutes ago, I said they had made it clear 

that in '96-97 one and a half billion dollars is coming out of the 

provinces in terms of social programs and higher education.  

That's the province's share of the social programs part of that.  

So that's where that is coming from. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So they have already given you a forewarning 

of where that 1.5 billion is going to come from.  In 

Saskatchewan's share of that, that you already know or have a 

rough estimate . . . or have you calculated that yourself and 

determined what that volume of dollars would be? 

 

And given that, I'd like to have you give me the numbers of 

what the increased income is going to be and separate that from 

what the volume of dollars are going to cost you when you 

have to consider the $1.5 billion that the federal government is 

going to cut across Canada. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- I can give you the numbers, but we 

have to be in a sense, quote, guessing what our share is going to 

be.  All they have said is:  '96-97, the federal government will 

be taking one and a half billion dollars out of post-secondary 

education and social programs.  Some of that the province may 

very well pass on to third parties like post-secondary education.  

So there's that consideration. 

 

We also don't know how that formula is going to work.  They 

have talked about no specifics. 

 

So we're just saying, if you looked at Saskatchewan's share of 

population and share of revenue coming from the federal 

government, if there was a reduction of one and a half billion, a 

reasonable estimate for Saskatchewan might be in the 

neighbourhood of 50 million. 

 

But we have no more specifics on this than you do, because we 

don't know where social security reform is.  From our point of 

view right now, it looks like it's stalled.  But until you get those 

details you won't know the exact impact.  So it's a very rough 

estimate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Therein lies the problem, Madam Minister, 

and that is that some of this is going to be picked up . . . some 

of these losses are going to be picked up by increased taxes that 

individuals are going to have to pay because they're going to 

pay their share of those to the income tax. 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

For example, if I can't use a deduction on capital gains any 

longer, I'm going to have to pay that to the federal government.  

I'm going to have to pay the proportional share to the province.  

I am going to have to pay more taxes in order to deliver that. 

 

And that's the same thing that's going to kind of overlay on the 

volume of dollars that universities and health care facilities 

perhaps are going to have to generate from some place else.  

And that comes from the taxpayers.  It comes from you and me. 

 

And so that volume of dollars, it might be a differential, or 

there might be a positive impact of $5 million this year, but 

when you come to the place, when you come to the place that 

it's going to add a negative $38 million, you still haven't given 

me the number of dollars that it's going to cost in the economy.  

Because those are two different things. 

 

And I'd like to know what that volume of dollars is and how it's 

going to impact in this economy.  You said something about 

$50 million costing Saskatchewan.  Well that is only one part 

of this.  We're paying taxes to the federal government that are 

going to increase too, and that is going to go over there.  Is the 

50 included in that; taken away from that?  Is it a net?  And 

what impact is that going to be?  And I'd like to have you 

explain that to us. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Well to the member opposite I 

would say, Mr. Chairman, I didn't vote Liberal;  I don't think 

you did either.  So I think we're talking about a problem that is 

not our problem. 

 

But if you want the number, it's about $25 million of the 

Saskatchewan economy, with the combined effect of the 

federal and provincial sides of these taxes.  When I say it's not 

dramatic, you have to think about it in these terms -- 25 million 

out of an economy where the level of activity is 20 billion. 

 

But I think your questions point to the major problem we have 

in this country right now.  I don't know the answers to most of 

your questions because I don't know what the federal 

government has in terms of its plans.  And nobody in Canada, I 

think nobody knows what their plan is.  Nobody knows.  And 

until we have a financial plan for Canada, we're all going to be 

here for hours guessing.  And there's going to be financial 

agencies that are going to become impatient about guessing.  

So what we need at the national level is a financial and 

economic plan for Canada. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The 25 million, that was this year's net to the 

cost of the economy.  You have to consider, Madam Minister, 

that isn't a comparison to the whole volume of business in this 

province.  That has to be netted.  There's $25 million coming 

out of net, that's what the difference is.  And that's significantly 

different.  If I took that in agriculture, if I only did 25 million in 

agriculture on 180 or $250 million, that's 10 per cent of that 

volume of dollars. 

 

So it has a significant impact in net take-home pay, and that's 

what we're talking about.  And that's why I 

think it should be considered as a part of what your 

representation to Ottawa needs to be, is that we need to have 

some clear guidelines as to what you're going to do. 

 

Twenty-six studies, in my mind, is absolutely absurd.  That 

means they're going to study the thing to death, and meanwhile 

not do anything that is of any economic significance.  If there's 

one thing that nobody in this country has ever bothered not to 

criticize about, it is to assess and evaluate as a positive, is 

where the interest rate is today and inflation.  Those two things 

were driven. 

 

And I would say a prime minister lost her job and a former 

prime minister was scorned out of the country because they 

delivered on low inflation and low interest.  It's a benefit to this 

man's business, it's a benefit to this province's business, and 

every businessman in this country.  And yet what we have here 

is 26 studies going on while we speak, and to what benefit? 

 

And that is where we have to put the pressure on the federal 

government to finalize some of this and get on with business.  

Because an indefinite, prolonged period of time of . . . I was 

going to say Liberals sitting on the fence, is going to make it 

very, very difficult for the provinces of Canada and the people 

who do business who supply the energy for the province.  It's 

going to take a long time for that to come around if they don't 

make some very concrete decisions. 

 

And that's why I believe Quebec, the issue of Quebec, has a 

very significant and important part to play in how we deliberate 

on this very issue. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Chairman, I essentially agree 

with the member opposite.  I think it was one of your 

colleagues in Ottawa who said he supported short-term pain for 

long-term gain, and that got him into a lot of trouble. 

 

Well I'll tell you, when you go for short-term gain and 

long-term pain, you're going to be in even greater trouble.  So I 

agree.  And we have to have this information, we have to have 

guidelines, we have to have a sense where we're going.  It's not 

the time in Canada to be running government by studies. 

 

And I guess one final point.  Of all the many things they're 

studying, one of the things that they had to study is not being 

studied, and that's the tax system in this country.  They've taken 

a very narrow little view.  Let's look at some fix on the GST 

(goods and services tax), and all the other major concerns about 

the tax system not being fair, being too complicated, being too 

bureaucratic -- all of those are being set aside. 

 

So I agree with the member opposite.  You have to be very 

concerned about what's happening in Ottawa. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Farm Security Act (No. 2) 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce the officials 

who have joined us, before we proceed to clause-by-clause 

study. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With me 

today I have Darcy McGovern from the Department of Justice; 

and deputy minister of Agriculture, Dr. Hartley Furtan; and 

Rick Burton from Ag and Food. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I guess, Mr. Minister, in summary what 

my opinion of this Bill is, is good show.  It's right on; it's what 

was needed, in my opinion.  And I think what we should be 

doing at this time is recognizing some of the essentials of this 

Bill where you have been able to make an agreement with the 

FCC -- and I think that's an admirable trait -- now where all 

farmers are going to be on an even, level playing-field whether 

they deal with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), the provincial government, or with the federal 

government, and some of the subsidiary advantages that will 

now accrue to all of our farmers. 

 

And I think what I'm going to simply do at this time is give you 

the opportunity, Mr. Minister, to get up and simply state the 

intent of the Bill.  And I'll see whether or not there are some 

questions that we might have as a result of your comments.  

But basically speaking, it's what is needed. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 

thank the member opposite for that opportunity and those 

words. 

 

The Bill has two amendments.  One is that we will be 

exempting Farm Credit from our leaseback provisions.  And 

we're doing that because we have a memorandum of 

understanding with Farm Credit which basically says that they 

will provide our farmers with the . . . at least equal provisions 

that provide under our leaseback legislation. 

 

And certainly that's good news and I think it comes of an 

understanding by Farm Credit that farmers in trouble are still 

out there and that the problems won't go away by waving a 

magic wand; that they have to be dealt with and that this is a 

fair way to deal with it. 

 

We're also pleased to see that Farm Credit is basically 

following our policy in extending this across Canada, although 

not in identical form to what we have, but very close to it. 

 

The second amendment that we're making is one that adds the 

right of first refusal and the leaseback rights as property that's 

exempt from the bankruptcy.  As it was intended originally in 

the Bill, that if a farmer went through bankruptcy they would 

have the right to first 

 refusal to purchase the land and the right to lease it back for 

six years. 

 

Because of a recent court case, that's no longer the situation; 

that the court has ruled that this is property under the Act.  And 

therefore by amending the Act to include those provisions 

under the list of property that survives the bankruptcy, this will 

indeed allow farmers who go through bankruptcy to get the 

same provisions as those that go through foreclosure or 

quitclaim or other methods. 

 

There are still some problems with the Bankruptcy Act as we 

see it, but those are federal jurisdiction and we have talked to 

the federal government.  The most notable one is the provision 

regarding definition of farmer.  The federal Bankruptcy Act 

says that a lending institution cannot petition a farmer into 

bankruptcy.  But in the definition of farmer it says: someone 

solely occupied in the business of farming. 

 

And with the tough times we've had in Saskatchewan lately, 

that excludes the majority of farmers because a large majority 

of farmers have off-farm income and do not derive their 

income solely from farming.  And we are concerned about that, 

but it's not within our power to make that amendment to the 

Bankruptcy Act. 

 

So I think these two amendments that we've made will help to, 

as the member opposite points out, create a level playing-field 

and strengthen our six-year leaseback program. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 54 -- An Act 

to amend The Trade Union Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I will 

have a few words to say this afternoon in addition to the points 

that I was making yesterday afternoon 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

while I was speaking to this Act before the adjournment took 

place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess what happened this afternoon underlines some of 

the concerns that the business community in particular, the job 

creators out there, the employers, have about this particular 

Act, but The Labour Standards Act as well.  And I guess in 

general, Mr. Speaker, the trend and the tenor of the 

government, where the government is almost on a daily basis 

showing explicitly why they are not to be trusted, why the 

people who deal with these should do so with a fair amount and 

a great degree, I would suggest, of trepidation on any kind of 

negotiations that they may have with them. 

 

And I guess it is simply because of the track record.  And when 

we review the track record, Mr. Speaker, of this government in 

labour negotiations and other aspects of legislation that has 

been passed, it is a track record that almost defies description.  

Because in so many of the issues that arise here, the 

government seems to be bent upon one particular ideological 

direction from which, Mr. Speaker, from my experience in this 

Legislative Assembly, it is practically impossible to get them to 

change in a direction, let alone stopping dead in its tracks. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the problem here is once more the so-called 

consultative approach.  And the Minister of Labour, among 

other ministers, is very proud from time to time to get up and 

talk about the track record of consultation, how there has been 

this great flurry throughout the province of consulting with 

groups. 

 

Now also from experience, Mr. Speaker, it has been proven that 

very often this consultation and the consultative process has 

included very often lobby groups, vested groups of special 

interests that would from time to time, I would suggest more 

often than not, basically concur with the direction in which the 

government wants to go. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, when there is opposition from a 

particular group, or a particular group has a different point of 

view, while it may be true that the government is consulting 

and sitting in the same room with these people, they are not 

listening, they are not hearing what the concerned groups are 

talking about.  And so they take the bit in the mouth and spurs 

to the rump and away they go in that particular direction in 

which they are so proceeding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, case in point was question period today, when I 

attempted to pursue an issue that I was discussing yesterday 

afternoon with the minister about amendments that were 

supposed to be coming forward.  And he did come up with his 

10 amendments, which reminds me very much about The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

We had the same situation developing in The Labour Standards 

Act as well where the minister at one point, in response to my 

colleague, the member from Maple Creek, made the 

commitment: yes, I can authoritatively say that I will give you 

those 

regulations, in response to the member's question: will you give 

us those regulations before the Bill is passed?  And he got up 

and said: yes, I authoritatively can do that. 

 

And I haven't got the quote with me right now; I quoted it in 

one of my previous speeches.  Now the minister looks shocked 

as he looks at me that, my goodness, did I say that?  Well yes, 

Mr. Minister, we have proven it to you; we have shown you it 

in Hansard.  That is a commitment that you made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that we have seen hide nor 

hair of those regulations.  Now the minister is telling me that 

yes, as soon as we go to committee you will be able to see the 

amendments that we are proposing. 

 

But I stressed before and I stress again, Mr. Minister, that's not 

consultation.  That's not consultation, because you know how 

this House works -- that once we get into the Committee of the 

Whole it will be extremely difficult for members in the 

business community to react to any problems that they see in 

your so-called proposed amendments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that it is not only The Trade 

Union Act but also The Labour Standards Act.  And it's the 

whole situation, the bent of this government, that has so many 

people concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so far I've only been talking about the employers, 

the job creators, the business community that has been under 

attack and has been called vicious and has been called ruthless 

and has been called greedy by this Minister of Labour. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is not just the private business 

communities that are saying that about the labour agenda of 

this government.  I have before me a Wednesday, May 4, 

article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix.  And I know the 

Premier says he doesn't read the Star-Phoenix any more, 

because they're starting to write the facts the way they are. 

 

And so this particular heading says:  "Public employers angry 

at trade union changes," Mr. Minister of Labour.  It is not only 

private business that has this kind of concern. 

 

Ted Cholod says, layoffs possible as a result of your labour 

legislation.  It says, and I quote: 

 

 Changes to provincial trade union laws can only mean 

increased costs to employers and possible layoffs for workers 

. . . 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, that's something that you and your friend 

from Regina Rosemont fail to understand.  That if you put the 

squeeze to employers . . . if that evil word of the bottom line, if 

that dastardly word, profit, is not brought to fruition in the 

business world, there indeed is no incentive for anyone to have 

a business.  And businesses will close down and that means 

loss of jobs. 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

And, Mr. Minister, I'm back on what seems to be a favourite 

theme of mine this session and that is, that in your good heart, 

where you're trying to do well for one group of people and your 

misguided vision, I hasten to add, that very often you're not 

only hurting someone else, you're hurting the very people that 

you're trying to help.  Because those union people, who deserve 

good jobs, are now going to be without a job as a result of your 

labour legislation. 

 

And it's not only the business community, it's not only the 

profit-motivated people that are going to be experiencing that, 

Mr. Minister, because here it says, it's exactly the same thing.  

It says: 

 

 Ted Cholod, president of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, said Trade Union Act 

amendments will mean higher costs at a time when public 

funding is being cut virtually across the board. 

 

 and . . . in some cases, (he continues on) layoffs of 

employees," 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Minister, doesn't that say something to you?  I mean these 

are people that have no vested interest in opposing a legislation 

that you're proposing, other than it's not going to be good for 

the organizations.  Now what organizations am I talking about 

here? 

 

I mentioned Mr. Cholod here, from SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association), but the same association is 

associated with SARM, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities is included in that same category; as is the 

SSTA, Saskatchewan School Trustees Association; and SAHO, 

which is the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, are all, it says, I quote: 

 

 . . . are (all) calling for a series of amendments to the bill now 

before the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, the process of this legislature is 

such that we have to have the amendments available to us so 

that we can do due diligence to them, distribute them among 

those people that are going to be affected, and then be able to 

hopefully persuade you to make some more changes.  Or if 

your amendments are what you propose them to be and what 

you purport them to be, then for the life of me I cannot, I 

cannot, and I cannot visualize why you would be so reticent in 

making them available to us as soon as you've got them. 

 

Yesterday you had a big press release. It said 10 amendments 

are forthcoming.  But you will not allow them to see the light 

of day.  So what sinister motive do you have that you want to 

keep them in darkness until some . . . what you consider to be 

an appropriate time, Mr. Minister?  I don't think your 10 

amendments are as perfect as the Ten Commandments were. 

 

And I had a good quote in the House here yesterday, which I 

thought was good, about the burning bush 

and Moses and so on.  And I understand in the Saskatoon North 

Businessmen's Association yesterday the Leader of the Liberal 

Party here, you stole my line and used it.  And she got quoted 

in the paper and I didn't.  And I resent that too, I say to the 

press. 

 

But I was talking to the Leader of Liberal Party about that, and 

then obviously she said she wrote her speech at 1 o'clock and I 

only delivered mine at 2.  So it's touch on that issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I don't want to make light of an issue that's very significant 

and very important here, Mr. Minister.  So I say to you, I say to 

you right now that before I turn the proceedings over to our 

critic of Labour, who will straighten me out in some of my 

wanderings that I've been engaged in here momentarily . . . But 

I want to do this to you now, Mr. Minister.  As much as I find it 

abhorrent in your hesitancy to share those amendments with us, 

with the legislature, with the business community, the 

employers, the organizations that I have just quoted, that you 

want to do it on the spur of the moment, I am now going to ask 

you this question and I want you to make a public statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that I cannot engage in debate with other 

members, but I want . . . The witnesses in this Chamber will be 

good enough at how you will respond, Mr. Minister. 

 

As reluctant as I am to do this, I will give you the opportunity 

to make a public commitment now, to me, without me losing 

my seat -- because I know if I sit down and let you get up, that's 

the end of me -- but I want you to indicate that if we allow the 

second readings to be concluded and go into Committee of the 

Whole, that as soon as we go into the Committee of the Whole, 

the first action of this Committee of the Whole will be the 

presentation to this Assembly of each and every amendment, 

House amendment, your amendment, the government 

amendment, that will be coming forward; that there will be no 

additional ones; this is what we got; we've got the package; and 

then I guess we'll have to run with it in the usual procedure of 

the Committee of the Whole. 

 

My concern is that you don't piecemeal them out and come up 

with extra ones.  So perhaps that will be one manner of doing 

it.  And if the minister wants to get up, Mr. Speaker, and say 

yes, I agree to that, and take his seat so that the member from 

Maple Creek can get up, then, Mr. Speaker . . . I know that we 

can't do that legally but we sure can do that between the two of 

us, Mr. Minister, and you'll pay the consequences. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave to make a brief statement 

in response to the member's comments. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I hereby commit to the member in the 

most solemn possible terms that as 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

soon as this goes to Committee of the Whole, I will table with 

the Clerk of the Assembly our proposed amendments and that 

will be the entire package of amendments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy 

today to enter into the debate on The Trade Union Act.  I have 

heard your commitment, Minister, and I'm happy to have heard 

that and I want to say as the critic for Labour for this side of the 

House, we're happy with your commitment and we are going to 

hold you to that commitment in just a very short time. 

 

But because I have a job to do, which is to point out a few 

things that need to be considered, I'll take a few minutes to do 

that before we watch you honour your commitment.  So you 

can prepare for that and perhaps lend one ear towards the 

direction of listening to some of the concerns that people have 

brought to me about this Bill. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, The Trade Union Act has not been 

amended or changed for some period of time and the minister 

has very eloquently pointed out that times have changed, that a 

number of years have gone by, and we acknowledge that.  Time 

does go by and things do change and we will need to update 

legislation periodically as we go on through history.  And 

naturally I think it holds true that this Act probably was getting 

outdated and needed some updating. 

 

Unfortunately when the minister talks about updating, he also 

talks about a swinging of the pendulum in his metaphorical 

description of how we should obtain a balance in our society.  

Unfortunately, what he considers to be a pendulum swinging to 

the middle of the spectrum, in many cases for Saskatchewan 

people appears to be anything but a levelling-out or a centring.  

It seems to be a massive swing to the extreme left side of the 

pendulum stroke where the whole gears and mechanism seems 

to have gotten stuck and jammed for the moment. 

 

And we are hoping to bring some sanity and some rationality to 

the minister's approach by debate in a democratic forum that 

this is designed for in this very Assembly.  This process that we 

live with is providing us with an opportunity to tell the minister 

we have passed the centre point, the pendulum is swinging too 

far, he needs to back off just a bit.  He's heard that message 

loud and clear, not only from the other members and colleagues 

in our caucus, he's heard that message loud and clear from 

several members of the business community and even from 

several workers themselves. 

 

And just as I pointed out to the minister during the debates on 

Bill 32, The Labour Standards Act, that there were both sides to 

the story that needed to be be considered, here again the same 

principles apply.  The very same types of people are telling me 

that, Minister, you're going a bit too far.  We need to back off a 

little to let the province evolve with the rest of the world. 

 

The problem that people see is that we are getting out 

of step with our neighbours.  And I have to repeat this 

argument because even though it's very much the same as the 

one used in The Labour Standards Act, The Trade Union Act is 

tied very definitely to the same conditions in our province; and 

those conditions that are most important, of course, is the 

condition of being able to maintain a job base for our province. 

 

If we get out of step, if we get out of tune with society too far, 

obviously what happens is the rest of the world prospers around 

us because we have an exodus of people from Saskatchewan, or 

we have the alternative which is people not coming to the 

province.  If those things happen -- either one -- we lose as a 

province, and we can't afford that loss, Mr. Speaker.  Quite 

frankly, we need more than anything else right now in this 

period of time in history, a development of our job base in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We are in a recession in this province; a very serious and deep 

recession has been going on for a long period of time.  And the 

old adage has always been -- and I remember it said so many 

times all through my life with my old friends and neighbours 

who used to talk politics around the table -- and they always 

said Saskatchewan is first into a recession and the last out. 

 

And I've always said to them, well why is that?  Well it's 

because we're agriculturally based, they said.  That's why we 

get into it first because the world economy fights all kinds of 

problems at the farm gate and the way to slow down an 

over-inflated economy is to reduce the farm gate price of 

agricultural goods because we're mostly agriculturally based in 

this province.  And if you do that you can tone down the whole 

economy of the province in a very quick order. That passes on 

through the rest of the country, and you slow down the 

economy in the whole country, you slow down inflation, and 

you have resolved a lot of your problems by doing that. 

 

Okay, I said, that's fine.  When I'm younger, back in those days 

I could accept that.  We were mostly agriculturally based and it 

seemed like a true analysis of the situation. 

 

Unfortunately as I've gone through life I've come to realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that it's not necessary for us to live on that philosophy 

alone although it is a true one and it does work.  But why do we 

necessarily have to have one location in the country that has to 

go into suffering first economically in order to cure the woes of 

the rest of the industrial parts of our country.  Not necessarily 

that we have to do it that way.  There must be other solutions. 

 

And so I've pondered this and, Minister, I hope you will take 

note of this.  When you change The Trade Union Act and you 

get us out of sync with our neighbours, what you've got to take 

note of is that we don't have to be the first into recession and 

the last out.  We can have a balance with our neighbours in our 

Trade Union Act, in our Labour Standards Act, that will attract 

people and diversify our agricultural base.  And that's the point 

I'm trying to get at.  We don't have to accept these problems 

that we have. We can 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

resolve these problems, and we can do it by diversifying our 

base. 

 

And even if we didn't diversify our base, I still would seriously 

argue whether we have to allow agriculture to be the hit man or 

the body that is hit by society in order to cure all of the 

economic woes of the country -- or of the world, as far as that 

goes. 

 

So we have a serious problem.  Now we've been in the 

recession for a long time and we're trying to get out.  And the 

other part of the adage is that we're the last out. 

 

Well why do we have to be the last out of a recession?  Why 

should we accept that?  Why don't we do something about that?  

And here's the place we can do that.  We can get ourselves out 

of this recession by having balanced trade union Acts and laws.  

We can have balance in our society so that we will attract 

foreign investors, attract other Canadian investors, attract other 

businesses and keep our own population at home because they 

will know that they have a level playing-field on which to 

work, so that they can build and create and diversify and look 

forward to a great future. 

 

Why is it that people look to Alberta and say, ah, things'll be so 

good if I could just get to Alberta -- if I could push my farm 

over to Alberta or move the line over.  Why is there that 

optimism?  Why is it when people look to that area of the 

province or of the world, that they are optimistic? 

 

And here when we say, well I'm going to stay in Saskatchewan 

and work, and they kind of get glum and they get sort of 

looking sad, and it's in the mind.  The mind-set is that somehow 

things are better in Alberta than they are in Saskatchewan.  

Why should that be?  It's not necessary that we have it that 

way. 

 

We can build this province, Mr. Speaker, so that the people 

here can be proud of the fact that they are living in 

Saskatchewan, that they're going to have their future in 

Saskatchewan, and they can have a smile and brag about the 

fact that Saskatchewan is the place where it's all going to 

happen because we're going to have a bright and dynamic 

future.  How do we do that?  By balancing our laws and our 

playing-field for business and labour alike. 

 

So let's get very quickly into some of the reasons why the 

business community is upset with the swing of your pendulum, 

Mr. Minister, the swing of your pendulum that they say has 

gone too far, which I'm happy to hear that you say you're going 

to correct in a few minutes with some amendments.  And we're 

going to look forward to examining those. 

 

But just in case, just in case you're not being quite as honest 

and forthright with us as everybody would hope, we're going to 

use a few minutes here to bring to the attention and put on the 

record some of the concerns that they have.  And then I'm 

going to hopefully have a few minutes to also talk about the 

workers in our province and the things that they're 

 saying about the need for equity and fair play and a balance 

here which even they have recognized is not in this Bill any 

more than it was in The Labour Standards Act. 

 

(1630) 

 

You have gone too far and they say that we've got to back off 

and get ourselves in tune with the world around us.  Especially 

we have to be in tune with Alberta now because that seems to 

be the place where people smile when they hear the word and 

want to go to.  I've heard people say they want to move their 

businesses there.  We've read you letters from people that have 

made that claim. 

 

And I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that these people 

are dead serious.  They intend on leaving our province if they 

can. 

 

One of the things that I find so amazing is that I look around 

Saskatchewan for all of this growth that we're supposed to be 

having, and I can't find it.  I find a little business maybe starting 

up in Saskatoon or Regina or some place like that, but 

immediately it's offset by some great big bunch of people being 

laid off or unemployed, and we've taken one step ahead and 

three steps back.  It's sort of like a reverse waltz or something 

that we're caught up in.  And it's really devastating to our 

province to have that happen. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I'm hoping that somehow we can get the 

minister to stop that trend in our province, where we take one 

step ahead and then three steps back.  We've got to somehow 

encourage development and investment, and we've got to 

somehow encourage our workers to accept the fact that we can't 

have benefits that would put us out of tune with our working 

relationship with our neighbours in other provinces or other 

jurisdictions. 

 

Now when I said, Mr. Speaker, about how we seem to be 

stagnated here, it's amazing that just a few minutes ago I was 

speaking on the telephone to a man in North Dakota who tells 

me that the city of Fargo, North Dakota has continued to 

expand. They have never known the effects of the present, or 

just past recession in the United States, and they haven't even 

recognized the one that we're into in Canada in that location.  

Their population continues to grow from 10 to 12 per cent on a 

continuous basis for the last number of years, and they predict 

of course that it will continue to.  It's not a phenomenal growth, 

but it's steady and constant. 

 

Why is that?  North Dakota can't be so much different than 

Saskatchewan.  In fact, almost all of the weather conditions, 

almost all of the job bases, the agricultural base, so much of 

North Dakota is just like the southern part of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so you've got to ask yourself, what's going on that we are 

in such serious trouble here in Saskatchewan, while North 

Dakota, a state very similar to Saskatchewan in many, many 

ways, with a smaller population -- I think about 600,000 

population --  



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

and here we have a growth continuous, and yet in 

Saskatchewan we go backwards. 

 

Minister, we need to examine these things.  We've got to start 

doing a little research.  I think that what we ought to do here is 

hire some university students to go down to North Dakota this 

summer and do a study on why the Fargo, North Dakota area is 

prospering through these so-called difficult times that we're 

having in Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's simple.  It's all the NDP's fault. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think my colleague said it's all the NDP's 

fault.  And I'm sure that he's right because I just read one of 

these news clippings here that said something to effect that it's 

an NDP plot because they're going to change the D in New 

Democrat to dictatorship -- new dictatorship party. 

 

So my colleague is absolutely right.  It's to do with the politics.  

And that is going to be the shocker that's going to come to the 

minister's attention if he does take me up on this offer to send 

some university students down there to research what the 

difference is between the growth and prosperity of North 

Dakota as compared to the dismal flatness that we are into in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Minister, quite frankly I have to say that you have to share a 

large part of the responsibility in this area, because the labour 

legislation in this session of our legislature is key to our 

prosperity and to our future.  The government's behaviour 

regarding The Labour Standards and The Trade Union Act is of 

course a despicable kind of situation and we cannot tolerate 

this, Minister. 

 

The House agenda has been dictated by Barb Byers and those 

kind of people.  And we know very well, Minister, that she's 

important to you in many, many ways.  But you've got to be 

sensible about this.  Just because she blinks her eyes at you and 

smiles a little, it's no reason to be carried away and expect that 

everything she tells you is going to be the best medicine for 

your government or for the province. 

 

Now you've introduced The Labour Standards Act and this Bill 

caused outrage in the business community, to say the least.  

The government began slowly to perceive that they were 

harming the people they meant to help.  Business began to 

dictate that they were going to be hiring part-timers and 

students this summer, so the government was forced to back off 

on this legislation a little. 

 

Now that's important to note, Mr. Speaker, because this is a 

fact.  The minister has conceded that he has backed off. In 

some private negotiations with the community he has found out 

just how intense the pressure out there is.  And when he found 

out how intense the pressure was, he decided that he should 

back off.  And we're going to try to convince him today to do 

the same with The Trade Union Act. 

I think it's important that we run over very quickly, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the points of The Trade Union Act in a 

general way, that are going to affect the business community 

and the workers of our province. 

 

Now in the case of the business community, the "bargaining 

collectively" is under section 2.  "Bargaining collectively" has 

been changed to include the words "making every reasonable 

effort to conclude, renew or revise a collective bargaining 

agreement;". 

 

We are unsure of the intent of this change . . . this is from the 

business community and their observation, and I'll quote a little 

further here so we can get the gist of where they're coming 

from.  And it says here: 

 

 . . . but are concerned that a Labour Relations Board may yet 

be involved on the reasonableness of bargaining positions.  

This would create a different system in Saskatchewan than 

other jurisdictions and would require the board to be experts 

in bargaining in each industry and experts in each industry.  

This will drastically change the present system of collective 

bargaining. 

 

Now, Minister, it's very essential that we not change the 

collective bargaining system very much, especially if it puts us 

out of tune with all of the other jurisdictions in the country.  

And I think the point is well taken here. 

 

We do need some change but we certainly can't be going to the 

point where we put ourselves out of balance.  And I think that's 

what the folks here are saying, is that they believe that your 

wording is too strong and you are putting us out of balance in 

our province. 

 

Their next consideration was under the benefits of section 

2(b)(i) and 11(1)(i) and 47.  Benefits are defined . . . and I'll 

quote just a little here of their observation: 

 

 Benefits are defined as benefits other than wages to which 

employees are entitled pursuant to a collective bargaining 

agreement before the commencement of a strike or a lockout. 

 

This section impacts on section 11 and 47, in that benefits are 

continued during a labour dispute.  Under section 47, 

employees only have to pay their share of the costs for benefits 

to have them continue during the labour dispute.  Therefore 

items that do not cost employees anything are shared cost 

items, will have to be paid by the employer during the dispute. 

 

Now rather than to have the employer pay the monies to the 

employees during a labour dispute, the section should only 

require an insurance benefit, to continue during a labour 

dispute if the plan allows it, and the union and the employee 

pays all of the costs to maintain the benefits.  Even with this 

there are huge potential problems in this section which could be 

abused. 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

Now you see, even at this point, Mr. Speaker, you see the 

business community saying, this section needs to be modified.  

And even if it is modified, it still could cause us some real 

problems.  But I think what they're saying is that they're willing 

to go along with taking a chance on that if there is some 

modification. 

 

In other words, I think you're seeing the business community 

here handing out a carrot on the stick to the Labour minister, 

saying that they are willing to cooperate and willing to 

compromise if the minister is willing to do the same thing.  

What they basically have said is, you back off some and we'll 

try to live with some of the damage.  I don't think that's such a 

bad position to be taking.  In fact I kind of compliment the 

business community on going along with the need for some 

changes. 

 

And that's what I see in that section, is an offering to a 

compromise to the minister.  And so I'm hoping, really against 

all hope maybe, but I'm hoping that the minister is sincere and 

that his amendments that he will introduce a little later on here, 

that they will in fact be that compromising position that will 

make our province competitive as it can be and should be. 

 

But there are a few other items that they bring to our attention 

here:  the bargaining impasse which is section 11(1)(m) and 

section 33.  Now three concepts in the Bill can be discussed 

together.  Now these are termination of the collective 

agreement, right to make a unilateral change, and strike and 

lockout. 

 

Now this unilateral change is a much confused and much 

not-understood section of the Bill, and it is extremely 

important.  I think this is a case, Mr. Speaker, where you could 

honestly say that a little term that doesn't sound too important 

has immense impact on the world around us -- immense impact 

on our province.  Such a subtle little phrase tucked in here and 

yet it has such a mammoth amount of impact on our province 

of the potential for us to be competitive. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 With the amendments proposed, a collective bargaining 

agreement would continue into perpetuity even during a 

labour dispute.  We would be the only jurisdiction in North 

America which has such a system. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, is the key -- the only jurisdiction in North 

America with such a system.  It's, as I said before in this 

Assembly, it's okay to be the leaders in some areas.  In fact you 

can lay a claim to fame in the annals of history by being the 

leaders in some areas, and you will always be able to feel good 

about that because you've started something in a new direction 

for your province and for the people and for the rest of the 

world to emulate and to copy. 

 

But in this situation, being the leader means that you scare off 

investment, you scare off business, and you close up the job 

base potential in our province.  And that is where we have to 

change this legislation.  And your amendments have seriously 

got to address this 

question. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

 If these sections are to be included, there should be language 

to clearly define the limit, the interim, and the final order to 

give direction to the board and prevent injustice. 

 

Now you have to give this direction to the board.  And you dare 

not, in labour relations, be out of balance or have any kinds of 

injustices because immediately they are magnified throughout 

the whole of our society.  And it's surprising how quick people 

from outside our province pick up on little differences, 

especially in The Trade Union and Labour Standards Acts and 

those things that concern labour and business from a legislative 

point of view.  It's almost a paranoia out in the world. 

 

But even if that is a fact, Minister, then we have to live with 

that and we have to recognize it and understand it and deal with 

it.  Even if they're wrong, we have to treat it as though they're 

right because they have the choice of whether they're going to 

bring their dollars here or not.  So we have to deal with that and 

we have to solve those problems. 

 

Now the certification and decertification without a vote, now 

there is an issue that every person in this country must take a 

hard look at.  But I'll give you their words first before I make 

my own commentary:  The practice of the Labour Board is to 

treat employee support or lack of it in confidence.  No one is 

compellable or competent to testify on these questions. 

 

Now given these rules, it is difficult to imagine how sections 

10.1 and 10.2 could be practically applied in a hearing.  These 

are, all the employees would be competent and compellable by 

any party.  Or if the intent is to preserve the confidential nature 

of the relationship, the section should be amended to provide 

for secret ballot vote conducted by the board. 

 

Now in our society, Mr. Speaker, people have said time and 

time again that we live and breathe by the rule of democracy, 

which is the right to vote, the right to a secret ballot to solve 

our problems.  Yet we have this government saying that in 

trade union matters democracy doesn't matter. 

 

The other day we saw the Premier of this province stand in his 

place and say that democracy is not important here because The 

Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards Act are different.  I 

don't know where it's any different.  I take serious exception to 

what the Premier has said in this regard. 

 

(1645) 

 

I believe that democracy is even more important in trade union 

matters than any place else.  Why should the workers not have 

the right to vote in secret to show their feelings on a ballot so 

that they can express themselves without fear of reprisal? 



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

I've heard it described in the old school yard version where the 

bullies will of course intimidate the other children if they don't 

do what the bigger kids want to have done.  And that's the way 

it works.  I'm not saying that the union people are a bunch of 

gangsters or hoodlums.  It's just natural that they're going to 

apply as much pressure to try and get their way as they possibly 

can.  That's human nature.  If you're trying to achieve a goal, 

you will apply all the pressure that you can to get what you're 

after. 

 

So in the union hall, if you hold up your hand and you vote 

against the union bosses, are they going to forget you?  Not by 

a darn sight they won't.  They'll never forget you.  They are 

going to remember.  They are going to watch you and they're 

going to put pressure on you because they want to win the day.  

They want to win their argument.  They want to be successful.  

That's human nature. 

 

It's also human nature to think otherwise occasionally or to 

dispute your leadership, and the democratic way of expressing 

that through a secret ballot is the only way that works.  It's the 

only way that the bully system doesn't take control of our 

society because we secretly can express ourselves and point out 

what our beliefs and our views are. 

 

I thought for a minute the member from Saskatoon was going 

to join me here, but unfortunately I guess I'll have to carry on 

this debate by myself. 

 

It's good to see the minister taking such a keen interest today 

because we need to get to him the idea that democracy and the 

right to vote is important.  And I think he realizes that we are 

going to be taking him up on his challenge a little bit later this 

afternoon and have him present his amendments.  But there are 

a couple of other points that we need to bring up. 

 

 Even though the democratic right to vote in a secret ballot is 

very important, there are also other things that need to be 

discussed. 

 

 The application pending definitions.  Given the expanded 

power to hear interim applications and the fact that there are 

consequences associated with an application pending, the 

government should consider why this section is required. 

 

 Once it is determined why it is required, as a matter of policy, 

this section should be carefully crafted to deal with the 

problem.  As an example of the problem, can an employer 

file a charge against a union before they take strike vote, 

immediately apply for an interim order and stop all lawful 

strike activities until after a Labour Board decision is 

rendered? 

 

 If the board is going to be given the power for interim orders, 

these sections should be removed.  Then each case would be 

argued on it's own merit. 

Now you see here again we're lumping things together, and we 

need to have a loosening up by the minister so that we can deal 

with issues on their own merit.  And I don't think that's so 

unreasonable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact when you get right down to it, I haven't seen anything 

put forward by the business community that is totally 

unreasonable.  In fact even in the area of certification and 

decertification where the unions are basically going to have the 

power to encourage the board to allow certification without 

even a percentage of vote, the whole thing has gotten out of 

hand. 

 

And we find, Mr. Speaker, that the right, the right of the people 

to be able to express themselves is taken away; the right of the 

business community to be able to conduct a reasonable 

business without a labour board being able to step in and 

unionize their workers without even so much as a percentage of 

a vote of the membership saying that they want to be. 

 

This is the kind of thing that causes people in the newspaper 

industry to write articles like: the D in New Democratic Party is 

going to stand for dictatorship.  That's the kind of thing that 

causes people to write these kind of articles, because they know 

that this is what this kind of law will do.  It will create a 

dictatorship within our province without a democratic vote, 

without the right of the people to express themselves.  That's 

from the workers' point of view and the business people's point 

of view. 

 

It is absolutely unconscionable, Mr. Speaker, that this kind of 

labour legislation would be put in that'll throw our province so 

desperately out of balance with our neighbours around the 

world.  And we need to have that balance. 

 

And we need to have a challenge to the minister to come up 

with his commitment that he gave a little while ago.  And I'm 

going to ask him to now do that, Mr. Speaker -- to give us those 

amendments.  And I thank you for your time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave to now 

move to Committee of the Whole. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to introduce my official, 

my deputy minister here.  No, the members are interested in the 

documents.  Actually the page went to make an extra copy.  My 

office only sent one.  They'll be back in a moment with the 

copies and then I'll simply give one to the 



May 5, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

opposition and one to the third party. 

 

If it's a matter of moment, I can also table it formally.  I seek 

your advice on that, since they're not in the form in which the 

Table is used to receiving them for the purpose of amendments. 

 

The wording is final.  The form -- it's not in the form in which 

we'd have it.  So I was just going to hand the documents to you.  

You've got the amendments.  If you want them tabled I could 

do that as well. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, as long as the 

opposition would get a copy of those amendments, that would 

be fine.  I hesitate to accept his admonition though, that the 

wording on those documents is final.  We hope to persuade him 

otherwise. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what I would do at this time is allow the 

member of the third party then to have five or six minutes just 

before 5 o'clock so that she can make her comments. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  I do 

want an opportunity . . . I guess I'm going to be speaking for a 

very short period of time. 

 

The Trade Union Act is very much like taking a hand-grenade 

to settle a playground fight, in my view, Mr. Minister.  Not 

only is the weapon far too powerful to settle the minor 

disturbance, but innocent people could be hurt in the process. 

 

There seems to be a penchant on the part of the current 

administration to fix what isn't broken, to break what is 

working, and simply meddle in the affairs of Saskatchewan 

people.  And that is of great consternation to so many people 

who have been in contact with my office, whether they be the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association, SARM, SUMA, 

SAHO, and the list goes on.  We're not simply talking about 

businesses in the province of Saskatchewan in the way that 

most people define business; we're talking about public sector 

employees as well. 

 

And I guess it's this kind of Big Brother attitude that is of 

greatest concern to ourselves and the people who contact us -- 

an attitude that has left people feeling quite frightened. 

 

Now the minister, and indeed the Premier of the province, have 

accused both the official opposition and the third party of 

fearmongering, when in fact I happened to receive the same 

faxes, the same letters, as the official opposition, from a broad 

cross-section of people in the province.  And they are the ones 

that are fearful.  We're simply presenting their case. 

 

Since taking power, I think the thing that's most disturbing is 

that the government has used its power in a very intrusive way.  

A way that has brought fear to the hearts of a lot of people.  

Tell people what they want to hear and then do as one pleases, 

seems to be the modus operandi that is running the 

government at the 

moment. 

 

Now when the Premier took office, it seemed as though there 

may be some hope on an agenda based on responsible 

governing.  And I was one of those people, in fact, who had a 

great deal of optimism.  The initial moves to address the deficit, 

to implement some of the recommendations of the Gass 

Commission, I think had many people believing that the new 

government was going to put politics ahead of people.  But 

while some of the public may have a temporary sense of false 

security, I think that the cracks in the armour began to show 

very, very quickly. 

 

And they actually began to show in this very Assembly.  First, 

there were firings of civil servants and the unilateral removal of 

their right to sue.  In fact even though there was an example 

which most people in the province did see as extreme with one 

civil servant, everyone knew that this was an exception to the 

rule. 

 

Then came the cancellation of GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program), the rewriting of legal contracts under threat of 

heavy-handed legislation, and gradually, unmistakably, a power 

. . . a government that was obsessed with power began to 

stagger to its feet after laying for nine years in opposition. 

 

Consultation was a favourite buzz-word of the administration, 

but there was very, very little evidence, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 

Chair, that true consultation ever took place on any single 

issue, whether that be drug plan changes, to agriculture policy, 

to taxation levels and economic development. 

 

And I think what's really unfortunate here is the way in which 

the government has tried to divide and conquer on this issue.  

The Liberal Party believes that it's incumbent upon the 

government to have a non-biased evaluation based on 

consultation and research as to what the effects of their 

legislation will be. 

 

And it would seem to me that if proposals being put forward by 

the Department of Labour are so good, then the business 

columnists and financial analysts of The Globe and Mail and 

The Financial Post would be writing about them.  The funny 

thing is nobody has a good word to say about the initiative 

except the people on the government side.  Even the unions 

have been strangely silent on this issue.  Either they are 

overwhelmingly in favour or they have gotten what they 

wanted and they don't want to appear too closely connected 

with the government's agenda. 

 

This is not an issue which sets up as simply as the government 

would like.  It is not simply a matter of business versus labour, 

employers versus workers.  The fact is the two are inextricably 

linked and what is bad for one is ultimately bad for the other.  

That in a nutshell is the problem with The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you to the Liberal leader for allowing 

me to have the floor at this time, Mr. Chairman, and pursuant to 

rule 55.1 I hereby request 



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 1994 

a three-day hoist on this Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- At the request of the official opposition under 

rule 55.1, proceedings on Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The 

Trade Union Act, are hereby suspended for three days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe it is 

appropriate for the committee to rise and report progress and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: -- The Government House Leader has moved the 

committee rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. Is 

that agreed?  Carried. 

 

The Speaker: -- I recognize the deputy chair. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, under rule 55.1 I advise you that 

the member for Rosthern has requested suspension of Bill No. 

54. 

 

The Speaker: -- So advised. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


