




















































Hansard: March 29, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1219 

 March 29, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, 

today in fact . . . the next item of routine proceedings is 

presenting reports.  Today, in fact, I gather we do have a report.  

I wonder if it would be in order to, with leave, introduce guests 

before we deal with that report.  I think that might work out 

better for most members. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the House, 

guests from Minneapolis, Charlene and Becky Kopetski, who 

are sitting in the east gallery.  And I would ask all the members 

to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Acting Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Martens, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, presents the committee's sixth 

report, which is hereby tabled. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to begin my 

remarks, and I know that it's going to be a little bit longer than I 

had anticipated, but I hope you won't be afraid of my speaking 

notes here. 

 

I want to say that I want to appreciate very much the 

opportunity to present this report.  It has a number of things 

that acknowledge the changes made by the government, but it 

also sets out some examples that the committee has 

recommended to the Assembly that the government make some 

changes.  And I want to outline some of those to you, Mr. 

Speaker, today.  At the conclusion of my remarks the member 

from Saskatoon Idylwyld will be seconding the motion.  And I 

just want to begin. 

 

No. 3 in the recommendations, Mr. Speaker, outline for you 

that the government should move toward disclosing in the 

summary financial statements information on its infrastructure 

investments.  This recommendation is extremely important.  It 

is difficult for members of the Assembly to realize that the 

volume of information that is provided to this Assembly, that 

40 per cent of the information that should come to this 

Assembly regarding financial statements is not made available 

to this Assembly for discussion except through the annual 

reports that are tabled. 

 

And what we need to have, Mr. Speaker, in the  

recommendation from the Public Accounts Committee, is that 

the issue of allowing the information to be presented, not only 

as information but as an information item that we can talk 

about.  And that is clearly what the auditor has suggested to the 

Assembly and it is your committee's recommendation that we 

go and include that as a format for the things that we do in this 

Assembly. 

 

The second point I want to indicate to the Assembly is 

recommendation no. 5.  It notes that discussions on the issue of 

giving the government as a whole an opportunity to make its 

presentation to the Assembly . . . As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

40 per cent of the work done by the government is not 

presented in a budget fashion to this Assembly and I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that it's necessary for us to begin to do that.  And 

that's the recommendation that the committee brought forward 

to the Assembly and is making available to the Assembly at 

this point. 

 

I want to have the committee . . . note brought to the Assembly 

that item no. 7 and 8 is also of significance.  It allows the 

opportunity for the people in the province to have the chartered 

accountants association be the standard that is made available 

to the Assembly, and that standard is to impact on how the 

budgets are presented and how the financial statements are 

made. 

 

Recommendation no. 10 says this: 

 

. . . considered the issue of unrecorded Government 

pension liability and agreed to accept the 

recommendations of the Provincial Auditor, the . . . 

(Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants) and the 

Financial Management Review Commission (said) that the 

Provincial Government of Saskatchewan should record the 

liability for pension obligations and that this reporting be 

consistent across all . . . Departments, (and) Agencies and 

Crowns (throughout government) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor recommended that and we are 

supporting his recommendation in view of that. 

 

Item no. 12 recommendation recommends: 

 

. . . that the interim report issued by the Government 

reflect the financial results of the Government as a whole . 

. . 

 

And here again the auditor, through his recommendations, said 

over and over again that we needed to have the reporting to this 

Assembly done on the basis of the government doing it 

completely and not only the 60 per cent that they normally do 

through the departments.  That's an important part of what the 

committee suggested. 

 

One of the ways the committee suggested that it be done is by 

recommendation no. 13: the government should disclose for 

each government organizations the payments made employees 

and suppliers of goods and services.  At this point, Mr. 

Speaker, they only do 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

this in departments and we need to have this translated itself 

into Crown corporations.  And recommendation no. 13 says 

that they should begin to do that. 

 

There is only one Crown corporation that does that, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation.  And incidentally, that was begun under our 

administration, and I think that needs to apply itself throughout 

the government and Crowns.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

recommendation by the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Timely reporting of significant transactions to this Assembly, 

and I believe that is something that needs to be done as it's 

recommended by recommendation no. 20 of the Public 

Accounts Committee: 

 

. . . the Government present to the Legislative Assembly, 

in a timely manner, information on each significant 

transaction or commitment respecting: 

 

-specific business or public policy objectives; 

-financial implications; 

-management process to be used; 

-legislative authority under which a decision is made; 

-(the) organizational structure; 

-(and the) process by which the public will be informed of 

status or performance. 

 

Item no. 22, Mr. Speaker, took a considerable amount of time 

by the Assembly -- or by the Public Accounts Committee -- and 

we did an audit review of the process that the Department of 

Health is taking to review the health boards. 

 

I believe the auditor's office is reviewing six health boards and 

we, through the help of the Department of Health, went through 

some of these items.  And I believe that we not only got an 

understanding of what was their expectation; the auditor had an 

opportunity to review with the Department of Health what his 

expectations were.  And we believe that the Public Accounts 

Committee is going to have to review these spendings in a real 

way. 

 

Item no. 23 in the recommendations was as a result of a special 

report given by the Provincial Auditor.  He made up a group of 

individuals to help him provide an audit function for his special 

report.  And they include the chartered accountants' association, 

Saskatchewan Government Audit Committee, the Provincial 

Auditor's office, and the Crown Investments Corporation.  And 

the auditor is to be commended for his role in pulling that 

committee together. 

 

The committee also recommended a change to the rules as it 

relates to the Rules Committee, that the appropriate legislative 

amendments be made to require reports to be released when the 

Legislative Assembly is not in session, Mr. Speaker, in the 

same fashion as section 35 of The Crown Corporations Act, 

where documents are required to be tabled. 

 

Recommendation no. 53, Mr. Speaker, dealt with estimates 

dealing with NewGrade under the agreements as expenditures.  

And item no. 53 said this: 

 

 (We want to review) the comments by the Provincial 

Auditor concerning a payment to NewGrade relating to 

royalty remissions granted to producers who supplied 

natural gas to NewGrade.  By the terms of the remission 

orders, producers were required to assign to NewGrade the 

rights to the remissions made.  In the opinion of the 

Provincial Auditor, the payment to New Grade in the 

amount of the remissions constituted a grant to NewGrade 

and, accordingly, was made without proper authority. 

 

And he said that we should make that authority through this 

Assembly, and we agreed with him.  And the committee also 

said that if the remissions of natural gas royalties are to be 

continued to be paid to NewGrade, the amount provided be 

included in the estimates and the Assembly consider these. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is, I believe, a significant amount of work 

that has gone into each of these items, and we dealt with about 

80 recommendations, Mr. Speaker.  We dealt with them I think 

in a forthright manner. 

 

I want to say, I thank the Clerk's office.  I thank the auditor's 

office.  I want to give special recognition to the members of the 

Assembly who provided the information and worked together 

with me.  I want to say that I think we had a certain degree of 

consensus built in Public Accounts Committee, which I think is 

commendable to the opposition, I think, mainly because it was 

less than confrontational, and I believe that it was as a result of 

goodwill between the members.  And I want to say thank you 

to them for that, and I want to continue to work with them. 

 

And I move now, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Idylwyld: 

 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts be now concurred in. 

 

Seconded by Mr. Cline from Saskatoon Idylwyld.  Sorry about 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, may I ask for leave of 

the legislature to make a brief introduction of a very important 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And thank you, Members.  I would 

like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of 

the House, the Consul General of Japan located in Edmonton, 

Mr. Toshikazu Kato, who is accompanied, is standing there 

accompanied by Mr.  



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

Art Wakabayashi, the honorary Consul General of Japan for 

Regina.  Please stand, Mr. Wakabayashi; he's a long-time, 

well-known public servant. 

 

This is Mr. Kato's first visit to Saskatchewan, and he'll be 

meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, departments of Energy 

and Mines, Economic Development, officials at the University 

of Regina, the mayor of Regina, and I'm also going to have the 

privilege of meeting with him following question period today. 

 

I think all members understand the growing importance of 

Japan to Canada and particularly to Saskatchewan.  Japan is 

now Saskatchewan's second-largest export market after the 

United States.  Our exports to Japan were worth $606 million 

in 1992.  Our province was Canada's third-highest exporter to 

Japan after B.C. (British Columbia) and Alberta and slightly 

ahead of Ontario. 

 

We very much welcome the visit of our distinguished guests, 

particularly the Consul General of Japan.  I look forward to 

meeting with him and discussing matters of mutual interest and 

concern.  I'd ask all members to extend a warm welcome to our 

special guest. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to join with the Premier on behalf of the official 

opposition in welcoming our distinguished guest, Mr. Kato, to 

our Assembly.  We hope, sir, that your visit here is enjoyable.  

We also hope on behalf of Saskatchewan people that it is very 

worthwhile, and we know that your personal attention here is 

something that we really appreciate.  So welcome, sir, to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Cline: -- . . . speak on the report of the Public Accounts 

Committee.  As the member from Morse said, under his 

chairmanship the committee has worked very cooperatively and 

I think has worked very hard and has come up with a long and 

fairly comprehensive list of recommendations which I think are 

very positive changes in terms of the accountability of 

government to the taxpayer. 

 

The report speaks for itself and it shows that the committee has 

done a lot of work since last spring when the Report of the 

Provincial Auditor for the year ending March 31, 1992 was 

released, and I want to commend the committee members for 

this.  Also the Clerk's office and the people from the 

Department of Finance, especially the Provincial Comptroller; 

and also the Provincial Auditor because he spends a great deal 

of time working with us. 

The member from Morse indicated that he enjoyed working 

with the members of the committee and we certainly have 

enjoyed his chairmanship; he does a very good job.  And as I 

mentioned in the committee before, Mr. Speaker, I hope that he 

will be the chair of the Public Accounts Committee for many 

years to come. 

 

Now I think what is quite remarkable and impressive about this 

report, I thought, and the transcripts of the hearings will bear 

this out, is that most of the recommendations of the Provincial 

Auditor with respect to the workings of the departments and the 

other government agencies have been complied with.  We had 

quite a few departments coming in and we were questioning 

them about what the Provincial Auditor recommended, and 

most of the time the departments were able to say that they had 

implemented the recommendations of the Provincial Auditor or 

were in the process of doing so. 

 

The report that we have presented has 18 pages of 

recommendations and observations concerning the Provincial 

Auditor's work.  And I'm pleased to say that for the most part 

the Provincial Auditor's recommendations are being 

implemented; they are not being ignored.  And that, I think, is 

what public accountability is supposed to be about. 

 

So I want to congratulate the Provincial Auditor and the 

committee members, the Finance minister and her officials, the 

Provincial Comptroller, and the people from the Clerk's office 

who assist us. 

 

And I want to acknowledge also, Mr. Speaker, just in closing, 

the help and assistance that the new members of the committee 

have had, both from the member from Thunder Creek when he 

was chair and the member from Morse who's now chair, and 

also the member from Regina Victoria who was the vice-chair 

previously and has now left our committee.  But he was 

actually on the Public Accounts Committee for several years -- 

I think about seven years -- and was of quite a bit of assistance 

to me and to other people on the committee and did a very good 

job on the committee. 

 

In closing, I just want to say that I feel quite positive, Mr. 

Speaker, about this process in the Public Accounts Committee 

and what we're doing.  And I really am looking forward to the 

next Report of the Provincial Auditor and to dealing with 

that report in some detail over the months ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few 

remarks to the concurrence motion today.  And it has been my 

privilege to sit on the Public Accounts Committee for over two 

years, and during that time the committee has presented six 

reports to this Assembly for concurrence. 

 

This report and the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the 

year ending March 31, 1992 is an important step that we as 

legislators take on the road to 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

accountability.  And we began this most recent task on 

February 26, 1993 when the auditor's report was referred to our 

committee by the Assembly.  The intervening year has been 

one of much hard work and diligence by the committee 

members, as has been talked about previously. 

 

For the most part, members approached this task in the spirit of 

cooperation and a sense of common purpose.  I believe in the 

process of learning through our questioning of witnesses and 

the examination of documents that we have contributed to the 

learning of others while we ourselves have become more 

knowledgeable. 

 

But we should not fool ourselves into believing that we have 

done all that we can do to serve the public.  The distance 

already travelled on this trail is dwarfed compared to that 

which we have left to go.  And this is not a recent phenomenon, 

for as the Chinese philosopher, Lao-tzu, said 2,500 years ago, 

and I quote:  "A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a 

single step." 

 

And so we take another single step this afternoon with the 

presentation of our report.  And I want to urge members today 

that we must all commit to do more.  There are so many small 

things that could be done at no cost to take the next few steps:  

things like changing the rules for tabling of annual reports so 

that if the House is not sitting, those reports could be tabled 

with the Clerk.  This very small move would greatly improve 

accountability since access to information is only relevant 

when that information is timely. 

 

And it should not escape no one's notice that in two days, the 

material contained in the auditor's report under review will be 

two years old.  This is not the fault of the auditor, but of the 

system; a system that delays the tabling of annual reports until 

sometimes more than a year after it is received by the minister.  

This is a change that we as legislators must support, a move 

that is supported not only by the Provincial Auditor but by the 

Financial Review Commission. 

 

I want to express my appreciation to the Provincial Auditor and 

his staff for the fine work they did with our committee.  Their 

expertise, their knowledge, candour, and dedication are 

attributes which we should all acknowledge and appreciate in 

this House.  And I for one am truly grateful for their help and 

advice. 

 

A special note should be made of the diligence of the dozens of 

capable public servants who appeared before our committee to 

answer our questions.  These individuals along with our 

legislative Clerks with their support staff whose work is out of 

our sight, often go unrecognized for the many hours of work 

that this committee and other committees often demand.  Their 

commitment to their profession and to the people of this 

province is to be commended and acknowledged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in concluding, I look forward to further meetings 

on Public Accounts Committee and to the challenges that lie 

ahead. 

Motion agreed to. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill to amend 

the legislative and Executive Council Act (Board of Internal 

Economy powers). 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Save Our Environment Guide 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to report on the second annual CJME Z99 Save Our 

Environment Guide that was launched this morning with a 

breakfast.  Many major businesses supported this guide.  Major 

sponsors include Dairy Producers, WBM, Sherwood Credit 

Union, and Bi-Rite Drugs who are distributing, at no charge, 

the Save Our Environment Guide. 

 

The guide, Mr. Speaker, is full of tips that are useful relating to 

composting, chemical-free gardening and yard work, water, 

electrical, natural gas, and automotive environmentally friendly 

tips. 

 

I urge everyone to pick up your copy at any Bi-Rite Drugs 

location.  There are environmentally friendly, money-saving 

ideas enough for everyone. 

 

I thank CJME Z99 for sharing with me their praise for 

government departments and Crowns, but particularly for their 

praise for the Department of Environment.  Congratulations, 

CJME Z99 and the many business sponsors of the second 

annual Save Our Environment Guide.  Job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Nations Community Policing Services 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm happy to 

announce the recent signing of Saskatchewan's first tripartite 

agreement with our government and the first nations of 

Poundmaker and Little Pine for RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) first nations community policing services. 

 

Under the agreement, existing RCMP first nations community 

policing services for the Poundmaker and Little Pine First 

Nations will be enhanced through the establishment of a new 

RCMP Little Pine-Poundmaker first nations community 

policing unit.  The unit will be staffed by three first nations 

officers.  To provide a true link to the community, elders will 

also assist police with their work and a police management 

board with local membership will be established to help set 

policing priorities and self-policed community accountability.  

This is the first agreement of its kind to be signed under a 

framework agreement put in place last year by the federal and 

provincial governments, and the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations. 

 

The five-year framework agreement paved the way for 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

negotiations of community tripartite agreements by some 72 

first nations in the province.  This is also a first step towards 

increased first nations control of their policing services.  The 

goal is to ensure that first nation communities receive 

professional policing service that are culturally sensitive and 

responsive to the special needs of first nations. 

 

One of the main principles of the policy is that individual first . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passover Week 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Saturday night at 

sundown marked the beginning of Passover week, the week of 

observance by Jewish people of the preparation for, and the 

flight out of, Egypt by the people of Israel as told in the Book 

of Exodus. 

 

This is not the forum, Mr. Speaker, nor am I the person to 

comment on the religious significance of this or any other 

holiday.  However I point out that we have had only two Jewish 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in 

Saskatchewan.  The population of Jewish people in our 

province is relatively small.  But a time of such historic, 

cultural, and moral significance to our society should not go 

unremarked. 

 

It can be argued that many of the principles at the core of our 

collective existence grew out of this event.  Our firm belief in 

liberty, justice, in religious freedom, and in religious tolerance 

is at the heart of the Israelites' struggle to be released from 

bondage.  Our support of liberation struggles by people all over 

the world has its roots in the famous statement: let my people 

go. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, our yearning for harmony among 

peoples, rather than distrust and conflict is expressed in the 

49th verse of the 12th chapter of the Book of Exodus.  I quote: 

"One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the 

stranger that sojourneth among you." 

 

These are ideals vital to all of us, regardless of our heritage or 

our religious belief system.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

IMI Brokerage Anniversary 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I would like to 

announce the upcoming first anniversary of IMI Brokerage on 

April 1, 1994.  The Duck Lake-based and Indian-owned 

insurance brokerage firm has been doing quite well in a tough 

area of business.  IMI is concerned with the economic and 

insurance status of aboriginals across our province. 

 

Joan Barmby-Halcro, president and marketing director, says 

her company meets the insurance needs of Indians and provides 

Indian bands with a vehicle 

for economic development.  The independent company looks 

for the best investment for the pension funds of various Indian 

bands and employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another fine example of economic 

development and entrepreneurship of the native peoples of 

Saskatchewan.  The people of IMI saw a void in the area of 

insurance needs for natives and they filled it. 

 

I would once again like the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating IMI Brokerage on its first birthday and wish 

them continued success in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Science Fair Awards 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  For a number of 

years, the Department of Economic Development and the 

Department of Education have sponsored trophies and awards 

for the best overall winner in each Saskatchewan regional 

science fair for grades 6 to 12.  In addition, the fairs are 

co-sponsored by ASTEP, Awareness, Science, and Technology 

Education Program Incorporated, and SaskEnergy.  This year a 

total of 11 regional science fairs were scheduled in the 

province, including northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Last Saturday I had the honour of presenting the best overall 

winner award at the Yorkton region science fair, with nearly 80 

entries from surrounding schools -- up from 30 three years ago.  

Several of these entries were from the Saltcoats constituency.  

This was the third consecutive year the science fair was held in 

Yorkton. 

 

I congratulate all participating students for their enthusiasm and 

keen interest in explaining their excellent displays and projects 

to the public.  I also commend parents, teachers, judges, and 

volunteers for their time and guidance.  And SaskEnergy must 

be recognized for its role in the science fair. 

 

I especially want to congratulate this year's first place winners, 

Shawn Sanderson and Amber Chernipeski, and Mitchell 

Stewart who placed second -- all students from the Yorkton 

Regional High School.  These students earned a trip to the 

Canada-wide science fair to be held in Guelph, Ontario.  Three 

other winners earned a trip to the science symposium in 

Regina, to be held later this year. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ostrich Farming 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to try to 

make this statement with a completely straight face because, 

bizarre as it sounds at first, this is good and interesting news. 

 

In Glenbain, near my constituency, three farmers with 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

a new and novel twist on entrepreneurship are into 

diversification in a way that will make your head spin around 

like an ostrich's.  In fact they have converted their farm 

operations to ostrich farms.  A fourth is changing over his hog 

farm to ostriches at the moment. 

 

Just recently the three hosted an information day in Swift 

Current in which they fed to those in attendance, ostrich soup 

and ostrich steak.  They also explained that ostrich hides can be 

used for shoes, boots, and briefcases, and that the eggs can be 

painted and used for unique decoration. 

 

Also, if you're only allowed one egg per week, Mr. Speaker, 

sir, this is the egg for you.  Strangely enough, these African 

birds appear to be highly adaptable to our climate and are 

thriving in the brisk air, just as the CP (Canadian Pacific) 

pamphlets of a century ago said immigrants to our fair province 

would do. 

 

The three farmers are young, they're working together 

cooperatively to expand their herds, or flocks, whatever you 

want to call them.  And not surprisingly, their farms have 

become tourist attractions in a way that hog farms could never 

be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, this is good news, and I do not believe we 

should hide our heads in the sand when we have something like 

this to announce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Moose Jaw Woolco Closure 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Labour.  Last Friday, Minister, we 

heard your Premier give us quite a lecture in here about how 

we should stand up for people and we should stand up for the 

workers of this province. 

 

Today, Mr. Minister, I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

exactly how your NDP (New Democratic Party) government 

stands up for workers in the province.  Yesterday about 140 

employees at the Moose Jaw Woolco store got word that their 

store will probably be closing and they will soon be receiving 

termination notices because of the way your government stood 

up for them.  Mr. Minister, you could have prevented this; you 

had a choice.  You chose to let these people lose their jobs. 

 

Mr. Minister, why didn't you prevent this?  Why didn't you just 

let those workers have the decertification vote that probably 

would have saved their jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That is nonsense, and the hon. 

member knows it.  They had a vote and a majority of them 

chose not to decertify, and the will of the majority was 

respected. 

I want to say, with respect to the closure of the store, there is 

some indication that the store may be reformatted, I think was 

the expression that was used.  We look forward to working 

with them to open the store in a different form.  But the 

majority of the workers made the decision there, as they will 

elsewhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Same minister.  Mr. 

Minister, I have the notice here, and it's very clear, and I would 

quote you what it says: 

 

. . . Woolworth is hereby giving you notice that your 

employment will be terminated at or prior to the time that 

the inventory in this store is fully sold.  In order to comply 

with Provincial Legislation, written notice will be given to 

each of you in the coming days. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you like to talk about driving a wedge 

between business and labour.  It's you who are driving the 

wedge, sir.  You're driving a wedge between these people and 

their pay cheques is what you've done. 

 

Mr. Minister, the workers at the Moose Jaw Woolco believe 

that a decertification vote would have saved their jobs.  You, 

sir, had the power to grant that decertification vote; you did 

nothing. 

 

Mr. Minister, as your colleague is wont to say, there is the law 

and then there is justice, Mr. Minister.  What justice have you 

given the 140 Woolco employees in the city of Moose Jaw?  

Would you tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think Winston Churchill might have 

called that a prevarication. The member knows full well that 

the workers did take a vote and a majority of them decided they 

didn't want to be decertified.  I have no power to interfere in 

that, nor should I.  That's their decision. 

 

We do look forward to working with the employees and the 

owners of the store to reopening in a different form.  The view 

of the majority of the workers was respected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's obvious that the 

minister is stuck in the same old ruts, so I'll ask the Premier the 

question.  Mr. Premier, a short time ago you asked people all 

around this province -- myself, the Leader of the Liberal Party, 

and others -- to join with you in saving the air base at Moose 

Jaw; to do everything that we could to save those jobs and save 

that federal presence.  And I think, sir, you were very 

successful in putting that all together. 

 

Today the Moose Jaw Woolco is in a situation of losing 140 

jobs; the community of Moose Jaw, 140 jobs.  Your Minister of 

Labour gives the same old, tired 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

answers that you and I both know are two years old.  The 

Minister of Economic Development, sir, does nothing; your 

minister from Wakamow does nothing. 

 

Mr. Premier, how about you taking the lead once again and 

standing in your place on behalf of those employees, which I 

remind you, sir, is a huge amount of the workforce in Moose 

Jaw, and let's get about saving those 140 jobs.  Would you do 

that, sir -- take the responsibility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- How about the Leader of the 

Opposition stop playing cheap politics with what is a very 

serious issue for the people of Moose Jaw?  This government is 

prepared to work with the employer.  We're prepared to work 

with the employees.  We are prepared to work with the 

members opposite, even though they don't want to stop talking 

long enough to listen.  We're prepared to work with the people 

of Moose Jaw, with the employees, and with the employer with 

a view to continuing this business and operation. 

 

But the facts which the opposition leader assumes in making 

his comments just simply do him a discredit.  The member 

knows that's not accurate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, that minister continues, 

continues to mislead this Assembly.  Those workers have never 

had a decertification vote -- never.  And you know it, sir.  They 

wanted one and they were never allowed to have one.  And 

now those 140 jobs are at risk.  And he says that they had one 

-- they didn't, sir. 

 

Would you, sir, take the lead on ensuring that these people get 

what they democratically should have in our society?  Would 

you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I'll repeat my comments for the 

benefit of the member opposite.  A majority of them did not 

indicate that they wanted to decertify.  And the will of the 

majority is respected.  We are prepared to work with the 

community, with the employees, and with the owner with a 

view to keeping the store going. 

 

I think that is a constructive approach.  I frankly don't think the 

member opposite who seeks to play cheap politics with what's a 

serious issue for these people . . . I frankly don't think that is 

much of a contribution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My colleague from 

Thunder Creek has shown what kind of damage a one-sided 

labour policy can cause.  Jobs for 120 families in Moose Jaw 

are on the line because 

the government opposite supports the notion that unions must 

come before jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another labour policy which the 

government has introduced in this legislature which will have 

even more of a devastating effect to jobs in this province -- The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Labour:  Mr. Minister, it is 

becoming increasingly apparent that your consultation process 

was a complete lark.  Each day my office is flooded with 

letters, faxes, and phone calls from small-business people, 

people which you should have talked to in the first place.  They 

tell me that you have betrayed them over The Labour Standards 

Act.  They are saying that you told them it was going to be one 

thing then delivered another.  Now that's the old 

bait-and-switch ploy, Mr. Minister. 

 

Just who did you talk to?  Would you supply a list of the people 

that were allowed a meaningful input into this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure whether the member 

wants to be remembered for his comments now that we 

consulted too little, or his comments in estimates that we 

consulted too much.  He appears to want to have it both ways. 

 

The truth of the matter is that we did consult very broadly with 

this.  Those who attended meetings felt they had been heard 

and we attempted to accommodate some of their concerns.  We 

continue to do that. 

 

Unlike members opposite who seek to divide and conquer, we 

seek to bring people together.  We have sought to get labour 

and management working together to resolve mutual problems.  

And I think, notwithstanding the best efforts of the member 

opposite, we're having some degree of success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As usual, Minister, 

you talk too much but you didn't listen.  That's what we said 

last night. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, as usual the rhetoric is thick but the 

answers are very thin.  This is too important an issue for 

Saskatchewan business and Saskatchewan jobs to be playing 

games.  So I ask you to simply answer the question.  If you had 

truly consulted, you would have heard their concerns and 

wouldn't have introduced such backwards legislation. 

 

One small business from Melfort said: 

 

No one will gain from this move.  Small business is 

expected to pull us out of this depression.  Why are you 

trying to kill it? 

 

The potash industry has said: 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

Not only will it deter any enterprises who have thoughts 

about establishing a business in this province, it will drive 

away many that are in operation now and will have an 

adverse effect on the workers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, in your massive consultation tour, did you 

hear any concerns such as those being expressed by nearly 

every small business in Saskatchewan?  If you did not, would 

you listen to their concerns now, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I note the member opposite is now 

referring to the consultation process having been massive.  

Indeed it was.  And one of the things that became crystal clear 

in that is that everybody . . . most reasonable-minded people 

agree that there are some problems which have to be resolved.  

Most reasonable-minded people, be they management or 

labour, want to work with the other to resolve those issues.  We 

have provided them with that opportunity both before this 

legislation was brought here, and afterwards in the drafting of 

the regulations. 

 

We think that has received broad support from 

reasonable-minded people in the centre.  The extremists, of 

apparently which you count yourself as one, we have not 

satisfied.  But we think we've satisfied the majority of people in 

the middle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, did 

you talk to the Battleford Chamber of Commerce?  I doubt it.  

Because if you did, you would have heard this, and I quote: 

 

Existing businesses with head office jurisdictions in other 

provinces with less demanding labour legislation will be 

seriously looking at withdrawing their services from such 

a demanding workplace atmosphere.  We respectfully 

submit to you that the proposed changes to the provincial 

Labour Standards Act will increase unemployment. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is what you would have heard had you really 

been consulting with small-business people.  But I submit to 

you that you either weren't listening or you didn't tell the full 

story. 

 

Now let's start with something simple, Mr. Minister.  Will you 

wake up, give your head a shake, and take a long, hard look at 

what your Act will be doing to the working people of this 

province?  Will you do that for us today, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As a matter of interest, I did meet 

with the North Battleford Chamber of Commerce.  I felt them 

to be a reasonable group, and I felt their suggestions were 

reasonable.  As was the case everywhere where reasonable 

suggestions were made, we tried to incorporate them into the 

proposal.  In some ways that happened. 

With respect to the whole issue of whether or not this 

legislation is going to inhibit economic development, as I said 

last night in estimates, it has forever been the cry of those who 

for whatever reason don't want to do anything, that it will drive 

away jobs.  Well we say that's just not good enough.  There are 

some problems here which have to be resolved.  We think, and 

we think the majority of people agree, that these problems can 

be resolved without creating any unemployment and without in 

any way inhibiting the recovery which is now in progress. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it is 

obvious that you didn't talk to the quick food service industry.  

I did, and they told me that they didn't hear a thing from you or 

your department.  If you had heard what they had to say about 

your legislation, you wouldn't have proceeded with it.  No one 

with jobs as their priority would have brought it forward. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have said over and over that your changes 

will cost business about $9 million.  Well that's absolute bunk.  

The quick service industry tells me that they have 325 

restaurants in Saskatchewan with 15,000 employees and a 

payroll of $130 million.  Just one section of your Act dealing 

with the mandatory pay for statutory holidays will cost that 

industry several millions of dollars. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, how can you tell the working people in this 

province that this is good for them when they won't be able to 

find jobs?  Shouldn't your priority be to create employment 

rather than line-ups at either the unemployment or the welfare 

offices? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I want to say 

that I appreciate the member's input and assistance when 

dealing with general principles.  I do react very cautiously 

when the member starts to deal with figures.  I've never seen 

any evidence that members opposite can deal with one zero, 

never mind five or six, as was in your figure. 

 

As a matter of interest, I'm going to be meeting with some 

people in the fast food industry.  I'll be interested in getting 

their views.  I think they will find after we've had a discussion 

that the legislation is something that they can live with, and at 

the end of the day they will be reasonably satisfied with where 

they're at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question as 

well is to the Minister of Labour today.  Mr. Minister, the Price 

Waterhouse study indicated that changes to labour standards 

would cost employees $9.5 million annually.  At a meeting of 

concerned businesses Friday evening in Saskatoon, a Price 

Waterhouse representative admitted that the study had not 

accurately costed some of the provisions in the Act because 

calculations were based on a draft of 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

a Bill which now differs dramatically in content and in intent 

from what they had to work with originally. 

 

Mr. Minister, your department is quoting as gospel a costing 

analysis which its own creators admit is incomplete.  Will you 

agree to withdraw the amendments to The Labour Standards 

Act until a comprehensive costing study and a full consultative 

process with business and workers has been undertaken?  Will 

you agree to reintroduce this Bill later after this has been done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the Liberals opposite, who on 

this issue as on so many are indistinguishable from those on 

your right, I say to the Liberals opposite, there are some 

problems here which need to be resolved.  We think this 

legislation provides a reasonable process and a reasonable 

framework for resolving those issues. 

 

We had a costing done by a reputable firm; we rely upon their 

figures.  I want to remind the member opposite that the cost of 

this is about one-tenth of one per cent of payroll.  Let's suppose 

they're out by 50 per cent.  That makes it one-sixth of one per 

cent of payroll.  That is still a manageable figure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I met yesterday with 12 

representatives of the fast food industry.  And as you've been 

told today, they represent 15,000 people in Saskatchewan as 

their employees. 

 

Most of their employees are part-time workers whose jobs may 

be put at risk as the result of your legislation because it will 

force employers to offer additional hours to seniority 

employees.  Now these part-time workers are at risk because 

the proposed seniority and scheduling rules will force 

employers to eliminate the flexibility that they offer to students 

who need that flexibility, and to working mothers. 

 

Mr. Minister, exactly what consultation did you have with 

workers in the fast food industry about the implications of these 

proposed changes on their lives?  The workers, Mr. Minister.  

And can you tell me exactly what efforts were made to bring 

part-time employees in this province together to hear the pros 

and cons of this legislation which is going to change their 

lives? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know, Mr. Speaker, the extent 

to which it's appropriate to continue to discuss the details of 

legislation in question period -- legislation which is before the 

House.  Let me say that in most communities we invited the 

local chamber of commerce to organize a meeting at which I 

would speak and at which I would take questions, and we did 

both.  And in most communities that's what happened.  The 

chamber of commerce invited their membership to come out to 

the meeting and they did, and we had a useful exchange. 

So if the hon. member opposite believes that the meetings were 

unrepresentative, then you're accusing the chamber of 

commerce of organizing unrepresentative meetings because in 

all cases it was they who organized the meetings.  And in 

almost all cases they were useful meetings and there was a 

useful exchange of information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, owners of major fast food 

operations in Saskatchewan are warning that the seniority and 

scheduling provisions of this proposed Act may force them to 

eliminate between 30 and 35 per cent of their part-time 

positions, positions that are held largely by women and by 

students.  These employers are absolutely incensed that not one 

of their operations was surveyed or consulted about this 

legislation at any time and they unequivocally have stated, at 

any time, Mr. Minister. 

 

Have you ever invited the individual owners of restaurants and 

fast food operations to meet with you for a consultative session 

on this legislation?  Yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I said earlier, if the member had been 

listening instead of preparing her comments, I said earlier that 

in fact I was meeting with them tomorrow, and I will be 

meeting with them tomorrow.  I said that earlier in the question 

period. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member that, as was the case in first 

reading when you voted against it without seeing it, you now 

argue strenuously against it without knowing how it's going to 

operate.  I really suggest the members opposite might take 

some time to consider how the Bill's actually going to operate. 

 

It is not going to . . . it is not a doomsday.  The members 

opposite might try to be a little less political about this issue 

and a little more understanding of the complexity of the issues 

involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, there's only one group in this 

House that's being political. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Last question to the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, there's only one group who's 

being political in this particular Chamber, and it's not on this 

side of the House. 

 

What I find most interesting is that your idea of consultation is 

what's called retroactive consultation.  Retroactive consultation 

people don't want; they want to be talked to and listened to 

beforehand. 

 

On the one hand, Mr. Speaker, you would have us believe that 

this will come at minimal cost to business and will not destroy 

any jobs in Saskatchewan.  On the other hand, dozens and 

dozens of businesses who employ thousands of people, most of 

them part-time, businesses who pay millions of dollars in taxes 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

annually, are telling me that you did not take the time to consult 

with employers or with workers.  They say that you're ramming 

this through without hearing their concerns.  In fact, all of them 

said, all you did was speak; you never . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please come 

to order.  Order.  Just for the edification of the Government 

House Leader, there really isn't a supplementary question.  She 

asked a new question; the member's entitled to ask her 

question.  Order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you indicate that now after 

the fact you're going to be meeting with these people 

tomorrow.  Would you agree to meet immediately with people 

who are both employers and employees who are going to be 

affected by this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know when we're going to 

complete the process, Mr. Speaker, just remove that narrow 

aisle between the two parties.  They operate in complete unity 

on this issue, as they operate on all others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to say with respect to the 

Liberals and Conservatives opposite, we have sought to get 

workers and management together and get them working 

together to arrive at a solution to some mutual problems.  You 

seek to divide and conquer.  I ask Liberals and Tories opposite, 

who's being political? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Establishment of Group Home in Regina 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to respond to two questions the 

Government House Leader took notice of on Friday, March 25, 

regarding Dales House children's home.  The member from 

Regina North West had asked this question, two questions, and 

I was meeting in Saskatoon with the Children's Council, Mr. 

Speaker, so . . . the founding meeting of the Children's Council 

which will advise us on the child action plan, so I apologize for 

not being here. 

 

The two questions the member asked, first question was: what 

consultations took place before the decision was made to 

purchase the home in the neighbourhood?  Mr. Speaker, as the 

member knows, I met and went over this in detail with her on 

March 3, but I'm quite happy to review it again here. 

 

Realtors took -- working for the SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation), Mr. Speaker -- did a 

search in the city.  They located four potential locations as sites 

for this children's group home, and identified that Normanview 

was the best alternative.  Once the site was determined and 

prior to the zone finalization from the city, the director of the 

Dales House advised the community association of our interest 

in the property and asked for his advice on 

how we could work with the community. 

 

The president suggested a mail drop and this was done, Mr. 

Speaker.  The director and the assistant director also met with 

the president and several others in the community association 

after we did the mail drop.  The following day we attended a 

community meeting, public meeting, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I think the minister knows that 

he cannot take a lengthy period of time in asking . . . Order.  

The member cannot take a lengthy period of time in coming to 

this House and answering a question.  He must answer it in the 

same period of time as if a question were asked in the House 

directly to him. 

 

I want the member to . . . I will give the Government House 

Leader just a few seconds just to calm down.  Would he?  I ask 

the Minister of Social Services to please put his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry.  This is a very 

serious issue and has been a fairly high community profile on 

the issue.  I'm trying to answer it as best I can.  And I would 

repeat, I mean I don't have to answer it at all because I've met 

with the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- All right, next question. 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Economic Development.  Minister, McDonald's 

Restaurants has recently written to us asking for assistance.  

They have told us that, and quote:  the implementation to the 

food services industry of your labour legislation that is coming 

up . . . and they have said that, and I want to quote: 

 

It is clear that the proposed amendments will result in 

significant increases to labour costs, making it almost 

impossible for businesses to operate to sustain their 

current employment levels. 

 

Alex Marion says in his letter that in fact their early indications 

are that your legislation you are trying to impose could result in 

a lose of 40 jobs per restaurant -- 40 jobs per restaurant.  And 

that's only for one chain, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Minister for Economic Development, surely this is of 

some interest to you.  If jobs is your priority, will you admit 

that your cost of employment analysis is fundamentally 

flawed?  Pull this legislation, Minister.  Have your Minister of 

Labour pull this legislation, start over, start from scratch, and 

let's have some meaningful consultation and start over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- These questions are beginning to 

sound an awful lot alike, whether they come from the Liberals 

or the Tories. 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

I want to say with respect to members opposite, all of you who 

are all asking the same questions, the member from Saskatoon 

River Heights and I did meet in fact with the food services and 

restaurant operators in Saskatoon.  We met with them, we 

received some comments from them, and indeed, the proposal 

which came forward was modified as a result of that in order to 

accommodate their needs. 

 

I think we have accommodated the needs of that industry.  We 

will see when I meet with them.  But I think we've largely 

accommodated them. 

 

And I think members opposite who try to fan fears and fan 

flames, I think, are creating a good deal of unnecessary expense 

and a good deal of unnecessary worry.  I think if the members 

opposite took a little more time to understand what we're doing 

and spent a little less time trying to create mischief, the 

community in Saskatchewan would be better off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to question 

no. 44, I request that it be converted to motion for return 

(debatable). And further, I would table the answer to question 

45. 

 

The Speaker: -- Forty-four, convert (debate), and 45, the 

answer has been tabled. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Board of Internal Economy 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak to a motion that is fundamentally important, I think, to 

everyone in this House.  And I will move that motion at the end 

of my remarks. 

 

My motion today is a result of recent events that have come to 

light regarding the functioning of the Board of Internal 

Economy.  We have a situation in this province where the body 

that is entrusted with making the rules for all members has no 

power to enforce those rules. 

 

What is this creature we know as the Board of Internal 

Economy?  Well according to our Members' Handbook, and I 

quote: 

 

In May 1981, through an amendment to The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, the Board of Internal 

Economy was created to emphasize the responsibilities of 

parliamentarians for the general administration of the 

Legislative Assembly.  The establishment of the Board 

also served to reaffirm the independence of the legislative 

from the executive branch of government. 

 

Currently, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act sets out the membership and parameters of 

operation for the board in sections 68, 50, and 58.1. 

 

I think it important to review for all members those sections, 

starting with section 68.7, entitled, board established.  This 

section prescribes the make-up of the seven-person board.  And 

for the record, Mr. Speaker, in accordance with that section of 

the Act, the current membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy is chairperson, the member from Saskatoon Nutana; 

and six members:  the member for Melfort, the member for 

Moose Jaw Palliser, the member for Prince Albert Northcote, 

the member for Humboldt; and from the opposition, the 

member for Thunder Creek and myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 68.7 goes on to describe what constitutes 

a quorum of the board, and the amount that members of the 

board will be paid for attending meetings. 

 

The next section, section 68.8, further describes eight functions 

of the Board of Internal Economy that fall into these three 

categories. 

 

First, the administration of the Legislative Assembly office, the 

office of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, and 

Legislative Library.  Second, the allocation of space within the 

Legislative Building and the provision of maintenance, 

furnishings, and services required in this building.  And thirdly, 

the provision of a security system in the Chamber and 

members' offices. 

 

In section 50(3) of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, we find the following additional functions of the 

Board of Internal Economy pertaining to members' allowances. 

The board may issue directives determining the amount, the 

method of calculation, and manner of payment of: first, an 

annual expense allowance; second, a per diem expense 

allowance; thirdly, a travel allowance; fourth, a telephone 

allowance; fifth, an allowance for office expenses or secretarial 

expenses; and lastly, for both an allowance for postal, 

advertising, and other communication expenses as well as 

several other less notable allowances. 

 

The role of the board is further defined in subsection (4) of 

section 50 of the Act, and I quote directly: 

 

The board may issue directives prescribing any terms and 

conditions that it considers appropriate on an allowance 

determined pursuant to subsection (3). 

 

And lastly, the Board of Internal Economy functions are 

detailed in section 58.1 which deals with benefits that the board 

may establish regarding group life insurance, long-term 

disability insurance, and other insurance, and the 

superannuation plan. 

 

Which brings me to the point of this discussion so far, Mr. 

Speaker, which is, what is wrong with this picture?  Well I'll 

tell you what I see wrong. 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

It has recently become evident that nowhere in The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act is there any provision 

whatsoever for the Board of Internal Economy to enforce the 

powers that the Act has given it. 

 

To me this begs the question, how could this board operate for 

13 years without ever being required to enforce its rules and 

directives?  And I would like to think that the legislators who 

are responsible for this Act were optimistic and trusting souls 

who never anticipated any abuses and therefore never provided 

for any enforcement. 

 

But in manners concerning the expenditure of public funds in 

the most direct of ways, we as legislators, law enforcers, and 

public servants, cannot afford to have any ambiguity about how 

we conduct business at the very core of our system.  It is 

unfortunate that there are two sitting members who are 

currently before the courts regarding alleged breaches of the 

very regulations that the Board of Internal Economy is charged 

with administering. 

 

And I will not discuss those cases, as they are, as I've said, 

before the courts.  But I think we need to look at these 

situations and ask ourselves this question, Mr. Speaker: how 

could we have prevented those situations from developing? 

 

I believe that there is some onus on the government to provide 

a stronger statutory framework on which the Board of Internal 

Economy operates; one that would remove the ambiguity that 

continues to surround payment of allowances and the rules that 

guide those payments. 

 

And now we're faced with a third situation where a member has 

been accused of using his communications allowance for 

producing material of a, what is "blatantly partisan nature," 

contrary to section 8 of the communication directive no. 4 

issued by the Board of Internal Economy, as well as being 

accused of using material which solicits donations to a political 

party or attendance at a political function. 

 

As members will know, this matter first arose on March 8 of 

this year when the member from Moosomin brought it to the 

House as a point of privilege.  In a ruling on March 9, Mr. 

Speaker, you made the following points with respect to the 

Board of Internal Economy and the reasons why this matter 

should not be dealt with by this Assembly. 

 

The salient portions of your ruling that pertain to my motion 

today are, and I quote: 

 

The Board of Internal Economy is not a legislative 

committee . . . And further, the Board of Internal Economy 

does not have the basic powers of legislative committees, 

that is, the power to call for persons, papers and records 

and to examine witnesses under oath. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the next step in the events that have led 

us here today was the calling of a meeting of 

the Board of Internal Economy on March 17, where members 

of the opposition attempted to raise this alleged breach for 

discussion and investigation. 

 

At that meeting I asked for clarification of where the statutory 

authority for the board to establish rules is found and where the 

authority for the board to enforce rules is found. 

 

The answer to the first part of my question is, as I've already 

outlined, found in sections 50, 58.1 and 68.7.  But the answer 

to the second part of my question, Mr. Speaker -- where is the 

authority for the board to enforce its rules found? -- was 

staggering in its simplicity.  There is none.  There is no 

authority with which the Board of Internal Economy can even 

investigate the current charges against the member from 

Yorkton, much less any authority or enforcement mechanism to 

penalize any breaches if they were proven. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of that meeting, the board 

recommended that your staff seek to obtain from other 

jurisdictions their determination of what partisan 

communication means.  I believe that this is a positive move 

toward clarifying our communications directive no. 4.  

However I must say that given the restrictions that are inherent 

in our mandate, we could do little else.  And so I maintain that 

we've merely addressed a symptom without getting at the real 

problem we face. 

 

The Board of Internal Economy, we learned, did not have the 

statutory authority to call the member in question to explain the 

circumstances or to order any form of restitution, should the 

board determine that that was warranted.  This has created a 

highly questionable situation that is unfair, not only to the 

member from Yorkton, but to every member in this House. 

 

Clarification of what is partisan communication and what is not 

will not correct this serious deficiency in how the Board of 

Internal Economy operates.  That issue is merely a 

smokescreen that is being used to deflect what the real issue is 

here -- where is the accountability of members of this House to 

the people we represent if we cannot be held to the simplest of 

guidelines regarding our own expenditures? 

 

Members of this House from all three political parties 

collectively wring their hands over the poor perception that 

much of the public has about us and the work that we do.  And 

all three political parties have made statements about their 

commitment to democratic reform.  But, Mr. Speaker, it'll be 

our actions that speak much louder than words. 

 

Since the first day that I sat on the Board of Internal Economy, 

which was January 6 of this year, I've attempted to bring 

forward the matter of an independent commission to examine 

all aspects of indemnities and allowances paid to members of 

the legislature.  My attempts have been met with personal 

attacks, with stalling, and outright subterfuge by the 

government members on the board. 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

And I must sometimes remind myself that these members sit on 

the same side of the House as does the Minister of Finance who 

on her recent budget summary card makes the following claim, 

and I quote: 

 

Three basic steps are helping us to achieve our goal. 

 

And what is the no. 3 on that card, Mr. Minister? 

 

Making government more accountable to the people it is 

elected to serve by: 

 

appointing an independent commission to review MLA 

salaries and benefits; 

 

And where is this commission, I ask.  For three months I've 

been waiting for the member for Prince Albert Northcote to 

honour his commitment to call a meeting just to discuss the 

terms of reference of this proposed commission.  But when 

reading the Minister of Finance's statement, one would think 

the commission was already in action, doing its work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have only to look next door to Manitoba 

where an independent commission has just delivered a report 

on this very matter.  And I'll be sending a copy of the terms of 

reference to the Premier and members of the Board of Internal 

Economy in the next few days so that we can at last begin to 

lay the groundwork for the task at hand. 

 

We as members have everything to lose and nothing to gain by 

continuing to wrangle about details such as, and I quote: what 

is the definition of partisan?  We must move immediately to 

clean up our collective act without regard to the ownership of 

the democratic agenda. 

 

In the process of contacting other jurisdictions regarding their 

enforcement mechanism for the Board of Internal Economy, 

my office has spoken with the Clerk's office in Manitoba.  We 

were advised that two years ago their equivalent of the Board 

of Internal Economy, which they called the Legislative 

Assembly Management Commission, received information that 

a claim had been paid to a member that contravened the 

guidelines that their commission had set.  That payment was for 

office renovations in the amount of $3,500. 

 

According to the spokesperson from that Clerk's office, there is 

no statutory authority in The Legislative Assembly 

Management Commission Act to adjudicate and enforce its 

rules.  But there is a policy and there is a will to do the right 

thing, and the right thing was done.  The Management 

Commission reviewed the evidence, concluded that a breach 

had occurred, and ordered the member, a cabinet minister, to 

pay restitution in the amount of $3,500. 

 

Now why is it so difficult for us to find the will to simply do 

the right thing?  My request today is simple.  I'm asking that the 

Board of Internal Economy be 

given the authority, through an amendment to The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, to allow the board the 

ability to require the attendance of any member of this House to 

appear before the board when questions regarding the member's 

expenditure of allowances arise; and to make an order of 

restitution from a member where the board has determined that 

a breach of the directive has occurred.  By making the Board of 

Internal Economy a standing committee of this Legislative 

Assembly, we would accomplish these objectives. 

 

There is precedent for this, Mr. Speaker, in Alberta, where the 

Member Services Committee is one of eight standing 

legislative committees; and incidentally, where expenditures 

from members' communications allowances are made only 

after an item being purchased, be it a newsletter, advertisement, 

or sign, has been examined to determine if it meets the 

non-partisan criteria of the guidelines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge members of this House to speak with a 

common voice today and support the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government to act 

immediately to address the deficiencies in The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act regarding the 

functioning of the Board of Internal Economy, specifically 

to allow: (1) the board to be classified as a committee of 

the legislature with the powers and abilities of all other 

legislative committees; (2) the board to be empowered to 

enforce the rules and directives that it creates. 

 

I so move. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take my place in this Assembly today to speak in favour 

of the motion brought forward by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone.  As the member has laid out . . . and I'm certain that 

your office and certainly members from around this House, 

certainly members on the opposition side of the House have 

spoken out very loudly regarding this whole issue. 

 

The problem that has been raised was brought to the attention 

of this Assembly by our caucus some time back, and we 

certainly appreciate the fact that the Leader of the Third Party 

has also joined with us in publicly bringing forward this 

resolution to bring the concerns that we've been raising and 

many members of this Assembly have been raising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spoken repeatedly in this House about 

the changing nature of politics in this province and indeed 

across the country.  We find, as we found at our recent annual 

meeting, in fact was just last Saturday, three or four days ago, 

the public is calling us to a higher standard than in the past. 

They are calling for greater accountability by their politicians. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that that is 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

something that will continue, and will continue on until we as 

politicians come to the point of indeed basically putting out 

everything as open and as publicly as we possibly and 

physically can. 

 

One of the most glaring examples in the past of the abuse of 

parliamentary privilege and of the lack of public accountability 

has been the operation of the Board of Internal Economy.  Mr. 

Speaker, the ability of the members of this Assembly to set our 

own wages and perks in secret was perhaps the biggest single 

feature that was bringing the operation of parliamentary 

democracy into disrepute in the public's eyes.  That even the 

government recognized the need to correct this shows how 

urgently this and other reforms are needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without the confidence of the people in the 

process and the politicians who use it, government cannot be 

expected to function properly.  To make the operation of the 

Board of Internal Economy open to the public and subject to 

verbatim review by the press and by everyone else in the 

province was a small and easy step to take, but very significant 

in the eyes of the public. 

 

It would take only the smallest measure of further courage and 

forthrightness on the part of the government to adopt the 

recommendations of this resolution.  And I trust that this is not 

too much to ask of the members opposite, at least I sincerely 

hope it isn't. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, this motion isn't exclusively or even 

particularly about the wage-setting function of the Board of 

Internal Economy.  This motion refers to the various serious 

matters of the disciplinary functions of the Board of Internal 

Economy, brought to public attention by our caucus. 

 

For politicians to be able to regain the trust of the public, we 

must act forthrightly.  Yet to do that, there must be clear 

guidelines and clear penalties for misconduct.  Without clear 

guidelines, we will continue to wander in the dark, never 

knowing when we will stumble over a rock that we did not 

know was there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a member of this Assembly I have sought on 

numerous occasions guidance from the individuals working in 

legislative accounts.  And I appreciate the guidance that they 

have given.  The reason being, Mr. Speaker, as MLAs, as 

individuals, sometimes it would seem to be easy to look at rules 

and say this is what the rules mean. 

 

But when the rules are somewhat vague and ambiguous, you 

always want to check with someone else to get their 

understanding so that in applying the principles of the rules and 

certainly making use of the allowances that are entrusted to our 

care, Mr. Speaker, we are doing it in the best possible manner 

that we have available to us so that the public can look back at 

each one of us and understand that we have done the best we 

can, that we have indeed used the funds entrusted to our care 

very carefully, and that we are indeed putting ourselves well 

above disrepute. 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that there be some corrective 

guidelines established.  Not only must we the politicians be 

more accountable, but the entire structure, functioning, and 

officers of the Board of Internal Economy must likewise be 

accountable. 

 

As it stands, Mr. Speaker, we have two members, one from 

each of the opposition parties, whose names have been dragged 

through the mud . . . pardon me, Mr. Speaker.  As it stands, we 

have two members, one from each side of the House, whose 

names have been dragged through the mud -- and I don't want 

to get into another area that was going through my mind -- who 

have been hampered in their ability to function to their full 

capacity as members because of accusations levelled against 

them, and investigations eternally pending, over their heads. 

 

Whether these accusations are right or wrong, only time will 

tell.  But until there are clear guidelines uniformly enforced, 

these sorts of situations could happen to any of us. 

 

The government continually ignores this situation.  It seems to 

be determined to stand behind the enforcement of rules only 

when it suits their purposes.  Although I must say it is 

extremely difficult to see how their actions of late have done 

them any good at all. 

 

Were clear guidelines in place, we would not have to endure 

the spectacle of the member from Yorkton trying to maintain 

that his letter to his constituents was not of a partisan nature.  In 

spite of what some members opposite might think, we have no 

vendetta against the member from Yorkton.  Had the rules and 

their enforcement been clear and uniform, he could simply 

have admitted a mistake, apologized, and paid any monies in 

penalties he had owing.  As it stands, it is completely 

mysterious to us why his case should be treated differently than 

any of the other cases. 

 

Last weekend, Mr. Speaker, one of the government staff, a Mr. 

Ted Bowen, got a letter printed in the Leader-Post, and I 

would like to quote a bit from it.  He says: 

 

Does anyone around this place remember anything?  Ten 

years ago, when rookie MLA Gordon Currie used 

ministerial stationery to invite his constituents to a Tory 

picnic, he was told he shouldn't do it.  So he stopped . . . 

 

When rookie NDP MLA Clay Serby either did or did not 

use a small portion of his communications allowance in an 

inappropriate manner, Dale Eisler writes verse 50 of his 

venal politicians' song . . . 

 

Let's get some perspective . . . 

 

Indeed, let's get some perspective on how the rules of this 

House are set and enforced.  What Mr. Borden . . . or Bowen 

missed in his letter is the fact that Mr. Currie admitted his 

mistake, apologized, and stopped.  The government still refuses 

to require the same from its 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the operations of the board to date have been 

atrocious and the opposite of normal standards of justice that 

any citizen would expect.  We are unable to get a judgement in 

advance of actions we would like to take, letters we wish to 

send out, and so forth.  Then if an offence is made, there is no 

uniform interpretation of the rules or means of enforcement, or 

redress other than to darken a member's reputation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to see this 

changed as much as I'm sure the government would.  We have 

no fear of a Board of Internal Economy with teeth.  Nor do we 

as MLAs have any fear of the board's deliberations going on in 

public.  If we do not fear these things, then I fail to see why the 

government members, who at the end of the day are ordinary 

MLAs like us, would fear them. 

 

Such a move would benefit all members, would allow us to 

conduct our affairs in the ethical manner we would all like 

without the fear of arbitrary and unfair retribution, and would 

improve the public's confidence in the integrity of legislative 

activity. 

 

The benefits, Mr. Speaker, in short, are enormous.  I challenge 

anyone on either side of this House to find a downside that 

comes close to overweighing these benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is with 

much interest that I have listened carefully to the words of the 

Leader of the Third Party and the member from Moosomin as 

they have entered into debate.  And, Mr. Speaker, as I listened 

carefully to the black cats and the white cats join together in a 

faade of non-partisan debate -- and it can be concluded to be 

nothing other than that, Mr. Speaker -- I find myself wondering 

if this motion that comes forth today is . . . if it's misinformed 

or if it's frivolous or if it's misdirected or if it's malicious.  

Which of those is it?  Because clearly it is one or more of those 

in some kind of combination. 

 

I find it kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the black cats and 

the white cats join together.  And as I listened carefully to the 

words of their debate, it becomes obvious to me that there is a 

distinct intention to forget about history, to disregard the facts 

of the matter. 

 

The facts of the matter are that there have been a record of 

enforcement of board directives over a large number of years 

and there is no denying that.  There are processes that have 

been followed, largely administrative, including the 

involvement of the Speaker of the House, who is the chair of 

the committee. 

 

And it's been not uncommon over the history of the committee 

for the Speaker to come to the committee for a determination of 

the principle of a question brought in terms of the use of 

members' allowances.  That's the fact of the matter.  Fact of the 

matter also, Mr. Speaker, is that the board itself has asked for a 

review of other jurisdictions in order to deal in an 

informed and considered kind of way with the matter of 

enforcement of regulations. 

 

Both of the members, Mr. Speaker -- both the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, the Leader of the Third Party, excuse me, and the 

member from Moosomin, also in a attempt to put up a political 

smokescreen -- suggesting that really the only matter of 

substance or of importance that the board deals with are the 

remunerations and the allowances of the MLAs.  Well that's the 

version as they see it; and then I note as well that the Leader of 

the Third Party calls for the board members to serve as judge 

and jury.  That's her solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in dealing with this question as to whether the 

board should serve as a committee of the legislature, we have 

to ask ourselves, what in the world does that mean?  A 

committee of the legislature reports to the legislature and has 

its report adopted by the legislature and exposes itself, 

appropriately so, Mr. Speaker, to the scrutiny and the debate of 

the legislature. 

 

Now when I look at where the Board of Internal Economy, 

from where it has come, as the Leader of the Third Party 

pointed out in her remarks, it was a creature that was born in 

1981.  Up until that time the subjects that are dealt with by the 

Board of Internal Economy were dealt with in the Treasury 

Board, Mr. Speaker.  They were dealt in Treasury Board of the 

government of the day -- by the Liberal government of the day, 

the Conservative government of the day, or the New Democrat 

government of the day. 

 

And the decision was made in 1981 to take a certain segment of 

the spending of government that has to do with the function of 

these chambers and the members within, and the officers who 

serve this Chamber, and to put scrutiny of the budget and their 

operations to the Board of Internal Economy so that there were 

decisions made in a non-partisan way, not only by the 

government of the day but by all parties, if there were three 

parties represented in the House. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, directives have been issued by the Board 

of Internal Economy on statutory obligations -- statutory 

obligations related to the remunerations of the members.  But I 

point out that it is only those who are frivolous or who are 

malicious or seek to be politically opportunistic, who choose to 

ignore the history or the reality or the purpose of the Board of 

Internal Economy, who say that all that it deals with that's 

important is the allowances and the remuneration of members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly I am offended in this debate that 

both of the previous members who have spoken have involved 

the Speaker in their debate in this House.  And that is a rule that 

is a long-standing rule that should ought not to be considered to 

be appropriate, for good reason.  The Speaker is not to be 

included in the debate of the House.  Neither is the Clerk, 

neither is the Sergeant-at-Arms, neither is the Legislative Law 

Clerk, neither are the pages, neither is the Ombudsman, neither 

is the Conflict of Interest 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Board of Internal Economy deals in advance 

of the setting of the budgets which all of those officers of the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan . . . in 

advance of the setting of the budget.  And as a result of a 

decision made by the Board of Internal Economy, the Minister 

of Finance takes the figure without question and with alteration 

and puts that into the budget brought into these legislative 

chambers. 

 

Now for someone to suggest that it is appropriate that members 

of the legislative chambers should be engaging, should have the 

opportunity to engage, in partisan debate which is the role of 

this House, on the officers who are assigned to serve all 

members of this Assembly equally and without bias -- the 

Speaker, the Clerk, the Sergeant-at-Arms, the pages, the 

Legislative Law Clerk, the Conflict of Interest Commissioner; 

the listing goes on to the library, the auditor, the Ombudsman, 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner -- Mr. Speaker, that is 

frivolous, it is politically opportunistic, and it is irrelevant to 

the function of this Assembly if it is our intention to restore 

trust.  Because you don't restore trust by playing games with 

the institution and protecting the impartiality of those who 

serve the Chamber. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that it is beyond scrutiny 

because in fact the budgets that are decided by the Board of 

Internal Economy go to the committee of Estimates which is 

made up . . . it's a committee of this legislature and it reports to 

this legislature -- after that budget has been determined by the 

Board of Internal Economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was with wisdom that the Board of Internal 

Economy was created in 1981 and a strong argument can be 

made that it should ought not to be open to the public as is the 

case in a large . . . the majority of jurisdictions of Canada; 

however, here in Saskatchewan we have recently decided to 

open it up in the interest of trying to preserve or enhance the 

integrity of the process. 

 

But we must be cautious in doing that, that we do not bring 

under attack the officers who serve this Chamber and whose 

independence of partisan influence must always be preserved.  

That's what it's about.  And I for one am not going to be a part, 

I am not going to be a part of taking any of the officers of this 

Assembly and putting their independence in jeopardy in order 

to gain some sort of partisan advantage.  I will not be a part of 

that unethical and immoral process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if I haven't made it clear so far, let me state 

abundantly clearly that I stand opposed to this ridiculous 

motion brought to us by the white cats and the black cats and 

they can decide who's which colour.  But cats they are.  Cats 

they are.  And Tommy Douglas told the people of 

Saskatchewan how to think about cats in mouseland and who to 

trust. 

So, Mr. Speaker, because I am uncertain as to whether this 

motion is misinformed or frivolous or misdirected or malicious 

-- it doesn't matter to me which of those that it is --  I stand 

opposed, Mr. Speaker.  I stand opposed to this motion on the 

grounds that it would try to acquire for the board authorities 

which are redundant with committees that already . . . the 

Estimates Committee of the legislature that already exists. 

 

And it is brought, I think, Mr. Speaker, because the black cats 

and the white cats are attempting today to gain some partisan 

political advantage with the consequence of putting in jeopardy 

in advance of the determination of the budget, the independent 

officers of this Assembly and, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

want to speak briefly as well to this motion that's at hand 

because it gives us an opportunity to debate a little bit about 

how we handle our business of running the legislature, that is, 

our internal business, and how the money that is used for the 

purpose of running the internal business of government as 

opposed to the external portion, the part that we do on behalf of 

the public, and how that is done. 

 

I want to make a few remarks on that.  And I want to endorse, 

first of all, the comments made by my colleague, the member 

for Moose Jaw Palliser, about the apparent lack of thinking 

that's gone into this motion.  It appears to me as if what's 

happening here is the member opposite, the member for 

Greystone, is trying to jump the queue on the Board of Internal 

Economy, which has already got a process into place, looking 

for work and looking for advice from other jurisdictions, 

searching out attempts to resolve what is perceived at this stage 

to be a problem. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at first blush when I looked at this, I was 

very tempted to agree with the member opposite. I was very 

tempted at first to agree with the motion because what it would 

do, following the proposal that they set up, is it would provide 

me and other members with a third place from which I could sit 

on high on a mountain top in judgement and ask questions of 

the members opposite as to why, for example, she continues to 

take her 37 per cent increase from the Legislative Assembly 

when all cabinet ministers, and the Leader of the Opposition, 

and the whips and the deputy whips, voluntarily reduced their 

pay from the Assembly by . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And House leaders. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- And House leaders.  And House leaders, the 

member said opposite, reduced voluntarily their stipend.  And I 

would have liked to have an opportunity to do that, to ask her 

these questions -- why that increase, which is even bigger than 

the increase she's proposing that the judges get, the 24 per cent 

that the judges would get, why she refuses to even budge on 

that.  It is an option, a voluntary option that's open to her right 

now.  And I 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

wouldn't question it, but the temptation was there, Mr. Speaker, 

to provide for that third opportunity just to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was also tempting for me because it would give 

me a third opportunity to ask in the House and in committee, 

questions related directly to estimates with respect to 

legislation.  And when you turn to the legislation, there's one 

place here, Mr. Speaker, where it identifies the amount of 

money going to a third party, increasing from $54,000 to 

$172,000 this year, Mr. Speaker -- an increase of over 218 per 

cent or about three times. 

 

Now part of that increase is deserved by the rules, Mr. Speaker, 

because part of it was because they elected a second member.  

But part of it was because of a member crossing the floor.  And 

there are many people in Saskatchewan that would wonder 

whether that member who crossed the floor and was elected by 

one party ought to be allowed to take the money with him to 

another party. 

 

So when I looked at that in first blush, Mr. Speaker, I thought 

that perhaps it might be kind of all right to sit up and ask these 

questions, questions that people want to know the answers to.  

But when I looked at it more seriously, Mr. Speaker, it 

occurred to me that there are already three places where these 

things can be debated. 

 

First of all, there's the Board of Internal Economy, which I 

suppose if I went to and asked the questions the board would 

probably in all likelihood grant me the privilege of asking these 

questions.  So there is that place. 

 

The Board of Internal Economy's recommendations then go 

through, Mr. Speaker, to the committee of Estimates.  And at 

the committee of Estimates there is another opportunity for any 

member to come and ask questions.  That's the second place.  

First of all, right in the Board of Internal Economy; secondly, at 

the committee of Estimates. 

 

And thirdly, the committee of Estimates reports to the 

legislature, and here any member can stand up during that 

report and make a comment or ask a question of the House.  

And then we all vote on it, Mr. Speaker, then we all vote on it. 

 

So there are already three ways, three opportunities for 

members to ask questions like about the 37 per cent that the 

Leader of the Liberal Party has taken as an increase, and she's 

asking for a fourth opportunity.  I do believe that to be 

wasteful, Mr. Speaker; I don't think it's necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you're going to change something, if you're 

going to change some rules, obviously either you have to 

assume that something has not been done correctly or you want 

to improve something.  You have to clearly identify the need.  

You have to identify the need. 

 

The member from Greystone attempted to identify a 

need.  I'm open to the process, to the debate here today, 

listening, seeing if there really is a need.  And one of the needs 

that was identified by the member opposite was to review and 

to have another place to review this. 

 

Now these items that are already under review by the Board of 

Internal Economy, my colleague, the member from Palliser, 

identified that in the case of the Ombudsman and in the case of 

the Clerk, Law Clerk, in case of the auditor, in case of the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner, librarian, the page, and the 

Speaker, that this already does take place.  And their budgets 

are set through the Board of Internal Economy. 

 

There are other items that are set by statute, by law, that 

ordinarily there are no rules to set, they're down there and 

they've been in for years.  And these are also identified very 

clearly in the budget book.  And you can turn to the budget 

book at any time and see which are in there by law and which 

are there to be set by the Board of Internal Economy. 

 

I think the process is always open to review, but you have to 

have a reason to change it, Mr. Speaker.  So does the member 

really want to have another place to debate the issue of how 

much an Ombudsman should be paid?  Does she want another 

place to debate the issues that are in statute?  Or does she see a 

parade and want to get to the head of the parade?  And that 

parade being the parade of democratic reform.  Does she see 

that our government has already done and is doing a lot of 

things in the way of reform, and is trying to clamour her way 

on top of it, using one or two individual examples which are 

already being dealt with. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that in her rush to lead a parade, the 

member opposite ought to be cautioned, ought to be cautioned 

as to what it will really lead to.  Does she really want people 

getting into a committee and asking questions, asking them to 

define what is blatant, what is political, what is partisan? 

 

Does the member want somebody to hold up literature in 

committee that she has produced?  And I read from it.  And this 

piece of literature says, in the middle of one of the pages:  

being Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party . . . Does she 

want somebody to come into that committee and ask her to 

prove that that is not partisan or not political?  Now let's get 

real. 

 

And that's exactly what the motion would lead to.  Or the 

member from Shaunavon, in material sent out to his 

constituents.  And I quote: I have been warmly welcomed into 

the Liberal Party.  Now when you use the word Liberal Party, 

does that . . . Does he want somebody to come in there and ask 

him the question: well, is that not political? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is obvious.  It's silly to go into a 

committee to ask those kinds of questions.  It's absolutely silly, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's absolutely silly to set up a vigilante group 

that would go around and asking questions whether or not 

members of political parties 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

should be political.  Absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I stand with the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

listen with some interest today to the debate on the question at 

hand.  And I think it's quite clear today that members would 

rather skate around the questions rather than deal with them.  I 

take some issue with the member from Moose Jaw Palliser in 

the way that he described the issue at hand about different 

colours of cats.  I think the . . . I've heard the member give that 

same speech in Toastmasters many years ago and it was more 

appropriate at that time than it is today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Simple fact is . . . and I would challenge all members, Mr. 

Speaker, to read the verbatim of March 17, 1994 in the Board 

of Internal Economy.  And I would think they would realize 

through that entire verbatim that there was no attempt at 

partisanship by anyone in the committee, of which the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser is a sitting member; that the issue at 

hand is one that is very serious to the well-being of this 

Legislative Assembly, to the well-being of the elected members 

who are fortunate enough to serve here. 

 

(1515) 

 

And the question is something that the public is demanding an 

answer to.  Now, Mr. Speaker, we can dance around it and we 

can drag the officers of the Assembly into the question and I 

believe we can abrogate our responsibilities as members of this 

Assembly and sort of hope that this thing goes away; or we can 

deal with it in a meaningful way. 

 

Now I'm not sure why the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

has the topic on the order paper today, but as a member of the 

committee I think she's entitled to discuss the issue as we all 

should.  But clearly I think it's something that we have to be 

mature enough about in this Assembly to deal with and that's 

politically mature -- I mean we're all politicians and I 

understand partisanship.   But if we don't put our minds to 

solving the issues at hand then I would say that the entire 

system, Mr. Speaker, is under a great deal of suspicion. 

 

We have currently, and I've said it before here, Mr. Speaker, 

we currently have sitting members of the House involved in 

legal questions under directive #4 of the Board of Internal 

Economy.  Now whether the board actually has the power to 

enforce its directives or not is an issue that we'll have to sort 

out and certainly how those directives apply to us in our 

everyday working lives in here are issues that are of utmost 

importance. 

That's why, Mr. Speaker, today I gave notice of the 

introduction of a Bill dealing with that very matter, and that 

was not without prior warning to members of the government.  

I take this issue very seriously.  It is something that needs to be 

dealt with in something beyond the partisanship round that 

often goes on in here. 

 

I think if, Mr. Speaker, we can have a good, honest debate 

about what is necessary to give us the comfort that everyone 

will be treated fairly and, at the same time, that the taxpayer 

and public of this province will have comfort in how we 

adjudicate ourselves, we will have served this Assembly well. 

 

For instance, Mr. Speaker, it was pointed out in the board on 

March 17 that other than the members on the board, no member 

has the right to speak.  Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, without 

moving actually into the realm of the House, which I don't 

think anyone wishes to see happen because that would mean 

holding a Board of Internal Economy in here, that we need to 

come up with some method.  But if a member, for instance, 

does have a problem complying with a directive, there has to be 

a mechanism for them to come before their peers and explain 

themselves without actually having to have the permission of 

the sitting members. 

 

It should be a fundamental right, Mr. Speaker, of any member 

of this Assembly, whether they be government or opposition, to 

appear before any body of its peers in committee or otherwise 

and speak their piece; that they should not be denied the right 

to speak.  I mean, Mr. Speaker, in the committee, in due 

deference, our officers of the Assembly have the right to speak 

at the Board of Internal Economy, but members do not. 

 

And I think it's these issues that we have to put our minds to if 

we are to come up with an equitable solution to the problems in 

front of us.  And yes, the public does expect us to be mature 

enough to adjudicate what is partisan and what is not partisan 

vis-a-vis how we expend public dollars.  I really do believe that 

they believe that is absolutely necessary. 

 

And the only comment that I would have more than that, Mr. 

Speaker, on the issue before us is . . . And if it will move this 

issue onward to some type of resolution, then this matter 

should come to a vote today.  If it cannot be dealt with in a way 

that we're all comfortable with, then I suppose it will not be. 

 

But I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that when the Bill comes 

before the House, that it would be proper to sit down and think 

and debate the Bill and come up with a resolution, or at least 

indicate that we, as members of all different political parties, 

are prepared to sit down and come up with a resolution. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if we do not, then I honestly believe that 

the public won't have the confidence that they should have in 

us to adjudicate these matters as a peer group, in a civil way, 

without simply having to have these things thrown into the 

criminal justice 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I honestly believe that all members would 

rather have that as the process, rather than currently what we 

have, which is a state of limbo. 

 

And I, just in closing, say to all members: I challenge you to 

read the verbatim of March 17, 1994, and if you can find any 

black or white cats in there, I'll be very surprised.  Because 

members have got to put their minds to solving these problems 

-- not simply cheap political rhetoric because it feels a little bit 

uncomfortable -- as part of that problem-solving process. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to add a few words to this debate.  And starting out, I want to 

talk about why it's not necessary to have the Board of Internal 

Economy be a committee of the legislature.  It's not necessary 

because we have a process, a long-standing process, a process 

that has evolved with decisions of board members over the 

years, a process whereby we set the budgets in the Board of 

Internal Economy for this legislature, for all the people in this 

legislature including members of this House. 

 

The process then moves forward and is reviewed by the 

committee of Estimates, and basically then accepted by the 

Minister of Finance.  So there is a long-standing process that 

has evolved. 

 

Unfortunately some people in this House, Mr. Speaker, are 

interpreting this process in a different way.  And the Leader of 

the Third Party is basically using her colleagues to catapult 

herself onto a political pulpit, supported by the members of the 

Tory caucus. 

 

Enforcement of an Act of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, as this is 

governed by, is the same as any other piece of the legislature.  

It is the law; the laws are to be interpreted by those people who 

are put in place to interpret them.  This body makes those laws; 

the judges and the court system interpret those laws.  So there 

is a process.  There is an enforcement process.  And it's always 

been there as the laws of this land have always been enforced 

and interpreted by those people who we put in place to do so. 

 

But as my colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser said, the Leader 

of the Third Party wants to be judge and jury.  She thinks she's 

more qualified, that the people of this Assembly are more 

qualified than the policing institutions and the court systems 

that we have put in place over the history of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have sat in this legislature for a number of years 

now.  I have seen many able people speak on the floor of this 

Assembly.  But over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker -- 

and this is part of the problem we're running into here -- the 

ablest person that I have ever seen speak or ever seen on the 

floor of this Assembly, the ablest person is the person that the 

Leader of the Third Party thinks she is.  And that's the problem.  

And we've seen it from day one. 

We have had a Liberal government in this province who didn't 

see fit to even have a Board of Internal Economy.  It was done 

through the Finance minister's office, behind closed doors, the 

Treasury Board. 

 

We've seen the Progressive Conservative Party in power, and 

all of sudden there seems to be . . . for a number of years now, 

there's a revelation that they should somehow want to change 

things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask why this motion is on the floor.  I 

have here the Board of Internal Economy Hansard from March 

17, 1994.  And without reading the verbatim, I'll shorten it up, 

Mr. Speaker, by reading from the review provided in the first 

page of the booklet. 

 

Now on March 17 the Board of Internal Economy met and the 

board was going to do a number of things, and I'll read: 

 

The Board requested the Legislative Assembly Office to 

gather information . . . 

 

And I want the Leader of the Third Party and the Leader of the 

Tory Party to listen carefully.  On March 17: 

 

The Board requested the Legislative Assembly Office to 

gather information, at their earliest convenience, with 

respect to other Legislative jurisdictions in North America, 

regarding: 

 

(1) What directives, bylaws or rules they have in place 

regarding MLA communications expenditures, 

 

(2) How they monitor communications; and, 

 

(3) What recourse the Board has when a Member is found 

to be in contravention of directives. 

 

And that was on March 17.  And that was agreed to by the 

Board of Internal Economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we see on March 29 a motion by the Leader 

of the Third Party that wants to prejudge any finding that the 

Board of Internal Economy might get from the research that's 

being done.  They want to ignore that, bypass that, again -- 

again -- showing the attitude and the arrogance of that member. 

 

What's happening, Mr. Speaker, is that she's ignoring the 

institution.  We have two members, opposition members, on 

the Board of Internal Economy.  They both want to be premier.  

One's the Leader of the Liberals and one's the Leader of the 

Tories.  They're the two members on the Board of Internal 

Economy, they want to be premier. 

 

I say they're bypassing the traditions and the customs in this 

legislature, using the Board of Internal Economy to catapult 

themselves onto the front pages of the daily papers at, I might 

add, the expense of their 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

colleagues.  And that is hypocritical and disgusting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who do they want to judge next?  Which officer 

of this Assembly will come into question? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I think you've been out of the country, 

Eric. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- I have been out of the country.  Mr. Speaker, 

the member says I've been out of the country.  He's right.  I was 

at a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meeting in 

London.  And you know what we talked about?  This 

institution that has been in the world for hundreds and hundreds 

of years.  And there is a reason we have procedures.  There's a 

reason we have ministers and committees of this legislature and 

boards of this legislature.  And the reason is because there are 

customs and there are traditions and there are rules and 

regulations that we have to go by to ensure the integrity of the 

institution.  And that was driven home when I was out of the 

country, as the member across said. 

 

(1530) 

 

And what's happening here, Mr. Speaker, is that by this motion, 

10 days after an agreement was made by all parties to go 

forward and do some fact finding, they want to circumvent the 

whole process that has been established over the years of this 

institution from Westminster around the world and including 

the Saskatchewan legislature.  They want to circumvent that 

and do away with it. 

 

Now that is the problem that we have here.  It's the attitude, the 

arrogance, and, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the two opposition 

members are using the institution for personal gain.  I mean it's 

obvious, it's obvious, because of the timing.  And I say that that 

is the wrong use of the institution. 

 

They're using the board . . . the Board of Internal Economy had 

been a board that met without public scrutiny because it dealt 

with members of this legislature, it dealt with the staff of this 

legislature, and it worked very well.  But in the board's wisdom 

they saw fit to open, at request, sought to open the Board of 

Internal Economy.  And now what's happened?  The two 

want-to-be premiers are using the board, using the process, for 

personal gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we allow this -- this is my point -- if we allow 

this type of abuse of an institution such as the Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, or any other Assembly in the world, then we are 

opening ourselves up to be scrutinized by the public, we're 

opening ourselves up to be accused by the public of the misuse 

of power.  And that's exactly what this whole process is leading 

to, the misuse of power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the motion, the motion saying: 

 

the board to be classified as a committee of the legislature 

with the powers and abilities of all other legislative 

committees; 

Well that, Mr. Speaker, I've explained how that is not 

necessary because we already have a process. 

 

The second one that: 

 

the board be empowered to enforce the rules and directives 

that it creates. 

 

Well as I said, the Leader of the Third Party, the Liberal leader 

and the Tory leader want to be judge and jury.  And they want 

to circumvent it, and they want to use the institution to promote 

themselves into a leadership authority. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to 

second that motion today.  And I guess, to use a little bit of my 

Shakespearian knowledge, I'd have to say, they doth protest too 

much methinks.  In fact this is the government . . . that is the 

government that claims to be an open and honest and more 

accountable government.  And today . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Today, Mr. Speaker, they have an 

opportunity to bring that to another step, but instead they're 

fighting it with all they can.  When we looked at what they did 

after they formed government in the 1991 election, brought 

forward the Gass Commission recommendations, and I guess 

the people of the province really thought they were trying to 

move government into a better working condition and make 

sure there were no more chances for some of these grey areas 

to, you know, put a bad flavour on government. 

 

Besides that, Mr. Speaker, they had the Provincial Auditor's 

recommendations which Public Accounts and Crown 

Corporations committees have been dealing with.  And actually 

the all-party committees that I just mentioned, Mr. Speaker, 

have done a great deal of work, good work, in addressing a lot 

of those recommendations by both of those commissions and 

the Provincial Auditor. 

 

When I take a look at what happened here today, Mr. Speaker, 

the member from Morse stood up and gave a report from the 

Public Accounts commissions.  I think there was some 50 or 60 

recommendations, seconded by one of the government 

members from Saskatoon.  You know, here's an all-party 

committee which supported the 50 or 60 recommendations that 

were talked about in the legislature here today.  And we didn't 

see all the problems that a few of the members opposite were 

complaining that would be, you know, would come about as 

all-party committees. 

 

And in fact when I look at what's happening with the Crown 

Corporations Committee, the wrapping up the '92 year which 

was under review, Mr. Speaker, the all-party committee of the 

Crown Corporations too, 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

you know, had full-party support on moving forward with the 

recommendations and the recommendations of the auditor.  

And still the sky never fell in, as the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser and the member from Prince Albert Carlton claimed 

would happen. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I question how you can possibly have a 

body that has the power to set rules and guidelines but no 

power to enforce or follow through on what they recommend.  

And I think the motion today would really do a lot in making 

this government more open and honest, as they claim they are. 

 

You know, when I listen to the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  The time for the debate, 

the 65 minutes has elapsed.  And as agreed to by members of 

the legislature, there will be the opportunity of a 10-minute, up 

to a 10-minute question period. 

 

Let me remind members that it is a question period on the 

content of the speeches that were given and can be directed to 

any of the members that spoke in the debate.  It will now open 

for questions. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

we've had our debate, and I have a question for the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, because presumably when you 

brought this motion forward and you catapulted the motion 

over and beyond the work that was being done by the Board of 

Internal Economy, you must have had a reason for it.  You 

must have felt that you had some kind of a solution to offer. 

 

So my question to you is, how do you see that this body would 

function in terms of enforcement and what kind of processes it 

might go through?  How do you see it functioning? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do thank the 

member for his question. 

 

As was stated in my remarks, we have been in contact with 

different provinces, and I had indicated that earlier on as well 

when I was sitting on the committee.  And there is a precedent 

already. 

 

And I think one of the things that was brought forward in our 

last Board of Internal Economy meeting were things that had 

been presented by the House of Commons, which is one of the 

reasons why I find it so shocking that the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser and the member from Prince Albert Carlton view 

this with such disdain.  It's as if what one is saying, what you 

are saying, Mr. Member, is that somehow we would not be 

capable of carrying out what other jurisdictions are currently 

doing. 

 

A precedent has already been set.  And what has been 

demonstrated by Manitoba is that even though they were left 

with similar problems with their equivalent to our Board of 

Internal Economy, one of the things that they found out is that 

they had the will to make changes when they found that in fact 

there was a  

breach of their rules and their directives.  And they took it upon 

themselves to deal with this in-house. 

 

I find it extraordinary that you find it much more acceptable if 

somehow someone had come forward and signed an affidavit 

against the member of Yorkton in order to take that concern 

into our courts rather than trying to settle that concern within 

our own Assembly.  If it in fact is because we are too vague in 

our directives . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member has taken 

sufficient time. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- It's not really a question, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member from Greystone then has cited examples from other 

jurisdictions and says that there are precedences elsewhere.  

Now the record shows in the March 17 debate of the Board of 

Internal Economy that the committee has agreed that they 

should be looking at other jurisdictions. 

 

So I'm asking the member then, are you prepared to follow the 

directions set out by the Board of Internal Economy and follow 

this process through?  Let them collect the information, bring it 

to the board -- you'll be there and so will the other members -- 

and have a look at it, and then from all of that, compile the best 

possible solution. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I find it 

interesting that the reasoning behind the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser objecting to the motion that had been brought 

forward by the member from Thunder Creek at the Board of 

Internal Economy was because it would be precedent setting.  

There have been precedents set all across the nation. 

 

What are we then going to do?  Wait for people to come 

forward with all of their precedents, or are we going to make 

decisions based on what we think is right and proper in our 

own Assembly?  I find this rather astonishing that the approach 

that you are willing to use is one that somehow sets aside all of 

our responsibilities. 

 

And just to clear this rather grey area, I do not think that it 

would be advisable for us to simply give the board the power to 

enforce rules without making it a committee of this legislature.  

And the danger in giving it . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think, members, if 

questions are asked, if we are going to answer them, I think we 

need to stay on the topic of the question that is asked.  And I 

would warn members that in the future, if we're going to make 

this a productive session -- we're experimenting with it -- but I 

think that if the question is asked, then we should attempt to 

answer the question, if you're going to answer it.  But I'm in the 

hands of the members.  I know we're experimenting with this. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd 

like to put a question to the member from Moose Jaw Palliser.  

The question has to do with the 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

fact that, as the member from Greystone had mentioned, the 

member was opposed to this sort of motion and such in the 

Board of Internal Economy because he was afraid it was 

precedent setting. And yet today he has another reason, and that 

be that the motion was being brought forward because of 

malicious intent. 

 

Now that the member realizes that other provinces, in fact the 

federal government have come forward and dealt with these 

kind of problems, then does the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser feel that some of the other provinces and the federal 

government also dealt with malicious intent, or could he maybe 

explain himself. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the member 

from Shaunavon for his question and I assume that he asks it 

with the best of intentions, Mr. Speaker.  This place operates, 

as does every Assembly throughout the Commonwealth, with 

precedent being a very, very significant part of the way things 

are properly ruled upon. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the Board of 

Internal Economy has existed for some 13 years, and in that 

period of time there has been decision making being made as to 

whether what members are doing is appropriate or not. 

 

We do have precedent. We have 13 years of precedent in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It has involved largely an 

administrative decision-making process that has been outlined 

on at least two occasions to the Board of Internal Economy.  It 

has involved the intervention of Speaker.  As I said in my 

remarks, it has involved as well the Speaker coming to the 

board with a question, without name of member, and then 

seeking for direction from the Board of Internal Economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should ought not, in my view, be moving off 

in some other direction without giving credence to our own 

precedent and without carefully weighing what is happening in 

other jurisdictions.  It's not my judgement that knee-jerk 

reactions serve the public interests well, and that we should 

think them through and decide them carefully and 

appropriately. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I listened intently to the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton and the member from Moose Jaw 

Palliser.  And I find it very interesting that both members 

happened to take the old view, the old view of how this House 

operates.  In fact I just want to remind the members of one 

thing. It was when they were here in opposition they 

continually said through the 1989-91 period, that they would 

make this House ungovernable. 

 

Now what the members on this side of the House attempted to 

do today, in bringing forward this motion, was to bring forward 

to the Assembly the importance of establishing a committee 

that actually had some teeth, that could set its rules and actually 

have the ability to enforce those rules so that as members we 

knew how we were operating. 

I'd like to ask the member from Prince Albert Carlton if he is 

totally opposed to the motion. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  I'd like 

to say to the hon. member that I'm very pleased that this motion 

was actually before the House today because it gave us an 

opportunity to discuss this issue in a format other than where 

we've had before. 

 

But I am opposed to passing the motion here in the House, of 

course, because that would make the work that is being done in 

the Board of Internal Economy now totally redundant.  And 

why should we have that? 

 

There is already work being done in the Board of Internal 

Economy.  Research is being done.  They'll weigh out the 

research, weigh out the good, weigh out the desirable from the 

undesirable, precedents that seem to work best, and then come 

forward with the recommendation to the Assembly as to which 

way we should go on enforcement or whatever with respect to 

the directives. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question to 

the member from Moose Jaw Palliser.  How does the member 

provide to the committee an opportunity to have another 

member express, without privilege, his opinion on his view of 

what transpired in . . . let's say there's a problem with his 

communications allowance or travel allowance or any of the 

other allowances, and how does the member who is a member 

of that committee pass a verdict without privilege in that 

committee? 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to the hon. 

member's question by referring him to his seat mate who 

answered that very question, as a matter of fact, in the Board of 

Internal Economy committee meeting about three weeks ago 

when he said that the appropriate course of action that he would 

recommend -- and it's on verbatim transcript; the members can 

review it for their own information -- that the best way to do it 

is through their caucus representatives and the Board of 

Internal Economy.  So that if a member wants to make 

representation there, that's the effective way of doing it. 

 

If the members of the . . . MLAs of the Conservative caucus 

don't trust their representative, or the MLAs in the Liberal 

caucus don't trust their representative, then they have a way of 

remedying that, Mr. Speaker.  But the remedy is simple and it's 

the same way it's always been. 

 

The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 44 -- Integrity of the Justice System 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to again stand in the Assembly to speak to this 

resolution.  This resolution, and I'll read it into the . . . for the 

Assembly: 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

That this Assembly recognize the significance of the provincial 

government's need to set an example in respecting the rights 

and freedoms of individuals and respecting justice and the laws 

of the land and to uphold all of these fundamental elements of 

the justice system and to recognize that no government, no arm 

of government and no individual is above the law and its 

penalities thereof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for the resolution before the Assembly 

today, I think, is very evident.  And certainly the . . . what has 

transpired over the past few weeks in this province regarding 

the judicial system, regarding law and order, and regarding the 

law and justice, I think it's important that we take the time to 

review this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we are all saddened by some of the events 

that have taken place recently, even across our nation and 

across our country.  Last night on the news we were reminded 

of the fact that some of the atrocities that we might expect to 

come out of areas such as Los Angeles or Florida or Third 

World countries or even Europe, actually took place in our 

nation's capital; where an individual or individuals rampantly 

went across the . . . through the city of Ottawa, randomly 

shooting at individuals.  And unfortunately a 27-year-old man 

lost his life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also took a moment to listen to a phone-in show 

that took place this morning in the province of Saskatchewan 

here.  And it was interesting to listen to the comments being 

made by individuals regarding law, regarding justice, and 

regarding the penalties that are handed out to individuals in 

regards to the crime that they may have committed.  And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, very clearly, people, not only around the 

world but even in this country, are becoming very cognizant of 

the problems we have in our judicial system. 

 

And I think what the motion does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

reminds us of the basic principle that as individuals we were 

elected, and we here represent the laws and the legal and 

law-making community of this province and of this country.  

One of the basic principles in a democratic society is the right 

to elect representatives that will work on behalf of the people's 

interests. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, governments in this country and in this 

province are also democratically elected to ensure law and 

order and good government in the land.  No government, no 

arm of government, and no individual, is above the law, the law 

and its penalties. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what happens when the government 

no longer honours the laws it passes and strips the rights of 

individuals to challenge its decisions?  Most people in Canada 

would think that that sort of thing would not happen in the 

democratic . . . the democracy that we live in, this democracy 

of Canada.  We might perceive this happening in other 

areas of the world such as places like Cuba, but never here.  

Unfortunately this is exactly what is happening with the present 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just saw recently a Bill brought before this 

Assembly to retroactively change the rules, to amend 

legislation.  The members opposite amended The Provincial 

Court Act last spring in order to set up a commission to review 

judges' salaries, allowances, and vacation leave and bring these 

recommendations to the provincial government.  At the time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Justice minister stated that such a 

commission was necessary in Saskatchewan.  He even quoted 

the Supreme Court of Canada by saying: 

 

. . . that the right to salary and pension should be 

established by law and not be subject to arbitrary 

interference by the Executive . . . 

 

Executive meaning the Premier and cabinet.  That's from 

Hansard, May 25, 1993. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know what commissions are all about 

because the former minister of Justice also appointed a 

commission.  He appointed a commission, and his commission 

was totally independent.  It was made up of individuals totally 

outside of the legal profession and they came up with the 

recommendation that even at the time the former minister of 

Justice found difficult to live with. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, what the minister was referring to, 

that it was difficult and that the executive branch of 

government, or government itself, should not interfere in the 

judicial process, but should set some principle and guidelines 

by which we all can live and survive. 

 

And I must remind the minister that at the time, the 

commission set up in 1989 was asked to come back with 

recommendations, but their recommendations weren't binding.  

The minister of the day didn't make a binding agreement in his 

legislation.  He left the door open to accept, to go with, to 

proceed with, or to choose another alternative. 

 

The minister the other day also said, later the minister added, 

and I quote: it wasn't right for the judges to be at the mercy of 

the executive arm of government.  As a result, the NDP 

government took out the veto power of the provincial 

government and replaced it with a clause that states the 

recommendations of the independent commission were to be 

binding. 

 

And as I've just indicated, the former member or minister of 

Justice in his commission, in his legislation, didn't make it 

binding.  And I believe when the Minister of Justice put that 

clause in, making his legislation and the recommendations of 

the commission binding, he put himself in a very awkward 

position. 

 

And I must also remind the House that when we were debating 

this Bill, we had suggested to the minister that maybe he should 

look at some alternatives.  Did he realize 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

what his Bill was going to do?  Did he realize the power that he 

was giving to the commission?  And as, unfortunate to say, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, some of the warnings we gave back in May of 

1993 have certainly come true. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite were ready to 

accept and act upon whatever recommendations were made by 

this independent commission because they said it was the right 

thing to do.  They said it was necessary that government should 

not interfere in any way in the decision making of judges' 

salaries, pensions, and allowances. 

 

Months later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we find?  The 

independent commission brought forward a recommendation 

that judges receive a 20 per cent pay increase to place them in 

line with judges from other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that may not be all that wrong.  The commission, 

I'm sure, took the information they had, looked back over the 

period of time that the judges were raising and questioning 

regarding salaries and regarding the time period in which they 

didn't have a salary increase.  And this commission 

unfortunately happened to be made totally of legal people.  But 

at the end of the day they came up with a recommendation that, 

it would appear, added basically another two years to the 

recommendation of the 1989 commission. 

 

And it's certainly fine and dandy for us to stand here and no, 

judges should not receive a salary increase of 24 per cent.  I'm 

sure, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government 

did some polling.  I'm sure they asked people to call in.  And 

the question probably was: should the judges receive a salary 

increase of 24 per cent?  And lo and behold, what was the 

response?  I'm not exactly sure what the percentage of response 

was, but I would think that there isn't a person across this 

province who would say yes to that question.  They would say 

no, definitely not. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what would the government have 

received in response if the question would have been: should 

governments arbitrarily break the laws that they establish?  

What kind of a response do you think we would have received, 

or the government would have received to that kind of a 

question?  Do you think it would have been a 10 per cent 

response in favour or against?  I think it would have been 

overwhelmingly against governments turning around and 

abusing the powers invested in them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although the NDP's legal obligation was to 

abide by this recommendation, they decided to ignore the law 

and in fact to break it.  And as the Minister of Justice has 

indicated, they did it because the public was on their side.  It 

depends which question you were asking whether the public 

were on their side.  They decided to once again rewrite history 

and wipe the slate clean, pretending the last law didn't exist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've been arguing, I don't believe 

anyone would disagree that a 20 per cent raise is an exorbitant 

pay hike.  And in fact many people have called me and raised 

the same concern, raised the same question.  They have 

indicated, maybe you took the wrong side.  But when you start 

to explain the issue and the fact that there is a principle here we 

must stand behind, we must stand for, then they began to say 

yes, that would be difficult. 

 

But in light of the fact that there must be an example set -- 

someone should be setting the example -- so there are laws that 

we must abide by.  We all must abide by the laws.  Maybe you 

have a point there. 

 

In fact when I look at the increases, brought to my attention 

that this increase, in the minds of the commission, the minds of 

the judges, goes back over basically over a period of six years.  

And when you look at that and take a 24 per cent increase over 

a period of six years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that works out to 4 

per cent a year. 

 

It was very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that through the 

freedom of information, we find out that the deputy minister, 

Mr. Cotter, had his salary raised by $6,300 at this time from a 

salary of 105,000 to 111,300, an increase of over 6 per cent -- 6 

per cent in one year -- while at the same time he was making 

the recommendation that no, do not accept the commission's 

suggestion or recommendation; give the judges a 2.5 per cent 

increase. 

 

And through that same freedom of information Act, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we find that there are many other individuals 

on the government side . . . or not on the government side of 

the House, but in the executive arm of government, deputy 

ministers and people working in government offices, that have 

received the same type of increase.  Is that fair? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we've seen in the end, the government 

decided to try to score political points rather than adhere to the 

laws of this province, their own laws.  Let's however set aside 

the politics and the dollar signs and think about the 

implications of the government's actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a provincial government that has been 

willing to break laws at the drop of a hat.  A government that 

when faced with issues they don't agree with say, oh well, let's 

just break the law and then change the law. 

 

I would think that it's very obvious why the Minister of Justice 

cancelled his trip to Ottawa to meet with all the other Justice 

ministers across the country.  I can just imagine what the 

Justice ministers from other provinces would think of our 

minister appearing, and he's breaking his own law, when 

they're trying to determine how they are going to set some 

principles and guidelines and set laws that we as ordinary, 

law-abiding citizens of this country and of this province, can 

live by. 

 

(1600) 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

And as I was thinking about this question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

an area of concern that certainly has been brought to my mind 

and to my attention is, if I as a resident of this province 

happened to jump in my car and drive a half a block and forget 

to put on my seat-belt and there happened to be a police officer 

standing by and noted that, guess what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  I 

would probably receive a ticket and have to pay a $70 fine, if 

that hasn't increased. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a law-abiding citizen, I may not 

like that, I may not appreciate that, but the law states that we 

must wear our seat-belt, and I would pay the fine.  I would be a 

little annoyed, but I would pay the fine because those are the 

laws, those are the rules of this country; rules that are helping 

and trying to prevent us and protect us from accident and 

injury. 

 

What an editorialist says, and I quote: 

 

Someone has to take responsibility for this mess the 

Romanow government got itself into over salaries for 

Provincial Court judges.  In this case, the buck stops with 

the justice minister.  The notion of ministerial 

responsibility, which is central to our system of 

parliamentary government, must apply. 

 

Suddenly, Mr. Speaker, we find the judges found out firsthand 

how 60,000 Saskatchewan producers felt when the NDP 

government did the same thing with GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) contracts -- people in the judiciary, people 

in the court system. 

 

And I think the interesting part about the debate that took place 

two years ago regarding GRIP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 

larger portion of the province, the people in general, it didn't 

really affect them personally.  So at the end of the day they 

may have said, well the government had no alternative.  The 

government laid its hat on its debt problem, a debt problem that 

they knew was there all along.  And because they didn't like the 

piece of legislation and the safety net that was laid out by the 

former government to help farmers through the lean times, 

work themselves, build for the prosperous times down the road, 

the government decided no, we're going to change the form of 

safety net.  And because they missed the deadline, we will just 

pass a law and change the contract. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've said, many people probably 

thought, well that's a little thing, that's just a little thing.  That's 

just like me going and arguing that, were you sure I didn't have 

my seat-belt on?  How can you give me a ticket?  You didn't 

really see whether or not I released my seat-belt.  You know, 

those are some of the little things we can argue, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  And yet at the end of the day 60,000 Saskatchewan 

producers lost their access to a safety net that had the ability to 

be built upon. 

 

And at the same time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we find 

today? 

 

The government's argument was, GRIP is going to cost 

us a bundle and it's going to have a deficiency in the fund.  The 

government changes the Act, changes the legislation, changes 

the safety net.  Today we have a $43 million surplus in the 

fund, and by the end of this year, as the premiums are paid in 

the federal portion, the matching portion comes in, possibly a 

premium fund balance of some 300 to $350 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think what that says, it points out that in 

the end the GRIP program, even though it was facing 

deficiencies in the first one or two years, had the potential in 

the long term of being a sound, solid, safety net program that 

any individual . . . And the good part about GRIP, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, was that farmers weren't forced into it.  It was a matter 

of choice. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have here with the judges -- the 

judges have been advised that they have a strong court case 

against the government.  In fact, I'd just like to read an 

editorial, or from an editorial, Leader-Post, Friday, March 25.  

And it says, the headline, "Wrong message from Mitchell." 

 

Saskatchewan provincial court judges should do more than 

consider legal action in their contract dispute with the 

provincial government.  They should actually file suit to 

ensure, as they correctly point out, "the sanctity of the law 

and the sanctity of the contract". 

 

A little further on it says: 

 

In reversing a legally binding decision, the justice minister 

-- more accurately, the NDP government, since this was a 

decision of cabinet and not Mitchell's sole doing -- 

breached the law and sent a clear message to the 

Saskatchewan people that arbitration is a satisfactory 

contract settlement mechanism only if the results favor 

government interests. 

 

And it ends up with: 

 

All governments are expected to act within the law and 

abide by the agreements into which they enter.  Certainly 

the NDP government asks no less of the residents of this 

province.  Perhaps, it is time for the courts to remind this 

government that its word must be its bond. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have heard time and time again of 

how the men and women who settled and built this great 

province, truly their word was their bond.  My parents can 

remember times . . . In fact there are still a few occasions where 

a handshake means something.  When you give a handshake 

with a neighbour and say that you're going to do something, it 

means something.  Your word is your bond; that handshake is 

your bond. 

 

And I think it's time that the supreme lawgiver, an example in 

this province, indeed set the example.  Maybe it would be 

difficult -- if I could use the word -- crow, to eat; maybe it's 

difficult.  But there are laws and guidelines which we must all 

adhere to and abide 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

by.  And as I've indicated, the judges -- and I'm not exactly 

sure, I believe the judges were making a statement today and I 

haven't had the opportunity of hearing that statement -- but the 

judges have a sound case. 

 

And it would almost seem to me that at the end of the day, if 

the judges decide to take on the government, they probably will 

have an inside road to get to the Supreme Court a lot quicker 

than GRIP contract holders.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, what 

the government has done regarding this Bill and regarding the 

example they're setting, if indeed at the end of the day the 

judiciary decides to seek the avenue of the courts, if indeed the 

courts rule in their favour, what we're saying again, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the fact that many more people are going to start 

looking at legal action against this government over contracts 

they have changed retroactively and made them retroactive to 

take away not only the rights of individuals but their ability to 

even come and challenge in the courts the actions of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of unilateral breaking of contracts that 

are legal and binding is indeed breaking the law.  It erodes the 

very foundation of democracy as we have known it in 

Saskatchewan and Canada for years.  What is worse, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

government has been making a habit of breaking the law for 

some time now. 

 

In addition to GRIP, they've broken contracts with civil 

servants, Federated Co-op, and the list goes on.  In fact one of 

the headlines today, an editorial said, the editorial reads: 

"Question of the day: who is next?"  Who is the next group on 

the list?  Who is the next person that is going to be challenged?  

Because the government finds it a lot easier to break the law 

rather than to set the example and be the example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has rewritten the law, and at the 

same time, taken away the rights of individuals to go to court 

over individual rights that have been violated -- rights, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that have been implemented in this country 

for a number of years, rights that a great prime minister, born in 

the province of Saskatchewan, stood for and fought for and 

established in the charter of rights.  Those rights are at issue, 

the rights that the Rt. Hon. John George Diefenbaker stood 

upon; and when he became prime minister, stood for and 

established in his term as prime minister, rights that you and I 

have the privilege of enjoying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the public cannot trust the government to 

uphold the laws they write, who can they trust to uphold and 

enforce the law?  Obviously not this government.  The NDP's 

actions send a clear message to the people of Saskatchewan: 

the members across the way believe they can do anything.  

They believe they can break the law and ignore the 

consequences.  They believe their actions are justified and 

above the law.  They believe the end justifies the means. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not what my wife and I 

have been teaching our children, and I don't believe that is what 

other parents are teaching theirs.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

are principles we must stand on.  What we have seen and what 

we have been viewing in the past few days is a government that 

has proven that it does not respect democracy, and I fear for 

that.  This government has proven that it does not respect 

justice and the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what the minister has said in his actions is 

that he and his government have proven that they do not respect 

the very foundation on which this country and this province 

was built.  And I think we, as legislators in this Assembly, 

should be very fearful, we should be very careful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that we want to set an example 

whereby young men and women and young people across this 

land can look to the leading officials and the lawgivers and say: 

yes, but he can do it; why can't I?  He can break the laws; why 

can't I?  I think too many people are breaking the laws 

nowadays.  I think too many people have looked at examples 

around them that haven't been solid examples, and it is the 

responsibility of elected representatives when they set laws and 

enforce laws to be the example to follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member from 

Souris-Cannington: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the significance of the 

provincial government's need to set an example in 

respecting the rights and freedoms of individuals and 

respecting justice and the laws of the land and to uphold 

all of these fundamental elements of the justice system and 

to recognize that no government, no arm of government 

and no individual is above the law and its penalties 

thereof. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I rise to speak on the motion put forward by the 

member for Moosomin, motion no. 44.  And after my remarks, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to move the following amendment, 

seconded by my colleague, the hon. member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster.  My amendment would read: 

 

Remove all the words after "Assembly" and replace with 

the following: 

 

acknowledge that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

making significant gains in achieving financial stability to 

ensure fair treatment to all the people of Saskatchewan, 

must continue to be vigilant in ensuring that expenditures 

are in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the motion by the member from 

Moosomin, he talks about setting examples and respecting the 

rights and freedoms of individuals and I fully agree with him 

that this government has to set examples.  And I want to 

explain. 

 

That is really what we are doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

We're making significant gains in achieving financial stability 

so that we can bring fairness to all our citizens.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that's the thrust of my amendment -- is to bring 

fairness to the citizens of this province. 

 

And I want to indicate to you that we still have a long ways to 

go.  And I want to give you some examples of the type of 

unfairness that we have in our province.  And I give you some 

of the examples in my own constituency.  And I want to 

compare these examples of the example that the member from 

Moosomin was using when he spoke and defended, I might 

add, the 24 per cent increase to judges.  And he tried to 

somehow water that 24 per cent increase down as being fair. 

 

And he worked it over a six-year period, and indicated that if 

you take 24 per cent for six years, that they would only amount 

to 4 per cent per year.  And I will get back to that and show you 

just how unfair that is to the rest of the citizens of this province. 

 

Up in my constituency I have individuals who are unemployed 

pretty well all year round, and they wait for the fire season to 

come around so that they can get a job fighting fire.  And you 

could go into some of the communities and you will see large 

line-ups of individuals who are waiting for a fire to start so that 

they can go out and get a job and make a few dollars. 

 

And just to show you how degrading this is to individuals up in 

my constituency, they can be called out, they'll go out to a fire, 

they're hauled out to the bush where the fire is and start fighting 

the fire and fight for a couple of days. And then a rainstorm 

comes along and the fire's out, they're all picked up and hauled 

back into town, and they're unemployed again, waiting around 

for the next fire. 

 

(1615) 

 

And this is the type of situation that we have in Saskatchewan 

and specifically in my constituency of Athabasca.  And it's 

something that we have to all work as a group of legislators to 

try and solve these problems.  Just no way that we can continue 

to operate and have the type of poverty and dignity taken away 

from individuals in the examples that I have given you. 

 

Another example, and I compare this to the salary that the 

member was talking about from Moosomin, the judges' salary 

and the 24 per cent.  Individuals who go out and work and they 

work on welfare jobs, and they go around and they take small 

jobs, work for 20 weeks, and after the 20 weeks is over, then 

they're out of a job.  And they go from that job, from a 20-week 

job onto UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission).  And 

from UIC then they go back to the welfare jobs. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is degrading.  And when we 

start comparing jobs of this nature, who are there working for 

minimum wage, they only work for 20 weeks and then they're 

laid off. And then the member from Moosomin has the nerve to 

stand up in 

this House and indicates that, well 24 per cent for the judges is 

not bad because it works it out -- he has his own formula -- four 

years at 6 per cent per . . . 4 per cent per year.  Well I'll tell you 

that there's a lot of individuals in this province who would just 

love to have a 4 per cent increase a year in their wages, and 

there's a lot of them who would just love to have a job. 

 

And I speak of the minimum wage earners and part-time wage 

earners.  And you can just take a look at the individuals around 

this province who are trying to make a living -- they're trying to 

feed their families, trying to put food on the table -- who work 

part time. Thousands and thousands of them who work in the 

superstores, who work at McDonald's.  They'd just love to have 

that type of an increase in wages of 4 per cent per year. 

 

I think when he spoke that we as a government were breaking 

the law, well I don't accept that.  I think that what has taken 

place is a mistake was made.  And when you make a mistake, 

you have to admit that and you have to rectify that mistake.  

And that's what we've done here; we've rectified the mistake. 

 

And I give you examples.  We asked the SGE, Saskatchewan 

government employees, the employees to take zero increase in 

'91, zero in '92, and 2.5 in '93.  We're asking health workers, 

we're asking nurses, we're asking teachers.  They're all taking 

zero, and some of them are taking roll-backs.  Up in the forest 

industry there's a number of individuals who have taken a 

roll-back of a dollar sixty an hour in their wages just in order to 

have a job. And that's a fact of life. 

 

And it's not just the provincial government who is taking part 

in this attack on the economy and trying to get our economy 

under control.  It's the federal government also.  And I give you 

an example of the RCMP.  The RCMP right now are working 

with a five-year freeze in their salaries.  They cannot get an 

increase in the RCMP now for five years.  There is also a 

two-year freeze on increments.  So you can see it's not just the 

provincial government; it's the federal government also.  And I 

commend them for taking those steps to try and solve the 

serious economic problems that we have. 

 

And we as governments, we have to set examples.  All 

governments have to set examples, and this government in 

particular.  And we have freezes on MLAs' salaries and 

expenses; we have roll-backs for cabinet ministers. 

 

We are setting examples and we are respecting the rights and 

the freedoms of individuals to have a job.  And that's what we 

all have to work for -- the right to a job.  And when you have 

that right and you have that job, comes freedom to raise your 

families and to do what you want to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked that member from Moosomin where the 

justice is.  Where does he see justice in indicating that judges 

should receive a 24 per cent increase in salaries?  I asked him 

where that is. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

When one segment of society is given 24 per cent raise on 

$90,000 a year when the rest of society who are working are 

asked to take small increases, zero increase, and some segments 

of our society actually taking roll-backs, and for the thousand 

who are unemployed or are living on welfare, I asked him 

where the fairness is in that.  And I just say this to you, Mr. 

Speaker, there is absolutely no fairness in that. 

 

We are facing tough economic times.  We all have to make 

sacrifices.  Some segments of society will suffer more than 

others.  All of us who are on a higher end, income end of the 

pay scale should be prepared to do what we can to make life 

better for those that are on the lower end of the scale.  And you 

take 24 per cent of $90,000, that's a lot different than getting 2 

or 3 per cent or zero for individuals who are earning 10 and 

$15,000 a year. 

 

One has to take into consideration what we're talking about 

here.  We're talking about a group of individuals who are at the 

highest scale in our province and we want to give them a 24 per 

cent increase in wages.  And I think we as a government just 

cannot do that. 

 

And if we do that, Mr. Speaker, then I say quite clearly what 

we are creating here is a class society, and that's something that 

we do not need, is a class society in this province.  That's 

exactly what we would be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I just want to indicate quite clearly that I 

cannot support this motion and I want to move this amendment, 

seconded by the hon. member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

 

Remove all the words after "Assembly" and replace with 

the following: 

 

acknowledge that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

making significant gains in achieving financial stability to 

ensure fair treatment to all the people of Saskatchewan.  

We must continue to be vigilant in ensuring that 

expenditures are in the public interest. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I find the amendment in order and the debate 

will continue on the motion and the amendment. 

 

Order.  Why is the member from Rosthern on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker.  I was not able 

to hear the member read it, and you did not read the motion to 

me so that I could hear it, so I would appreciate it if you would 

reread that motion. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member makes a valid point of order.  

Order.  The member from Athabasca has moved an 

amendment, seconded by the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster: 

That all the words after "Assembly" be replaced by the 

following: 

 

acknowledge that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

making significant gains in achieving financial stability 

and to ensure fair treatment to all the people of 

Saskatchewan, must continue to be vigilant in ensuring 

that expenditures are in the public interest. 

 

And I recognize the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In 

relation to the amendment as proposed by the member from 

Athabasca, I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 

amendment is not in order simply because the main motion as 

such, makes absolutely no reference whatsoever to any 

financial agreements or any financial situations whatsoever.  

It's entirely a justice- and law-related matter, as the member 

from Moosomin has moved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I further submit to you that the amendment 

as such, as its fundamental premiss simply indicates that there 

is a financial stability, and what this motion then does is reverts 

from law and order to an economic, fiscal, financial stability 

kind of a situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that in Beauchesne's 6th Edition, 

page 175, dealing with amendments, under the main section of 

"Motions" no. 568., does indicate quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

that: 

 

It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be 

relevant to the question on which the amendment is 

proposed. 

 

And then further on, Beauchesne's continues, Mr. Speaker, on 

page 176, under the heading of "Inadmissible Amendments" 

no. 579., subsection (1): 

 

An amendment setting forth a proposition dealing with a 

matter which is foreign to the proposition involved in the 

main motion is not relevant and cannot be moved. 

 

And then 579., subsection (2), further, Mr. Speaker, indicates: 

 

An amendment may not raise a new question which can 

only be considered as a distinct motion after proper notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that this amendment, as proposed 

by the member from Athabasca, is not in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I shall be very brief, Mr. Speaker.  

We don't want to take up all afternoon on the amendment.  I 

would submit to you that it is in order.  The subject matter of 

the two is the same, the issue is 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

the same.  The amendment suggests a different approach to the 

same problem.  There's a time honoured tradition in this House 

of allowing such amendments.  The subject matter, it is the 

same issue; it is simply a different approach. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have re-examined the 

amendment and I've listened to the points of order raised by the 

member from Rosthern and also the explanation given by the 

Government House Leader.  And I do think that the member 

from Rosthern makes a very valid point of order. 

 

The main motion speaks very, very clearly on the rights of 

individuals and respecting justice and the law.  The amendment 

deals entirely with the financial aspects and brings an entirely 

new realm of debate.  And I find the amendment out of order 

and the . . . order! -- find the amendment out of order and the 

debate will continue on the main motion. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise today to speak on this resolution, Mr. Speaker, because it is 

indeed a very important motion that has been presented to this 

House. 

 

I would like to reread the last portion of the motion: 

 

. . . no arm of government and no individual is above the 

law and its penalties thereof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that's what this issue is all about.  It's not 

about money; it's about the rule and sanctity of law.  The 

members opposite and the minister have tried with smoke and 

mirrors to camouflage what the real issue is.  But the real issue 

is not how much money the judges make.  Because if it was an 

issue of how much money the judges make, then the same 

value in money could be saved by the provincial government if 

they simply eliminated one of the cabinet ministers.  It would 

be almost an identical amount of money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they were to eliminate one of the cabinet 

ministers, they could do so without breaking the law.  And 

that's the important point -- without breaking the law.  Because 

what the Minister of Justice has done in this particular case is 

indeed has broken the law. 

 

The member from Athabasca spoke of the desperate situations 

in his own constituency dealing with finances.  He spoke of the 

various groups that have taken roll-backs or zero per cent 

increases in their salaries, and of which MLAS are one.  I 

believe the last time the MLAs received a salary increase was 

1986. 

 

But if it's a question of increases and if it's a question of how 

much money can be saved, the public has to ask the question: 

how much money would have been saved had the NDP cabinet 

ministers' ministerial assistants not received a salary increase?  

How much money would have been saved then?  They didn't 

have to pay that extra amount and they wouldn't have broken 

the law had they not paid it. 

The Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, gave the deputy minister 

of his department a salary increase.   The government has tried 

to say that because judges are well paid in our society that they 

don't need an increase.  Well the deputy minister was earning 

105,000 and has now had an increase to 111,000. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even the government in their actions admit 

that it's not an economic situation; it's a situation of the rule of 

law and the fairness and the applications of law and justice in 

this province. 

 

The government, in talking about the financial situation, is 

simply trying to justify in their own minds -- because I think 

there are a number of members on that side of the House who 

feel guilty about this situation -- they're trying to justify their 

own actions of breaking the law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, no principle is more sacred in our system of 

government than the rule of law.  If you look at Canadian 

society, Mr. Speaker, what is Canadian society based on?  It's 

based on law, order, and good government.  Law, order, and 

good government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the first one of that is law.  Our whole system of 

government is based on the rule of law.  Now the French fought 

a revolution for liberty, equality, and fraternity.  We didn't fight 

a revolution, Mr. Speaker, we developed through the British 

parliamentary system and we follow a system of law, order, 

and good government.  But, Mr. Speaker, when a government 

breaks the law, that is not good government and that destroys 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rule of law is a concept that is perhaps the 

proudest accomplishment of western democracy and the idea 

that no one -- not the Justice minister, not the Premier, not even 

the Lieutenant Governor or the Queen -- is above the law.  

Everyone, Mr. Speaker, is subject to the law and, should they 

break the law, is subject to its penalties. 

 

The government doesn't need to take our word for this, Mr. 

Speaker.  History and literature are full to bursting with 

authorities who are willing to stand up for the most basic, most 

necessary democratic ideal. 

 

If the government will not listen to our words on this important 

subject, perhaps they will listen to the venerable voices of 

history.  As Denis Deiderot spoke so wisely two centuries ago: 

"anyone who takes on himself, on his own authority, to break a 

bad law, thereby authorizes everybody else to break the good 

ones. 

 

And that's indeed the case, Mr. Speaker.  Once you sanction the 

breaking of a law, for whatever reason, then others can take 

that own authority onto themselves to break whatever laws it is 

they wish to break.  Because when the Minister of Justice 

declares that the law he wrote himself is null and void because 

he doesn't like it, and he breaks the law, then what is to say that 

someone else who, in their own judgement, 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

decides that a law is no longer valid for them, and they break it, 

does that mean they are as immune from prosecution and the 

penalities of the law as the Minister of Justice is claiming 

himself to be? 

 

In his breaking of the law and in his attempts to rectify the 

situation, or to make himself immune from the penalities of the 

law, he is denying those other members of society the right to 

approach the courts for justice under the law. 

 

And justice is not what the Minister of Justice decides it is, it's 

what society decides is just.  The Minister of Justice, while he 

is indeed the top legal official in this province, it is not up to 

him to make the judgements.  That is up to those that society 

has appointed to sit upon the bench and to judge.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the Minister of Justice. 

 

The minister and the government, when they break the law, 

make themselves outlaws; they step outside of the law.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, we've seen in this province, we've seen across this 

country, those who are prepared to take what is called civil 

disorder, that are prepared to stand up and break the law for 

their own particular purposes. 

 

We see that happening today out in British Columbia, where 

protesters protest the logging, they break the law, the court's 

rulings, the rulings set out by the provincial government, and 

what happens?  They are arrested, they're taken before a judge, 

and they suffer a penalty as a result.  While they break the law, 

Mr. Speaker, because they do not agree with it, they pay the 

penalties of such action. 

 

But the Minister of Justice says no, I'm above that.  You are not 

allowed to take me to court.  You cannot say that I have broken 

the law because, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is saying 

with his piece of legislation that the law no longer exists; that 

law was never there.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the law was there.  He 

wrote it and his government passed it.  They all voted for it, 

Mr. Speaker, and it's on their heads that they break the law. 

 

In debating this issue, Mr. Speaker, of the judges' dispute, in 

question period, the government spin doctors would like the 

public to believe that in opposing the government's actions we 

are supporting the judges' raise.  The words by Deiderot 

however tell the truth and spell out clearly and simply what our 

position is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don't expect the government to understand this, since to 

them justice and politics are one and the same.  That this 

represents bad government was affirmed by Woodrow Wilson, 

past president of the United States a number of years ago, who 

once said: "Justice has nothing to do with expediency."  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what this legislation, presented by 

the Justice minister, is all about.  He broke the law for political 

expediency. 

 

He initially made the law for political expediency because he 

did not wish to make the determination, 

his government did not wish to make the determination as to 

the salary concerns of judges.  They determined that it would 

be politically expedient to give it to an independent 

commission, allow them to make a binding arbitration.  And 

this is what the minister put into his legislation and this is what 

he agreed to in a written contract with the judges -- a binding 

arbitration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because when the commission came back he 

did not agree with it, for political expediency he broke the law. 

 

He broke the law, and then because he is in a position of power 

-- he and his colleagues are the Government of Saskatchewan -- 

he used the power of the majority, the tyranny of the majority, 

the tyranny of power, to pass another law stating that the first 

one had never existed.  It was null and void and had not 

existed.  And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter how the Minister 

of Justice colours it, how his government colours it, they have 

broken the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a little closer than Woodrow Wilson, John F. 

Kennedy once said about the United States, although it could 

apply to any western democracy: 

 

Our nation is founded on the principle that observance of 

the law is the eternal safeguard of liberty and defiance of 

the law is the surest road to tyranny. 

 

Or John Locke put it more directly: 

 

Wherever Law ends, Tyranny begins. 

 

And that's what we're seeing here, Mr. Speaker.  We're seeing 

the tyranny of power: the fact that the Minister of Justice and 

his colleagues have the power to break and change the law.  

They are exercising it. 

 

And it's not a question of the money.  It's a question of using 

the power vested in them by the people of Saskatchewan to 

provide good government, that this government is breaking the 

law and then using that power to retroactively change and say 

that that law had never, ever existed. 

 

And it's not a great revelation to the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, that this would happen.  Because we see before us 

unelected health boards.  We see the bullying of interest groups 

-- if they don't happen to agree with this particular government, 

they're threatened.  Arbitrary measures taken against their 

wishes.  They've known this for a long time. 

 

Ever since 1991, Mr. Speaker, they have seen this happen with 

this government.  And what is so surprising to us all though, is 

that the Minister of Justice, who seemed to be a reasonable 

man, would be so brazen in his contempt for the principles that 

MLAs are supposed to hold so dear, to the rule of law. 

 

I carry on with one last quote from the Minister of Justice . . . 

that the Minister of Justice may be very familiar with.  And this 

is from an article by A.V. Dicey 



March 29, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

from his treatise on British parliamentary law, Introduction to 

the Study of Law of the Constitution.  And this book was 

published in 1885 and is one of the most definitive works of the 

legal structure in concepts of British-style democracy and 

therefore one which I presume the esteemed minister has come 

across in his studies in becoming an officer of the court. 

 

(1645) 

 

And I quote: 

 

It is now well established law that the Crown can act only 

through ministers and according to certain prescribed 

forms which absolutely require the cooperation of some 

minister . . . who thereby becomes not only morally but 

legally responsible for the legality of the act in which he 

takes part. 

 

Hence, indirectly but surely, the action of every servant of 

the Crown, and therefore in effect of the Crown itself, is 

brought under the supremacy of the law of the land.  

Behind parliamentary responsibility lies legal liability, and 

the acts of ministers no less than the acts of subordinate 

officials are made subject to the rule of law. 

 

And it's a long and lengthy quotation, Mr. Speaker, but it 

clearly lays out that the Minister of Justice is legally 

responsible, is not only legally but morally responsible, for the 

acts that he takes part in as part of this government and in 

bringing forward the pieces of legislation that he has. 

 

He was legally and morally responsible for the piece of 

legislation he brought forward establishing the commission 

which provided the binding arbitration.  And he is legally and 

morally responsible for the act of bringing in legislation which 

will deem that that original Act did not exist.  That he broke the 

law, but because the Act will no longer exist when this piece of 

legislation is passed, that he had not have broken the law. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he is morally and legally responsible and 

we will hold him responsible for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commission that was set up provided for a 

binding arbitration.  Both parts -- the government on one side 

and the judges on the other -- agreed to abide by whatever 

determination this commission came down with.  Without 

regard to what the figures would have been, both sides agreed 

to abide by those. 

 

There was a law.  The Minister of Justice passed legislation in 

this House setting out this binding arbitration.  The Minister of 

Justice also signed a legally binding contract with the judges 

that they would agree to whatever settlement was proposed by 

this legally binding arbitration. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as has become the tradition with this 

government, contracts are only valid when they favour the 

government.  Contracts have no 

impediment upon this government when the government 

disagrees with them. 

 

Because we've seen them break the contracts, legally signed, 

duly sealed and delivered contracts with civil servants, with 

farmers, with the Co-op upgrader, and now with judges. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the question has to be, who will be next?  

Because surely, as these four examples demonstrate, there is no 

one in the province of Saskatchewan who can consider 

themselves to be sacrosanct from the machinations of the 

government opposite. 

 

If they desire to break a contract with you, they will do so 

without conscience -- without conscience, Mr. Speaker.  Not 

one of the members opposite has felt that there was . . . or has 

at least stated that there was anything wrong with what the 

Minister of Justice has said; what the Minister of Justice has 

done.  Not one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to consider what other laws that this 

government might break.  Sometime the government is going 

to be approaching a period of time when they are going to have 

to call an election.  And, Mr. Speaker, if they carry on the way 

they have been, the possibilities of their re-election will be 

somewhat remote. 

 

But what's to say that the Minister of Justice doesn't approach 

the House at that particular point in time and say, I deem the 

law that says you have to call an election every five years to be 

ultra vires, has never existed.  We deem it out of existence and 

therefore we can sit here as long as we want.  Oh yes, five 

years, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I noticed a number of unfamiliar 

faces on this side of the House, but they're sure noisy, and I ask 

them to please come to order, and let the member from 

Souris-Cannington continue.  Order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, what other laws might the 

government change because it doesn't suit their particular 

purpose to have those laws in place any longer?  Because it is 

no impediment on them -- at least it seems to be no impediment 

on them -- to break the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw Palliser spoke 

earlier in a motion about the traditions and the precedents that 

parliamentary democracy has established.  And indeed, 

tradition and precedents have been a large part of this House.  

But an even greater part of this House, Mr. Speaker, has been 

the rule of law.  I would question the actual tradition that is 

being established in this House with the examples I gave earlier 

-- the breaking of legal contracts with civil servants, the 

breaking of legal contracts with farmers, the breaking of 

contracts with the Co-op upgrader, and now with judges.  And 

it's not just a tradition of breaking contracts; it's the breaking of 

the law. 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1994 

And, Mr. Speaker, what needs to happen in this province is the 

Minister of Justice needs to be taken to court, and the 

government needs to be taken to court, because they have . . . 

and they continue to break the law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they will be judged accordingly by the 

public, not for the monetary concerns that they have, but for 

their disregard for the law of the land.  They place themselves, 

Mr. Speaker, above the law, above the people.  And by doing 

so, Mr. Speaker, they showed disregard, total disregard, for the 

people that they swore to provide good government to, the 

people that they swore that they would uphold the law for -- not 

break it, Mr. Speaker, but uphold the law.  And that is not what 

they're doing. 

 

And they have, Mr. Speaker, a good number of legal minds on 

that side.  And you have to question what they meant when 

they took their oaths.  What did the Minister of Justice mean 

when he took his oath to uphold the law of the land?  Mr. 

Speaker, he didn't swear to break the law; he swore to uphold 

the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is wrong.  What the government is doing is 

totally, totally wrong.  And if you look back on some of those 

quotes that I read: 

 

Behind parliamentary responsibility lies legal liability, and 

the acts of ministers no less than the acts of subordinate 

officials are made subject to the rule of law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is not above the law of this 

land.  He may wish to place himself above that law but he does 

so at his own impunity.  And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province will judge whether or not the minister and his 

government are right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will not abide by a 

government who breaks the law.  Mr. Speaker, we ask that the 

minister withdraw his legislation, admit that he is wrong in 

trying to break the law, and provide the judges with their 

financial reward and then proceed to do something about it 

after that point if he wishes.  But he does so within the bounds 

of the law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when a minister of the Crown breaks the 

law and is held legally liable and subject to that law, there is 

only one action, only one which can repay, which can provide 

confidence to this House that the government is proceeding in 

the proper manner, and that is for that minister to resign.  That 

is the only way that a minister who has broken his oath of 

office can redeem himself and allow the House to be cleansed 

of that influence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only way is for that minister to resign.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, if he doesn't resign, then the other course of 

action is for the Premier to demand his resignation and 

withdraw his appointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the honourable and the proper course of 

action.  That is the course of action as set out 

by tradition and precedents as spoken about by the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser.  That is the tradition -- not that you 

stand in the House and because you have the power of majority 

in the House to break the law and then change it, Mr. Speaker.  

The tradition is to resign if you break the law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's not just the Minister of Justice who is 

breaking the law in this case, but he is doing so with the 

acquiescence of everyone of his members and perhaps they 

should be searching their consciences about breaking the law, 

Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe it comes down to a 

question, as I said earlier, not of money, but of law. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen happen in this House on 

the day when the member, the Minister of Justice, brought 

forward his piece of legislation, and before that, when he broke 

from the law when he had 90 days to make his determination -- 

90 days, Mr. Speaker, to make a determination -- and he didn't 

do so.  And then he prevaricated and prevaricated; he put it off 

time and time again.  He suggested that, tomorrow, tomorrow I 

will come to a decision.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that's where he 

broke the law, and that's where he went wrong. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the debate be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


