




















































Hansard: May 09, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2145 

 May 9, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Registered Psychologists 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time, before we proceed to 

clause-by-clause consideration, I would ask the Associate 

Minister of Health to introduce the officials who have joined us 

here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Immediately 

to my right is Drew Johnston, who is our senior health 

professionals analyst; and sitting behind us, Mr. Chairman, we 

have Paul Leech, who is the director of community therapy; 

George Peters, executive director of the provincial laboratory 

services; Bonnie Swan, senior program analyst.  And we may 

be joined in a few moments by Lawrence Krahn, who is 

executive director, MCIB (medical care insurance branch). 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Good evening, Mr. 

Associate Minister and your officials.  I have a few comments 

to make this evening regarding Bill 41, An Act to amend The 

Registered Psychologists Act, and will follow those comments 

by questions. 

 

In the original discussions that this government had with 

parties affected by this Bill, the government expressed its intent 

to alter the level of qualification that would be acceptable to 

deem someone a psychologist.  And I have grave concerns 

about that intention, and I'm not sure that the amendment 

addresses the problems with the psychologists Act. 

 

As a registered clinical psychologist, I want to point out the 

level of trust necessary between psychologists and their clients 

-- trust which is absolutely essential for a professional to 

provide counselling and treatment for psychological problems. 

 

Now when an individual goes to their family physician, they 

have an understanding, they have an assurance that the 

individual has completed a certain level of education, taken 

appropriate examinations, and put in a required number of 

hours for internship and training. 

 

Without the trust that all practising physicians are qualified, 

people would understandably hesitate to submit to medical 

treatment.  Now that's not to say that there are not good doctors 

and bad doctors.  What it says is that anyone practising 

medicine has achieved certain qualifications. 

 

Now in the practice of psychology, there are many imitations of 

what one calls the real thing, but there 

are also very real standards, standards which have been set by 

the psychologists' association, standards that establish the level 

of qualification, not only for members of the profession, but 

specifically for the protection of the public.  Registered 

psychologists are responsible to uphold rigid professional 

standards, adhere to a code of professional ethics, or they risk 

losing their registration. 

 

Now this amendment merely continues to sidestep what I 

consider a very important issue, and that is the issue of the use 

of the title of psychologist, as it has done since this Act was 

first introduced in 1962.  Currently, Saskatchewan is below the 

standard in North America, where, of 60 jurisdictions, only a 

handful allow such an exemption as is found in Saskatchewan's 

Act.  In other words, we permit something that the majority do 

not. 

 

In Saskatchewan those who are not registered as psychologists 

provide many valuable and significant services within our 

mental health sector, our education sector, and to the public at 

large.  I believe that our system needs and can support varied 

levels of expertise in the field of psychology, but I am strongly 

rooted in my belief that there should be no confusion in the 

minds of the public as to the level of qualifications of the 

professional whose services they are engaging or submitting to. 

 

I believe that regular dentists, for example, should not be 

permitted to promote themselves as orthodontic dentists.  

General practitioners should not be confused with orthopedic 

surgeons, and chiropractors are not physiotherapists.  Now that 

is not to pass judgement on the value of one group over 

another.  It is to protect the distinction and the public's ability 

to make the distinction between the professional qualifications 

of the person providing them with the service. 

 

With specific respect to the amendment being proposed, I have 

some reservations as to whether this will allow the government 

to broaden the provision of psychological services by deeming 

persons with master's preparations who are in the employ of 

government, in the employ of district health boards and the 

University of Regina, deeming them to be psychologists when 

someone with similar qualifications outside the employ of 

those agencies would not have the right to claim that level of 

professional certification.  Further, those individuals may be 

deemed by the government to be psychologists but they would 

not in fact be able to register as psychologists by the 

Saskatchewan Psychological Association. 

 

Who then assures that everyone is competent and regulated?  

To whom are these people -- now deemed to be psychologists 

-- accountable?  Who will reprimand them for breach of ethics 

to which they are not forced by any regulations to subscribe?  

This also raises the question, who is responsible to determine 

what constitutes "qualified psychologist"?  Is it the government 

or the professional association? 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

Now I recognize that the government, as the result of limited 

resources, has made choices.  One of those choices is to reduce 

the level of qualification required to be a psychologist if you 

work for a specific, limited number of employers.  This raises 

questions as well.  If the government can amend legislation to 

adjust the level of education required to qualify as a 

psychologist, will it set a precedent -- a precedent which allows 

them as government to interfere with the professional standards 

of other professions? 

 

Theoretically speaking now, could the standards be further 

reduced to include therapists and counsellors?  If the 

government finds itself short of dentists in rural areas can they 

reclassify dental hygienists or dental therapists as junior 

dentists, or will they assume responsibility to ensure that rural 

areas receive the same standard of professional qualification 

that is available in urban centres?  What will determine the 

standard of professional qualifications in the future?  Will it be 

budgetary restrictions, government policy?  And if the 

government is going to offer people who are qualified, but not 

as qualified as those who have achieved a higher professional 

standard, why the need to repackage the product?  Why not 

label it with a different name so that people will be aware of the 

difference? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, with those comments, I have a few questions 

to pose to you and would very much appreciate your 

comments.  Could you tell me what discussions your 

department has had with the Saskatchewan Psychological 

Association regarding this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I recognize in the 

member's comments this evening, her deep and understandable 

interest in this piece of legislation and in legislation regarding 

psychologists generally.  I want to remind the member that this 

piece of legislation is a very narrow piece of legislation.  I 

would guess from the member's comments, too narrow for her 

taste; that she would have preferred perhaps, in this session, a 

much broader amending or renewal of the Act. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Chair.  In my view, when this type of 

professional legislation is brought into the House for 

legislation, I'm of the view it should only happen when there 

has been that full discussion in the community and there is 

some general agreement in the community.  I think the member 

would recognize here tonight that there is not entirely general 

agreement in the community around some of the issues which 

she raises.  And therefore, at this point, we have chosen to 

come with this very narrow amendment with the full intention 

of continuing the discussion in the community. 

 

In answer to your very specific question, there have been a 

number of meetings between the Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan and the Department of Health about this smaller 

amendment and about the whole question.  And I'm informed 

tonight that the society met last week in their AGM (annual 

general meeting) and over the course of this 

intersessional period -- this coming summer and so on -- we'll 

be working with our caucus committee on trying to resolve 

some of the very important issues that you raise tonight with 

the goal in future of coming with a much broader package. 

 

(1915) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I 

appreciate that very much. 

 

What I in fact have heard from my colleagues in Saskatchewan 

is that the initial draft of the legislation was a greater concern.  

And in fact they're a little less concerned, with the exception 

that they would like some further definition.  And you can 

correct me if I heard you wrong, but did I hear you say that 

your department actually is undertaking and would, within a 

particular time line -- you're saying intersessionally -- going to 

move forward and perhaps examine whether or not there could 

be further amendments to this Act?  I'm just wondering if I'm 

quoting you correctly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, the member is indeed quoting 

me correctly both, if I may say, both in working with the 

Department of Health and in working with our caucus 

committee. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Does this 

discussion . . . will it include the professional psychological 

associations in Saskatchewan for input?  Is this something that 

you would be looking forward to doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, the answer is yes, and 

involved in those discussions will be the Saskatchewan 

Psychological Association, the Psychological Society of 

Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan educational psychologists. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I just want one 

further clarification.  Is this specifically going to look at 

eliminating the exemptions found in section 10(2) of the 

Registered Psychologists Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In reference to that specific section, the 

officials assure me that the whole Act would be under 

consideration including that and I guess every other section. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, has 

your department undertaken a survey of other jurisdictions with 

respect to their licensing of psychologists and the use of the 

title, psychologist?  And can you tell me what information 

those surveys have told you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, to the question, have we 

reviewed other jurisdictions, the answer is yes, I think only 

Canadian jurisdictions.  I'm told that, just in very brief, that we 

find a difference that some jurisdictions use the title 

psychologist, some use psychological associate.  And so that's 

an important part of trying to frame legislation in our province, 

certainly not always the determining factor, but we do 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

want to know what's happening in other jurisdictions. 

 

And obviously before we went with the fuller amendment of 

the Act, we'd want to have a good and clear understanding of 

what's happening across Canada 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps you 

could -- Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister -- can you explain to me 

exactly what it is that you've changed in this Act and why it 

was brought forward at this particular time if, in fact, your 

examination of other jurisdictions has not transpired; if you 

have full intent on moving forward and making changes.  It 

sounds as though this is something that's going to be brought to 

this House again in the very near future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The impetus in the current circumstance 

to make this small amendment relates to the overall reform of 

health care delivery in our province where, as you will know, 

some of those services now being delivered by the province, 

through the Department of Health, will be transferred to the 

district boards for delivery -- a process some refer to as 

devolution.  Because we believe that some of this may occur in 

advance of the more extensive amendments to the Act, we 

brought forward this narrow amendment now in that short-term 

period. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I have one final 

question -- actually I have two.  What is the number of people 

actually affected by this amendment?  My understanding is that 

there could be as few as two and as many as four individuals 

who work for the district health boards or the University of 

Regina, who are not registered psychologists as per section 

10(1) of the Act.  Can you, or your officials, confirm that 

number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, in response to the member's 

question, we do not have the exact numbers here and I can 

commit that we can get exact numbers.  I'm told that 

provincially there are about 70 master's level psychologists.  

Now certainly not all of them are employed with the 

Department of Health.  We think it will be something more 

than two to four, but we're not sure of the exact number and I 

commit that we'll provide that to you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister -- and 

welcome to your officials as well -- as I understand it, one of 

the things this Bill does is extend professional recognition to 

the master's prepared psychologists trained or employed at the 

University of Regina.  As you know, the University of Regina 

is celebrating its 25th anniversary, and I presume it has had a 

psychology department throughout most if not all of that time.  

Why has it taken so long for this professional recognition to be 

extended, and are there any other examples of such oversights 

in professional recognition regarding the University of Regina 

that should be attended to as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe the answer here 

is that the Act that we're amending is older than the University 

of Regina.  And in fact, the 

issue was not brought to us by the university, but in fact was 

raised by departmental officials who noted this situation and 

therefore this is really at the initiative of the department.  We're 

not aware of any other circumstance in the province that exists 

like this. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, will the professional 

standing of the Saskatchewan psychologists be affected in any 

way, either positive or negative, outside of the province by this 

piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  This Bill relates to the role of 

psychologists within the new district health board system.  

Have you consulted with the psychologists as to their feelings 

about the health boards, and will their role or duties within the 

health care system be changed as a result of the devolution of 

powers to the health boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In terms of the transfer of programing to 

the district boards, we are endeavouring to consult as widely as 

possible with all those who will be affected, both at the district 

level and with professional associations and workers and 

others.  It's our assumption that the role and the services being 

offered by psychologists will not change dramatically, if they 

will change at all. 

 

One thing that might ought to be noted, that district boards as 

they assess their needs in the local communities and may in fact 

decide that there is more need for psychological services and 

other mental health services, and we may see greater demand. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will the public's 

access to mental health facilities be affected at all either by this 

Bill or by the devolution of responsibility over psychologists to 

the health boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- It would be our hope, Mr. Chairman, that 

in fact access would improve.  Again I suggest that our district 

boards will be doing very careful need assessment, both in the 

near future and over the long term, so that need assessment is a 

continual process.  And as those needs are identified, we hope 

that the district boards would act on them and which in the 

short and long term could mean, in fact, greater access. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, in your second reading 

speech you stated that the actual devolution of the psychologist 

staff to the health districts is still several months away.  Are we 

looking at that kind of time frame or have you set out some 

kind of time frame that you're targeting for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, in the longer term we're 

looking at a date of April 1, 1995.  And that is going to be 

governed entirely on the readiness of the district boards to 

accept the transfer of programing and responsibility and 

employees.  So there's no strict time lines.  We are looking at 

April 1, '95 as sort of the closing date. 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Who will be 

responsible for the transition of the mental health services 

affected by this Act to the health boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the district support branch 

of the department. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Physical Therapists Act, 

1984 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Mr. Minister, I do 

note that this particular Act has been greeted very favourably 

from the physical therapists of the province because they no 

longer have to have a doctor's referral.  I think that you should 

note first of all that I generally favour the idea of people having 

more ready access, but I do want to know certain things. 

 

It seems only logical that people may not know what kind of 

treatment they require and therefore could there not be damage 

done by administering physical therapy to patients, for 

example, with nerve damage or some other condition that could 

be potentially aggravated by physical therapy?  And what 

position does this leave the physical therapist in if in fact they 

take it upon themselves to -- in quote -- diagnose and treat 

patients? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, thank the member for her 

question and the concern that's behind the question.  I know it 

is a concern that's shared by physiotherapists.  The 

physiotherapist, as the member I'm sure will know, is a health 

professional, and someone who presents to a physiotherapist, I 

mean if there is indication that there should be other medical 

diagnosis, we're more than confident that the physiotherapists 

would refer to the appropriate . . . probably a physician for 

further medical diagnosis.  The physiotherapists have no 

interest of course in treating where it's inappropriate. 

 

And so we're confident that they're health professionals and 

that they will assess individuals who present for treatment as 

any other health professional would, I think, be it a chiropractor 

or others.  And if there's indication that the person who has 

presented for treatment requires some other diagnosis or 

investigation, we're confident that the physios will refer. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Chair, Mr. Minister, I take it then that what you're saying is that 

you don't have a concern with people presenting to a physical 

therapist with perhaps a particular condition that they've 

brought to 

the physical therapist and then this individual, as the health 

professional they are, would provide some treatment. 

 

What you're suggesting then is that there is a process where one 

would understand the particular situation they may be placed in 

as a professional; that it's incumbent upon them to make 

referrals wherever they deem necessary.  In other words, refuse 

treatment if someone comes to them.  Am I following 

correctly? 

 

Okay.  You're nodding, and I shall say that you're nodding for 

the record. 

 

I have one final question on this.  I'm wondering whether this 

has any impact on health care funding, this particular change to 

this Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Our expectation in this regard is that it 

will likely balance out.  There may in fact be some decrease in 

expenditures as a result of taking the step of the physician 

referral out.  There may be, on the other side of the equation, 

some increase in physiotherapy services. 

 

We think the two will almost balance out, so it shouldn't have . 

. . We're not in essence doing this as some sort of measure for 

cost saving.  We don't anticipate it's going to be a cost to, but 

rather a balance.  Our goal is to provide, as we've said, easier 

access. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Just one final comment, if I may, Mr. 

Minister.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I want to be on record that I 

think that this is a favourable direction in which to move.  What 

I'm concerned about is a kind of quality control -- measuring 

what transpires as a result of this change, and not just 

economically, but other ways as well, in terms of their own 

profession. 

 

Have there been things put in place then to measure changes in 

cost, measure increases in people accessing service, ways of 

being able to measure whether or not certain kinds of problems 

may arise?  Is there a place, for example, where physical 

therapists who begin to see some great advantage in this, and 

perhaps would like you to consider things further, or see some 

great disadvantages in the future, can come and have these 

things addressed promptly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member's question, 

we keep a close monitor, of course, of utilization of health 

services across the province, and that's no different in 

physiotherapy services.  And that kind of monitoring will go on 

very carefully.  We also, of course, keep the financial 

monitoring. 

 

In terms of quality of care, not unlike almost every other 

medical profession, the physiotherapists have their professional 

association and are therefore charged with monitoring and 

disciplining their own members. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as we 

stated today in this second reading, we recognize that this is a 

move to eliminate needless 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

waste and duplication in the health care delivery.  Has your 

department made any estimate as to how much money this 

move will save? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, again I would say that we 

anticipate this will likely almost equal out.  There certainly will 

be some savings, in that if an individual does not need the 

doctor's referral, there is some cost saving at that point. 

 

However we anticipate there may be some, although not 

dramatic, but some rise in the physiotherapy services which, on 

the other side of the equation, will cost a little more. 

 

We don't see this primarily as a means of saving a great deal of 

money, but we do see it as providing easier access for 

Saskatchewan people to the service and emphasizing what we 

want to emphasize throughout all of health reform and that's 

community-based services, services which are close to home 

and easily accessible. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Do you expect the 

case-load for physical therapists to increase significantly as a 

result of this Bill?  And if you do, do you have any kind of an 

estimate of how much that it will increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we do not anticipate a large 

increase; we anticipate small increase for physiotherapy 

services.  In jurisdictions where this legislation has existed and 

where direct access has been permitted for some time, all of the 

studies have shown that the increase in annual referrals was 

between 2 and 3 per cent and we expect that pattern will be 

very likely followed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, in general, are physical 

therapists paid by salary or by billings to the health care 

system?  If they are paid by billing, would an increase in 

case-load bring down the amount of the government's savings 

as billing increases?  If they are paid by salary, do you 

anticipate the government or the health boards will have to hire 

more therapists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the information that I 

have is that the physiotherapists in Saskatchewan are all on 

salary. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, the issue on which this 

Bill is premissed is that physical therapists have adequate 

training and professional ethics to assess patient needs without 

necessarily the intervention of a physician.  And we do not 

question that. 

 

However, just for the information of the House, could you 

outline the kind of training the average physical therapist goes 

through, the code of ethics they abide by, and how these 

standards and ethics are enforced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

his question.  The training for the practice of physiotherapy is a 

four-year university training, a four-year professional training 

at university. 

 Physiotherapists in Canada are all members of the Canadian 

Physiotherapy Association and that association has a code of 

ethics for all of its practising members which guides their 

practice and assures the quality of that practice. 

 

In the practice of physiotherapy, I'm told there are many 

opportunities which are taken by physiotherapists to update 

their education, continuing education and so on.  And of course 

we have our own professional legislation here in the province 

which governs the practice. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The only substantive 

concern we have, and it's not a large one with this Bill, is how 

it might affect the related field of chiropractic.  You have given 

your assurance that you have consulted with the physicians and 

physical therapists on this Bill; however, it occurs to me that 

chiropractors and physical therapists deal with many of the 

same kinds of patients so that chiropractors would therefore be 

affected by the public having easier access to physical 

therapists. 

 

Have you consulted with chiropractors on this Bill, and if so 

what was their reaction and how was it taken into account in 

the drafting of this legislation?  And if you didn't consult with 

the chiropractors, why didn't you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the executive director of 

the chiropractic association has had discussions with 

departmental officials.  Copies of the proposed legislation have 

been provided to the chiropractors.  I think understandably 

there will be some chiropractors who may have some concerns 

about this because they are also in the arena and the business of 

providing health services.  But generally there has not been a 

negative reaction from the chiropractors, and the chiropractors, 

as you know, have had direct access since the beginning. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is there a period of 

internship for a physical therapist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Part of the four-year professional training 

at university does include internship.  It's built right into the 

four-year program -- clinical training and internship. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Previous to this point, 

those needing physiotherapy had to be referred by a physician.  

Now people will be able to go directly to the physiotherapists 

for attention.  Is your department planning on imposing some 

sort of user fee for this service as you did with chiropractic 

care? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we are looking at the whole 

range of how physiotherapy services are provided in our 

province.  This is one step in a whole package.  Because we 

have now district boards -- as you know, delivering more and 

more of our primary services -- we want to work closely with 

our districts with physiotherapy services and with all services; 



2150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

both in terms of the need, and how we meet the need, and then 

of course as with every health service that we deliver, how 

indeed that's to be funded. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  I understand that there's quite a 

waiting-list for those seeking physiotherapy, and with your 

cut-backs, I can't imagine the situation improving much.  After 

the implementation of this system, how long can individuals 

expect to wait for physiotherapy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I think the member will be 

aware -- certainly many of us have been aware for some time -- 

that we do have a shortage of physiotherapists in Saskatchewan 

and we've been working at that.  And indeed part of our whole 

review of physiotherapy services is to answer that question. 

 

Now in terms of waiting-lists in individual clinics or with 

individual physiotherapists, I'm told that each of those will 

have a criteria so that they are trying to treat people who have 

the most acute needs first. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So then, Mr. Minister, are you anticipating hiring 

additional physiotherapists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, to try and address the 

availability of physiotherapists to Saskatchewan people, 

number one, this piece of legislation we see as important to 

doing that, to encouraging the practice of physiotherapy in our 

province. We are looking very seriously at other incentives that 

would encourage our trained physiotherapists to remain in 

practice in Saskatchewan and particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One of those areas that we're looking at very seriously is a 

bursary program with a goal of retaining physiotherapists in the 

province, and again I say particularly in rural Saskatchewan.  

We have been in conversations with the university to see just 

what it would take, financially and other, to expand the training 

program there and we are also looking very seriously at a 

rehabilitation assistant program that we believe could take 

some of the pressure off of the demand for physiotherapy 

services. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess just out of 

curiosity, who are the major users of physiotherapy services?  

Heart attack victims?  Athletes?  People of that nature?  Who is 

it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I think the answer is everybody.  There 

doesn't seem to be one predominant group, either by age or sex 

or occupation or location, that demand the services of a 

physiotherapist.  You'll find young people, elderly people, as 

you say people who have suffered athletic injuries, or stroke, 

heart attack, those injuries.  There's no particular group that 

shows any greater usage than any other. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Previous to drafting of this Bill -- in conclusion 

here -- what groups or organizations did you consult with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- We talked of course with the 

physiotherapists and I recall about a year ago, if not a 

little more, meeting with a group of physiotherapists here in the 

city over a reception.  We talked about the issue at that time.  

Since then we have consulted with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses' Association, SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), and I'm 

pleased to say all of whom support the legislation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting the Licensing and 

Operation of Medical Laboratories 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, there 

has been much discussion in the House regarding the 

advantages of private versus public medical laboratories.  

Could you reflect on how this Bill relates to that situation.  

Does this Bill affect only private labs, or public labs as well?  

And will a licensing office have any role in the investigation 

and quality control of public labs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, this particular piece of 

legislation really has no impact on the debate to which the 

member refers between private and public labs and which will 

be used by the districts and so on.  It does in fact apply to all 

labs whether they be private or public. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you clarify the extent of the jurisdiction of 

the licensing office.   Would a physician in a private practice 

who is qualified to run certain tests, or who has a staff member 

who is qualified to do certain tests, be prohibited from doing 

these tests in his own office?  Or I guess, in other words, would 

my own physician require a special licence subject to this Act 

to poke my finger, obtain a sample of blood, or examine it in 

his office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In fact, Mr. Chairman, the situation today 

is that if your physician has a lab, it needs to be licensed.  That 

doesn't change.  What really changes through the legislation is 

that the process of licensing is being changed.  But all labs, 

whether they be very small in a physician's office or to the 

largest laboratory in the province, must be licensed. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, further to this then, if a 

family doctor does, under licence, perform tests in his own 

office and if he records his findings in my personal medical 

file, would the director of the licensing program then have the 

ability to read my personal medical file if he conducts an 

inspection?  If so, would you not agree then that this is an 

intrusion into personal privacy and doctor-client privilege? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I want to assure the 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

member and any who may share his concern that if there were a 

circumstance that led to an investigation, in any investigation, 

that investigation would involve the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons as it does now.  And so I think the confidentiality 

aspect that the member raises and is concerned about is 

guarded, as it is now, by the professionalism of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  So if a doctor were to refuse to 

submit personal medical files on the grounds of doctor-client 

privilege, would he none the less be subject to a fine then?  Or 

would there be some other mechanism for him to stay within 

the bounds of the law without offending doctor-client 

privileges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we are here dealing with 

issues that are regularly faced by the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons.  When there is any investigation into any medical 

practice, they are going to run into this particular difficulty.  

This piece of legislation doesn't change that. 

 

Ultimately I expect that the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, if they feel the need is warranted, will access 

information.  And if the information is denied, I think then they 

take the steps to discipline their own member who will be the 

physician or surgeon involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Another aspect to this 

Bill that concerns me is that there are many people who 

conduct their own medical tests on themselves or on members 

of their families -- diabetics would be an obvious example 

where people take their own blood and conduct tests in their 

own homes.  There are many other examples of people 

receiving home care from relatives where the individuals need 

simple, standardized testing done on a daily basis. 

 

Is it true then that under this Act that no one in the province can 

examine a human specimen without a licence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I appreciate the member's 

concern in raising the question.  Indeed the Act identifies that 

situation and gives specific exemption within the body of the 

Act, if you refer to section 2(f)(ii).  I believe that exemption in 

the Act covers off your concern. 

 

We're not here trying to regulate or license those who will take 

blood samples, for instance, as diabetics.  The Act is to deal 

with labs.  And so the concern of the member, I think, has been 

addressed by the exemption in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As I understand the 

appeals process set out in this Bill, if the director of the 

licensing program refuses to grant a licence, or revokes a 

licence, this can only be appealed through the minister.  Since 

the minister is responsible for appointing the director in the 

first place, I would say it is fairly unlikely that the minister 

would reverse a decision made by his or her own hand-picked 

official. 

We have received a suggestion by representatives of medical 

laboratories that this appeal should be handled by some sort of 

independent agency.  Have you heard that concern, Mr. 

Minister, and what is your response to it? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, the member will be interested 

to know that this is not the only piece of legislation with this 

same sort of appeal procedure.  The same sort of procedure 

exists under The Personal Care Homes Act, and has been 

working, and has been workable, for some time. 

 

I think I understand the concern the member raises.  It has been 

raised by others.  I do want to point out to the member that, to 

be very clear, while the minister is responsible, it is indeed 

within the purview of the minister to appoint a person or 

persons to form an appeal committee, and may well do that.  

That is within the provision of the Act and indeed may well 

happen.  This has been the practice, as I've said, under The 

Personal Care Homes Act, and it seems to have worked quite 

well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I notice that, in the 

definition under the Bill for the position of director of the 

licensing program, unlike the previous definitions for the 

licensing board officials, there is no provision that the director 

must be a doctor, a medical technologist, or hold any other 

qualifications.  Is this going to be provided for in regulations? 

And if so, can we see a copy of those regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, to be clear, the quality 

assurance issues, the quality assurance issues -- the medical 

issues primarily -- are going to be in the purview of the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons.  They'll be setting the quality 

standards. 

 

The director is, in essence, an administrative-managerial role, 

and so we do not believe that that necessarily needs to be 

someone trained in the practice of medicine.  It could be but not 

necessarily.  And so we do not have the intention at this point 

of putting that into regulation, primarily based on the argument 

that the quality issues, the medical issues, will be handled by 

the college. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, why is the position of the director 

to be appointed purely at the discretion of the minister?  Why 

are there no provisions for a consultation with the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons or the medical laboratories in either 

appointing or setting the qualifications out for the director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, in essence -- in answer to the 

member's question -- the director's position is not unlike many 

other positions within the Department of Health.  This will be a 

position within the department and therefore would be filled 

through the regular public service competitions and so on, 

publicly. 



2152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

We've talked to the College of Physicians and Surgeons about 

this very issue and I'm told that they have no real concerns 

about either the qualifications or the job description. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many medical laboratories are affected by 

this legislation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- About 450. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many medical technologists are affected by 

the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, these figures are 

approximate.  If the member wants exact numbers we could get 

them but these are approximate numbers.  Approximately 1,200 

registered technologists, and about half that number, about 600, 

certified combined X-ray and lab techs, so 1,800 total. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  How many physicians' offices are 

connected with laboratories at this time and how many are 

free-standing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, for the member's 

information, I'll just . . . rather than trying sort out the specifics, 

I'll give you the whole list of the labs in the province. 

 

Currently, 223 physician office labs; 60 which are described as 

satellite labs; 4 private laboratories; 111 laboratories in rural 

hospitals; 7 labs in large community hospitals; 6 in regional 

hospitals; 6 in the base hospitals; there's 2 Red Cross labs; 1, 

our provincial lab.  And then in a category described as 

category 11, there are 31, and these will refer to labs, for 

instance, at mine sites or in health and social centres.  So that 

gives us a total, I hope, of 447. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many private laboratories in the province 

are connected with government-run hospitals in other medical 

services facilities, and how will this legislation affect them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- If I understand the member's question -- 

he may want to return to it -- but if I understand the member's 

question, there are two in Regina and one now in Saskatoon 

and they, like every other lab, will be licensed under this Act 

just like every other lab in the province. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I just have a 

couple of questions for clarification to add to what the member 

from Kindersley had raised.  I note that the most significant 

change, in my view, to this Act, is the replacement of the 

previous medical laboratory licensing board with an individual 

appointed by the Minister of Health to act as the director of the 

laboratory licensing program. 

 

Now the revised Act also specifies that this individual -- as you 

duly pointed out -- would be someone who is employed by the 

Department of Health and that other employees of the 

department may be appointed as deputy directors.  The concern 

that I have, Mr. Minister, that I'd like you to speak to, is the fact 

that 

there's no stipulation that this particular individual or the other 

individuals would have any previous knowledge of medical 

labs.  Could you in fact clarify whether or not that's the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- As I said, Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier, 

the intention with this Act is to separate and provide to the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons the quality assurance, the 

actual medical provision for laboratory work.  The director is in 

essence an administrative position.  And so we have not 

indicated that the director's position would need to be filled by 

a health professional, i.e., someone trained in the field of 

medicine. 

 

However, to your question, would we want previous 

knowledge of the lab scene in Saskatchewan, I think, when that 

position is advertised and so on; that would certainly be part of 

the criteria that would recommend someone for the position.  

What I've said is that it's not necessarily going to be a medical 

person.  It could be but it may not be.  I think knowledge of 

laboratory work would be an essential ingredient for someone 

who would want to fill that position. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 44 -- An Act respecting Chiropractors 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, can you tell us about 

the process of consultation with chiropractors that your 

department had that went into this piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we have in fact been 

working with and discussing this piece of legislation, 

consulting with the chiropractors for a period of two or three 

years. 

 

This has been under discussion by the chiropractors for some 

time.  I had an opportunity to meet with them just a couple of 

weeks ago and they tell me that within their own organization 

this has been through a long process of drafting.  They almost 

jokingly said they think this is the 25th version of the Bill.  

They've worked very hard internally, they've used some of their 

own legal expertise, their own experience in the profession.  

We've been talking to them, working with them for the last two 

to three years, the Department of Health, and so there has been 

a good dialogue and discussion all the way along before it 

reached the House.  We've also, of course, knowing that 

professions do not live in isolation, we've also talked and 

consulted with the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 

College of Physical Therapists and SAHO, Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations. 

 

(2015) 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under section 8 of this 

Bill the government reserves the right to appoint two members 

of the board for the chiropractic association.  I think this is 

fairly unusual since the government usually only appoints one 

member to the board of a professional body.  Why was this 

extra representation needed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'm told that in many of our 

professional pieces of legislation where there will be public 

representation on the professional boards, many pieces of 

legislation indicate one or two.  In this case we have opted for 

two, and again that is with the agreement and consultation with 

the chiropractors.  It is a process of trying to have public 

representation, public involvement.  That I know is being 

welcomed by the chiropractors and it's not inconsistent with 

other professional pieces of legislation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  We understand that some of the 

chiropractors that worked on this Bill felt that this person, an 

extra board appointee, was meant to be a lay person.  Is that 

your understanding, and if so, why wasn't that made clear in the 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I hope we're working on the 

same definition of lay person here.  Neither of the two 

appointees to that board will be employees or government 

people.  In that sense they will represent the public, they will 

represent the consumer.  So they're not government people that 

are being appointed, but indeed, members of the general 

community. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- This Bill substantially increases the disciplinary 

fines that can be imposed on chiropractors.  Can you expand on 

some of the circumstances that led to this increase and why the 

chiropractic association requested it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I just want to refer . . . we're 

just taking a few moments here to search the old Act and I find 

under the old Act -- I'd forgotten -- some of the fines or the 

penalties indicated by the old Act were in the amounts of a fine 

not exceeding $100 -- $100 -- and the subsequent offence is a 

fine not exceeding $250. 

 

It's my understanding that the chiropractic association felt these 

penalties were simply too small to be effective, and therefore 

have recommended the penalty amounts that are indicated in 

the Act here -- just to provide an effective tool for enforcement. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How many chiropractors are there currently 

practising in Saskatchewan and how does that compare with the 

number of practising chiropractors in 1992 and 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'm pleased to report to the 

member and to the House tonight that we're, in fact, showing 

some increase in the number of chiropractors practising in the 

province.  The figures that I have would indicate in 1992-93, 

we had 106 practising chiropractors in the province; in 

1993-94, a 

growth to 124; and in the current year, we're now up to 125. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- How will Bill No. 42, the one we've discussed 

earlier, An Act to amend The Physical Therapists Act, affect 

the viability of chiropractic practices in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we really don't expect any 

change in that regard.  We believe that those who will seek the 

services of a chiropractor will in fact continue to do so. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 59 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Thank you to the minister 

and the officials for the time spent this evening.  I think it was a 

worthwhile examination of the Bills presented here this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I want to join with my 

colleagues across the House in expressing our appreciation to 

the officials from the Department of Health who have been 

here tonight and so ably assisted with our consideration of the 

Bills.  And I want to thank the members opposite for their 

considered questioning tonight. 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask at this time, the Minister of Labour, 

please introduce the officials who have joined us here this 

evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- They have been introduced on 

previous occasions, but I'd be happy to do that again.  Deputy 

minister, Merran Proctor, on my left; and Jeff Parr on my right. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials.  This is the first time that the 

House has had the opportunity to deal with this piece of 

legislation since it was hoisted some time ago, and there have 

been a number of amendments brought forward by you, Mr. 

Minister, because of the significant concern that was voiced all 

across the province.  As you know, there are a number of 

groups out there that took a lot of issue with the Bill in its 

original form, and you are going to be presenting a number of 

House amendments to the Act. 

 

I wonder if you might tell the House exactly about your 

consultation process since this Bill was hoisted, and what has 

happened.  If you could, tell me which groups you've met with.  

Maybe give me an outline of two or three of the major areas of 

concern before we get into the clause-by-clause section of the 

Bill, because that was one of the criticisms of the Bill in its 

original form, was that the interest groups felt that there had not 

been an in-depth look at some of the issues at hand, and that 

there would be significant job 



2154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

loss, for one, as a result of the Bill in its original form. 

 

And I presume that some of the amendments which you are 

proposing to bring to the House tonight are a result of those 

consultation processes, to show that there will not be 

significant job loss.  And maybe that will speed the process up 

down the road because we will be aware of the areas where that 

concern was. 

 

So if you could briefly, Mr. Minister, give us an indication of 

what you've been doing over the last couple of weeks in order 

to make this Bill more compatible with the workforce in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me be honest with the member 

from Thunder Creek, and say that the bulk of my time over the 

last little while has been spent on The Trade Union Act, and not 

on labour standards. 

 

But the groups I have met with who really have discussed both, 

I would be hard put to enumerate them all one by one.  We 

have met with a number of business groups and we have met 

with a number of groups of trade unionists, both the executive 

of the Federation of Labour and with individuals, met with both 

fairly extensively. 

 

I think it is fair to say of the trade unionists, their concern is 

that the amendments not weaken the Bill.  They believe the Bill 

provides much-needed protection for working people and their 

only concern is that some of the amendments might result in a 

weakening of the Bill.  Therefore they support the Bill and are 

perhaps less than enthusiastic about the amendments. 

 

With respect to the business community the opposite might be 

said.  They welcome the amendments because they believe that 

it provides additional guarantees that the Bill will do what we 

said it's going to do and some of them would have perhaps have 

soon have passed on the Bill itself.  But they welcome the 

amendments. 

 

All that having being said, I think we have been successful in 

achieving a fair degree of consensus arising out of this Bill.  I 

recognize there are people on both sides who would dissent 

from that.  There are trade unionists who would want a stronger 

Bill; there are people in the business community would want a 

weaker or none at all. 

 

But having said all that I think we've gone a fair distance 

toward achieving a consensus on this Bill, and I think that's 

particularly true if you compare this province to virtually any 

other province which has wrestled with this legislation.  Here 

there has been much more consensus and less marching in the 

legislature and in the streets than has been the case in other 

provinces. 

 

So I think we've achieved a fair amount of consensus which has 

been a collegial effort by this government, and I think the Bill 

will resound to our credit but I also think the process has 

resounded to our credit.  I think we've achieved a fair amount 

of consensus and I 

recognize the dissent which exists on both sides. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, an area that I don't think has 

been addressed -- and perhaps you can elaborate on it further -- 

a number of the interested groups feel very uncomfortable with 

the fact that the legislation will be taken through the House and 

that regulations will be determined afterwards. 

 

One of the groups for instance has written to me still very 

emphatically saying that they feel that this Bill should be pulled 

until the entire regulatory framework has been laid out for the 

public to view.  They are somewhat sceptical of a process that 

for instance has the legislature not in session, that they then are 

dragged through a long process where one group can be pitted 

against another group.  That a very large business for instance 

on the private side, who might have hundreds of employees, 

would in fact be in a different regulatory process than those that 

might have a few. 

 

And I think the restaurant trades for instance, very worried 

about this regulatory process being done as a side issue where 

they don't have the ability to influence the process as much as 

they might have if the House were in session.  And that there is 

this fear and I know you expressed, earlier on in second reading 

and others, that no, that this was normal.  But I know from as 

recently as yesterday, when I received correspondence from 

one of the major business groups in the province, they still feel 

very, very uncomfortable about the fact that you will be doing 

regulations piece by piece, rather than sort of an inclusive 

process. 

 

And I wonder if you might comment on that and how you 

foresee that happening, to satisfy this real concern that they 

won't have as much exposure to the wider public because the 

House may not be in session while you're doing this. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I recognize that concern.  The 

problem is, the regulations are a subset of the Bill, and they 

have to be drafted with respect to a given Bill, a defined Bill.  

If we did what you asked, it wouldn't be fair to the opposition; 

it really would not.  Because if we were to draft the regulations, 

that assumes this legislature plays no role in the Bill itself,  and 

it's just going to rubber-stamp whatever we do. 

 

I don't think that is the legislative process with respect to Bills 

this difficult.  These are difficult Bills.  These are difficult 

areas, these are difficult Bills, and I don't think this is a 

rubber-stamping process.  I think they change, and we consider 

what things might work, and we listen to people as we go 

along.  And that means, I think, that we have to establish the 

Bill, the framework, and then do the regulations.  I don't think 

we can draft the regulations and then pass the Bill unless we 

assume that this legislature simply rubber-stamps.  We've got to 

pass the Bill, provide the framework, and then do the 

regulations. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

I guess the response I make to members of the community -- 

and I admit that they're not all in the opposition -- to members 

of the community who have that concern, my response is that 

either we short-change the opposition by assuming that the 

regulations we draft will be cast in stone, and that the Bill 

therefore is a defined Bill, and can't change from that; or we 

short-change the process in drafting the regulations by bringing 

the Bill here and then tabling the regulations already pre-done. 

 

If we want a true consultative process, and we do; and if we 

want to replace conflict in this area with consensus, and we do; 

we have to involve people in the decision-making process.  

That means we have to involve the opposition in the passing of 

the Bill, and we've got to involve the industry thereafter in the 

drafting of the regulations.  And there isn't another way to do 

both.  There isn't another way that the opposition can be treated 

with respect, with respect to the Bill, and at the same time give 

the committees real latitude in drafting the regulations.  There 

isn't another process.  We've got to pass the Bill, then we've got 

to pass the regulations.  You can't do it the other way around. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I understand your 

argument to a certain point.  You're right, this is a very 

complex piece of work.  Trying to follow this thing from the 

original Bill through the comments and criticisms that were 

made to the original Bill to now look at your House 

amendments and the criticisms that have come along on those 

House amendments, and trying to cross-reference that all back 

and forth is something that is very difficult for the average 

legislator to handle. 

 

One of my preferences, Mr. Minister, would be to perhaps have 

a few people sitting here with me as we go through this 

process.  You might call in my officials, individuals that 

understand this business and have significant concern.  We 

might have a better dialogue in here if I had access to those 

type of people.  But the only way I can do this is for you and I 

to dialogue, send the verbatim out, ask for comments on what 

has transpired, because it is a very, very difficult process. 

 

Earlier on you had indicated that there probably were a 

significant amount of the regulations already in place because 

they aren't that much different from the previous legislation.  

And I think it would be very helpful in our case -- because we 

are having to debate in here, and at the same time receive 

feedback from people in society -- if we perhaps even had a 

draft copy of what the regulatory environment . . . because the 

meaning and the nuances -- and I'll give you an example -- for 

instance, just going through when we get into section 3 here 

about the definition surrounding holiday pay which are 

changing significantly from what they were before.  And for 

me to understand the entire complexities of several different 

industries in the province who are affected by holiday pay is 

difficult. 

 

I guess what you're saying to me is that we have the 

opportunity to bring House amendments in here that 

may alter the Bill.  But my nine years as a legislator in this 

place tell me that the chances of very many of those things 

being adopted are slim and next to none because of the way 

that this place functions. 

 

So in effect the regulatory regime that usually evolves from 

these things is pretty well cast in stone no matter what we do 

here with the Bill.  And that's just life and I recognize it.  I 

accept it and understand that probably the next session of the 

House, if there are significant problems, will be the first 

opportunity to get at those things. 

 

So I say to you, it would make my life easier.  And I recognize 

the arguments that you put forward, saying that we have our 

role to play here. But it is an extremely difficult role without 

actually setting the people down in this House on our side to 

give you the type of thorough examination that would be 

absolutely necessary on some of these clauses.  I'd seek your 

comments on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It was initially my thought that we 

would do that -- that we would provide some draft regulations.  

I was discouraged from doing that by the groups with whom we 

met, actually.  Both the business community and the trade 

union community, both were concerned that if regulations were 

tabled at this point in time . . . And while I respect your -- I hate 

to use the word, it sounds a bit stuffy -- but I respect your 

honour in a sense: if you say you'll treat them as draft 

regulations, then I believe you'll treat them as draft regulations; 

it's not that I'm in any sense distrusting your word. 

 

But the groups with whom we met felt that if those regulations 

were made public, they would attain a certain immutability.  

They would be immutable.  And they wouldn't be able to get 

them changed.  And the groups with whom we had the 

discussions were anxious that the regulations not be tabled 

because they were afraid that then the government would feel it 

had to defend them. 

 

And frankly, there may be something to that, just as you feel 

that when we bring in legislation -- which I want to make a 

comment on in a minute, actually -- when we bring in 

legislation, you feel that you can't make amendments.  Perhaps 

not directly. That isn't common directly, but indirectly I think 

the opposition does have a role.  Indirectly you send this out to 

people who you think are interested.  They get it.  They get 

another point of view.  All they've got at this point in time is 

ours and the officials'.  They get another point of view. 

 

And they say, holy cow! -- pardon the language.  It may not be 

parliamentary. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Worse than that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It is.  I don't think the chairman's 

going to let me get away with it, though.  I thought that was the 

strongest epithet I could get away with.  Holy cow! I never 

thought it would mean that.  Then they come back to us and 

they say, this is 



2156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

intolerable. You know what you can do with this?  And we say, 

this was never intended.  Believe us, trust us. 

 

And Mr. Blakeney used to have a rule for -- the former member 

from Regina Elphinstone -- used to have a rule with respect to 

drafting legislation.  Don't tell me what you thought it meant.  

Tell me what is the worst interpretation which the words will 

reasonably bear, and that's the interpretation I'm going to use 

because that's a reasonable interpretation from the point of 

view of the public. 

 

So they come back to you with this, we look at this, and we 

respond accordingly.  We may move the amendments -- not the 

opposition. 

 

But the comment that the opposition plays no role in 

legislation, I think, misunderstands the process.  I think that it's 

a very superficial view of how this place actually operates. 

 

I think we had an effect when we were in opposition on what 

you did and we did not . . . we tried to take credit for it; I'm not 

sure the extent to which we succeeded.  But I think so does the 

opposition now have to play a role.  It may not be a direct role 

in moving amendments but it's a role nevertheless that is sure. 

 

One thing I am certain of, having spent a little under 20 years 

here, is that what is introduced by a minister has no guarantee 

of passage -- no guarantee of passage at all and no guarantee 

that it will be passed in its original form.  And I think the only 

way the process can be made to work is to have the Bill passed.  

Then we've got that.  And then we'll deal with the regulations 

which are a subset of it. 

 

I think anything else is really, really irrational.  I don't mean 

that you're irrational, but I think it is an irrational process to try 

to do it any other way. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well if you remember, Mr. Minister, last 

session, I think in workmen's comp and occupational health and 

safety, we brought forward over 40 amendments.  And I 

suggest to you that a lot of them were very well thought out.  In 

fact they were a representative voice of a great number of 

people in the community who expressed concerns to us. 

 

So we know how to do that exercise and were very diligent last 

session in bringing those amendments forward.  Those 

amendments were fairly well universally rejected by your 

government at the time.  I'm not sure, there might have been 

one or two very minor ones that you, in turn, adopted through 

your own wording and brought through. 

 

But that process was done.  And I'm not saying to you that that 

won't be followed again in this case. 

 

This particular piece of legislation is probably twice as difficult 

as both of those put together last year for people to understand.  

And that is why, when you had suggested earlier on that 

perhaps you would bring a set of draft regulations forward in 

some context and 

put that into the mix for us to discern, we sort of felt that that 

was a good suggestion and that would be forthcoming when we 

got into this Bill a little bit later. 

 

You mentioned the fact that the groups that you have consulted 

with didn't want that because they would then . . . you'd be a 

position of having to defend.  And that, Mr. Minister, in my 

view goes with the chair that you sit in and the turf that you are 

supposed to understand.  That's the minister's job is to defend 

and you can defend best by having your homework done to the 

greatest degree and understand that probably the greatest 

majority of people will back you in what you do. 

 

If you are afraid to bring forward something that will 

automatically generate a lot of controversy, that tells me then 

that the issue is not settled enough to go through this House.  

And it simply puts the opposition in a place of having to 

filibuster, of perhaps waste the time of this Assembly and waste 

the time of the people out there, doing something that you're 

not quite prepared to defend. 

 

And I think that's why a lot of groups with this particular item 

-- which has been many years since it has had a very thorough 

overview and rejigging and absolutely necessary because of the 

changing climate that we live in -- I don't think there's anyone, 

Mr. Minister, that denies that it was not appropriate in the 

1990s to look at these issues because our workplace is under a 

tremendous amount of pressure. 

 

We've seen jobs created that weren't here 10 years ago.  We're 

seeing a lot of people in their late 50's having all of a sudden to 

look at an entirely new environment.  They're not prepared 

mentally, or educationally, or psychologically to handle some 

of the things that are being thrown in front of them. And it is 

causing major disruption in our family units, having to cope 

with second jobs and a workplace that doesn't have all of the 

safety that people considered when they graduated from high 

school and moved into the workforce. 

 

But by the same token, Mr. Minister, I think you would be 

furthering a process by allowing those regulations to come 

forward.  I really do.  I believe your Bill would go through this 

House much faster, even though there might be some tough 

moments for you in having to defend something that you 

perhaps have a philosophical point of view on that runs counter 

to a great number of people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think the member is essentially 

right.  I think it would further the process in going through the 

House.  I'm not convinced that that would produce a better 

product in the end.  I think in the end we want to leave the 

sectorial committees -- as we have come to call them -- with 

the maximum degree of flexibility in dealing with their . . . in 

fine-tuning the regulations. 

 

I mean I can tell you what I think the regulations are going to 

say.  I am reluctant to put it in writing.  There's a real difference 

between what one says and what one 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

puts in writing.  And on any one of these given sections, I can 

tell you what the department's thinking is, and we'll be sharing 

that with the committee, and asking the committee to go from 

there.  But you must remember, we have the joint 

labour-management commission dealing with the broader 

issues of part-time workers and then working 

contemporaneously with that we have the sectorial committees 

flushing out the detail of the regulations. 

 

And we really, I think, are going to pre-empt the work of the 

joint labour-management commission if we table these 

regulations. And I don't think there's any difference between 

giving them to you and tabling them.  I think that if we're going 

to give them to you, we might as well table them; they then 

become public.  I don't think they're of any use to you if you 

can't disclose them.  I assume if I send them to you, you'll want 

to discuss them with others.  Once you do that, they are then in 

the public domain and we might as well table them.  So I don't 

see any difference between tabling them and giving them to 

you.  I think it has exactly the same effect. 

 

I do think if we do that, there will be a certain rigidity built into 

the system.  And what is more, I think the people who we 

would like to see serving on these committees are going to 

think that their work is being pre-empted and that there's 

nothing left for them to discuss because we have made the 

major decisions.  That's particularly true of the joint 

labour-management commission, the single commission, which 

will review the broad issues of part-time workers.  I think that 

is true. 

 

(2045) 

 

I think the draft regulations -- which we would like the 

committees to start with in the area of part-time workers -- I 

think it would, to some extent, pre-empt their work and they 

would feel they would be faced with something that was a fait 

accompli if we were to do this. 

 

If it were just the sectorial committees, I think it might be 

different.  I've agonized over this because I fully believe that 

good government is accountable government; accountable 

government is that which is, in the broadest sense possible, 

accessible and in which information is shared.  I think good 

government is a government which shares information.  And I 

had every intention of tabling these until the process began to 

develop and change once we tabled the Bill and we entered into 

discussions.  And particularly with the joint 

labour-management commission now, I think it's wise not to 

have these regulations which will cover some of the same 

issues which they will want to discuss.  And I'm really afraid 

that we'll pre-empt their discussion. 

 

Maybe the labour-management commission will do what we 

always intended to do; maybe that's all they'll do, is come back 

and say yes, that's what we'd have done.  But I don't think they 

think that. I don't think that either side think that we have all 

the answers.  I think both sides think that they would like 

us to redirect some of our thinking and I'm hopeful there will 

be some agreement on how our thinking should be 

redeveloped. 

 

I am impressed -- and I want to say this -- I am impressed with 

the degree of consensus which we've achieved.  I know there is 

conflict, and in some cases bitter conflict, about some of this. 

But I'm also impressed with where we are.  Where we are is a 

degree of consensus on what should be done that I think truly 

rebounds to the credit of the province -- not to the credit of the 

government, but to the credit of the province. 

 

As I went around the province, I was impressed with people's 

decency and thoughtfulness, and their concern for their 

neighbours.  The workers who knew, the business wasn't there, 

they didn't have a job, and they, quite apart from that, they 

cared about the business. They wanted it to succeed. They 

shared a sense of pride and accomplishment that the owners 

had. 

 

I was impressed as well with the sense of compassion and 

responsibility which most of the employers had for their 

workers.  They genuinely cared about them.  And I think that 

has shown itself in this process because I think we've achieved 

a degree of consensus that I never imagined possible.  With a 

little less far along the road with The Trade Union Act, I'd be 

prepared to admit that, but with labour standards, we've done 

better that I thought we would, and I want to try to make that 

process work. 

 

I really think what we want to do with labour-management 

relations is put behind us the conflict and replace it with 

cooperation.  That I think would be to the benefit of workers, it 

would be to the benefit of management, and it would certainly 

be to the benefit of the province of Saskatchewan and the 

nation called Canada. 

 

And it would certainly make the life of the Minister of Labour 

a lot easier, not . . . Yes.  Last and least.  One of the members 

on the other side comments, says it would make the life of the 

Labour minister easy. That's for certain.  That isn't really a 

serious consideration, though. 

 

It is our view that what labour-management relations need is a 

more cooperative relationship.  That requires changes on both 

sides.  And it requires some of the actors who are frankly more 

pugnacious than productive to stand aside. But I think we've 

accomplished a good deal here and I really want to let the 

process work.  I think it will work, and for those reasons I, 

contrary to my every instinct, which I explained earlier, 

contrary to my every instinct, I am reluctant to table those 

regulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask leave of the 

House to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 



2158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would like at 

this time to introduce a person whom I'm sure is known to 

many members at least on this side of the House, and perhaps 

to other members as well, and I would like to pick up on the 

comments that the Minister of Labour was making about the 

need for a more cooperative . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member should 

not involve those in the galleries in our discussion.  It suffices 

to simply introduce those who have joined us here. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- All right, my apologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

would like to introduce someone who's a well-known person 

from Saskatoon, very involved in the cooperative movement in 

Saskatoon, and also very well known in jazz musician circles.  

And I'm sure that he's going to have much to say with the 

upcoming Saskatoon jazz festival.  I would like to introduce 

Mr. Skip Kutz to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In this business I have got extremely 

little applause.  I'd like to savour what very little I get.  That 

last comment of mine drew a scattering of applause, and I think 

I'd like to savour that for a while. 

 

On that note, I think I will therefore move the committee rise, 

report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to amend The Registered 

Psychologists Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 42 -- An Act to amend The Physical 

Therapists Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 43 -- An Act respecting the Licensing and 

Operation of Medical Laboratories 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 44 --  An Act respecting Chiropractors 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I would ask for leave to move to the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Government 

Vote 24 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome 

back, Madam Minister, and your officials.  I just have a few 

more areas to cover. 

 

I believe where we last left off we were discussing your 

temporary employees and you informed me that my 

information was wrong, and that you had far more temps than 

what I had believed from the globals.  I wonder if you could 

tell me -- I asked you for highs and lows in that particular area 

-- if you could give me those numbers now. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes.  Thank you.  I can give you . . . if 

you would like, I could give you a breakdown of month by 

month in 1993-94 or I can give you the high of 1993-94.  The 

high was August, where there were 76 total, temporary casual; 

and the low was in December, where there was 47 temporary 

casual. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  So that 

explains why we have such a large number.  I believe the totals 

went from about 523,000 to 1.088 million.  And if I average 

those numbers out, I should come up with a better figure than I 

had before? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If you average all the numbers out, they 

would come to 66 personnel, temporary casual, involved in the 

department for that fiscal year. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- That's still a fairly significant jump, Madam 

Minister.  You had an average, I believe, of 46 the year before 

for 523; 66 would be about one-third more, but the budget is 

just about doubled.  I'm wondering . . . and as I said, last year 

the temporary average would have been about $11,000.  These 

numbers still seem fairly high.  Has there been anything beyond 

a normal 5 per cent increase that 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

would drive those numbers up that much? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I was going to correct what you have as 

far as '92-93. The average was .43 for the in scope, casual, 

semi-permanent, in 1992-93.  The reason, I guess, can be many 

and varied.  There's short-term contracts and people are coming 

and leaving the department.  But there has been nothing more 

than the average two and a half per cent that was applied under 

the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union) 

contract. 

 

There were other increases, I guess, when you take the in-scope 

or in-grid advancement within the range, as they move up 

within the range year over year, and so that would have brought 

up some of the salaries.  Some were reclassifications which was 

a result of the amalgamation of the department. 

 

We had a compensation to the staff in Sask Housing in July 

1993, from converting the collective agreement in Sask 

Housing to an SGEU main table agreement.  So that also 

increased the amount of salary in that category. 

 

So there were a number of variations but I think it can be said 

unequivocally that there was no more than a two and a half per 

cent increase for any of the workers who belong to the SGEU 

union. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Could you tell me, Madam Minister, what the 

difference was in that conversion at Sask Housing, taking them 

from where they were to SGEU.  Could you give me a global 

number for that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The conversion in the Sask Housing 

division amounted to about an extra 3 per cent per worker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Do you have a number for that, a total dollar 

volume in that conversion -- what extra it cost to convert to 

SGEU? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have it here but we can provide 

you with those numbers. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  That'll be of 

some interest.  On your out-of-scope permanent employees, it 

looks like this class of employee cost you about 8 per cent 

more while you had one fewer person in this category.  Is 8 per 

cent normal, given some of the other numbers that government 

has been insisting upon, as we go through budgeting process? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Again, on that number of 98 out-of-scope 

permanent, that number has fluctuated through the year and it 

goes from a high of five down to a low of three.  For example, 

in April 1993 . . . oh I guess we had 15 in April of 1993.  In 

May, we had three; in June, four.  We don't have the figure for 

July.  In August, we had three; September, we had four; 

October, we had three; November, four; December, five; 

January, five; February, four; and March, five.  So that number 

fluctuated up and down. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- How does that work, Madam 

Minister?  I'm talking about out-of-scope permanent 

employees.  Are these being seconded in and out then, of the 

department? Because I would expect that your permanents, 

your out-of-scopes would be managerial-type people who are 

already being paid fairly significant salaries.  Can you explain 

to me how you get that much fluctuation in your permanents? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we gave the wrong 

numbers just now.  I apologize.  We'll go back and correct 

those numbers.  The ones I gave were related to the 

out-of-scope . . . no, the in-scope, casual temporary.  But we 

will find those numbers so that you will have an understanding 

of the fluctuation within the management level. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well my research shows me, Madam 

Minister, that what we're probably dealing with here is not 

necessarily 8 per cent due to raises but probably 8 per cent due 

to the higher salaries that you have given to people who 

replaced existing positions.  And I'd still like to know what the 

difference is. 

 

I mean 8 per cent to the category of employee that are in the 

upper scale of pay in government, 8 per cent seems to me fairly 

high compared to some of the other areas in the province.  So 

I'm wondering if you could explain to me if . . . tell me that I'm 

wrong in my assessment of what has been going on. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Okay.  I apologize for the mix-up in the 

answer to the last question.  We reorganized the department in 

March, on March 31, 1993, and at that point when 

reorganization took place we had a vacancy for an ADM 

(associate deputy minister), an associate minister of culture and 

recreation division. 

 

So as the department has come up to full complement we have 

brought in more management level people to take care of the 

recreation cultural division, and then we brought in also the 

public safety division from the old Environment and Public 

Safety department.  So it was a matter of reorganizing the 

department into those various divisions, and with that came an 

increase in the management level of personnel. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, how many of those people 

were brand-new to those positions, that weren't simply transfers 

from another area of government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The two new positions would be the 

Provincial Librarian and the associate deputy of recreation and 

culture, Ken Alecxe. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well these were people that were brought in 

totally brand-new.  Okay. 

 

Madam Minister, in your contract employees the costs appear 

to have gone from 191,787 last year to 367,269 this year even 

though you only hired three contracts as opposed to four last 

year.  That works out to 122,000 a contract.  First of all, could 

you explain this large overall change, and how do you justify 

those type of wages given that we've just been through a 

number of exercises to cut down wages and 



2160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

percentage increases across government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- On your data that we gave you, you have 

a number that says out-of-scope permanent, 98 personnel for 

5,378,800.  And then down two you have "contract" where you 

have three personnel for 367,269.  When the staff put these 

numbers together they included in that 98 the contracted 

personnel in the minister's office, the three people who work as 

secretarial staff and the three who work as ministerial staff.  So 

that 98 includes those but the number 367,000 includes their 

salary.  So there was a mismatch when they put these answers 

together.  What we should have in out-of-scope permanent is 

the number 92, and under contract, the number should read 9.  

And that relates to the total contracted cost, salary cost of 

367,269, which would include those six people working in the 

minister's office. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, well you understand, Madam Minister, 

when I look at last year's numbers I have to trust that the 

cross-referencing being done by your department officials are 

accurate, that if there's nine instead of three, then we will do 

our mathematics a little bit differently. 

 

You indicate you have six people in your office that are under 

contract? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's right.  The three people who work 

as secretarial assistants are on contracts, and the three people 

who work as ministerial assistants are contracted people. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, in the information that you 

have sent to us you have a category which is "other," in which 

you've spent $571,000.  That seems like a lot on miscellaneous 

for an undetailed cost analysis.  Can you explain to me what 

these other costs are, because I believe in the previous year 

there were no such category, or if it was, it was a very small 

amount of money. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I can give you the breakdown.  

There are a number of items.  First, overtime is 110,149; TPHD 

(temporary performance of higher duties), $6,807; a shift 

differential for $1,808; stand-by fees for $996; northern district 

allowance for $11,448; employee education expenses for 

$9,790; severance pay for 279,938; staff housing for 1,644; 

allowance for special services, 1,389; pensions and benefits, 

90,052; car allowance, 2,811; honorariums and retainers, 

31,153; and career assistance for 14,606.  The total of that is 

$562,591. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, Madam Minister, would you mind 

providing me with that list, and also could you break that 

severance payment down for me by the number of individuals 

and the amounts that they received in severance. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we're looking it up.  We'll send it 

over to you.  The list I just gave you we can send over right 

now, but the severance payments will take a 

minute to get that data. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. 

 

You mentioned a figure of over $31,000 in honorariums.  Can 

you tell me what type of honorariums we're dealing with here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's a number for the boards and 

commissions.  We were just looking . . . It's in the information 

we provided for you.  There are a number of boards and 

commissions who receive honorariums.  We can provide . . . I 

believe it's in that list, that document that you have there.  Yes, 

on page . . . well these aren't numbered, but it's question no. 7. 

 

Do you want me to go over all the boards and commissions that 

were given honorariums and payments? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, we'll check that Madam Minister.  I'm 

sure if it isn't in here you would be more than willing to 

provide that list to us.  This year's figures that you've given us 

show that you failed to tender on 58 of your 86 computer 

purchases, including one for around $40,000 in the housing 

division.  Can you tell me why you would not tender on 

something that size? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That project was an upgrade to an 

existing system that we use in Sask Housing for all the local 

housing authorities and the company that owns the software 

had the expertise to do the upgrade, so that's why it wasn't 

contracted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Can you tell me then at what the threshold 

number is when you do contract? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The benchmark is $10,000 unless there 

are exceptional circumstances like the one we've just 

mentioned.  But usually anything above 10,000 is set to tender. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Can you tell me, Madam Minister, what 

would be exceptional about this software?  I don't know a 

whole lot about computers, but it seems like these days you can 

pretty well cross-reference anywhere you want and you'll come 

up . . . if your system's IBM compatible, there's all sorts of 

people out there that can provide the same stuff.  So I wonder if 

you could tell me what is exceptional about this system. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well they own the system and they were 

the ones who had the expertise in providing the software.  So I 

guess the point is that the original system, the original package 

that was being used by the housing authorities, was designed 

by this company.  And when there was an upgrade needed, then 

they turned back to that company to provide the expertise to do 

the upgrade. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But as far as you know, there's nothing about 

this software that makes it unique in any way?  Like I said, if 

your system's IBM compatible there's all sorts of people can 

supply you software 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

that'll be compatible with your system.  Is this an Apple system 

or something else that makes it different? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This company owns that system.  They're 

the ones that own the computer system, so they are the ones 

that did the upgrade on the software package. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would compliment you, Madam 

Minister, on the fact that it looks like your computer costs in 

this last year were around $300,000 and that is a drop from 1.8 

million the year previous -- at least that's what my data shows.  

And so I would compliment you and your officials for reducing 

that number significantly.  There's others in government that 

haven't been quite so diligent this year when it comes to buying 

computer hardware. 

 

Madam Minister, one final question here.  When we were 

talking about honorariums we quickly looked through here.  

You have an individual, a number of individuals here, receiving 

far more than the total actually of the honorarium that you 

talked about.  There's an Ann Kipling-Brown who is your 

adviser on the status of the artist for $31,000.  Can you tell me 

what that individual does for $31,000? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The number that you have there is for the 

total cost of the committee.  There were 10 members on the 

committee and that cost includes accommodation costs, travel 

costs, honorariums.  So the number you have in that category is 

a total cost for the committee's work.  It includes the 

honorariums but is not the only cost. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I would suggest to you, Madam 

Minister, for accountability purposes then, we must be dealing 

with the same thing here.  You've got Alderman Mark 

Thompson down for just about 16,000 and you have Sonia 

Morris for 21,000-plus.  I would presume then that these are the 

same type of things where there would be a committee in place 

that would be accounting for this money. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's true.  All those committees . . . you 

have the head of the committee and then you have the cost of 

the committee and the cost includes all of the personnel who 

worked on the committee and all the associated cost with that 

committee's work. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I would 

suggest that in future we would like to have all of the 

committee members with a cost attached to them because the 

rest of them are very good here.  You know, you've got it right 

down to $130, $150, that type of thing and that makes it easy 

for me to understand on your honorariums what exactly you're 

up to. 

 

But I would like those committees broken down by individual 

with the amounts attached to them so we understand who's 

getting what here.  Because just the total of those three is nearly 

$70,000 which, if I were just to accept honorarium, would give 

me a totally 

different idea. 

 

So if you'll make that commitment, Madam Minister, I think 

we can bring our business to a conclusion here. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we will provide you with that 

breakdown.  I just wanted to say the average honorarium was 

between 75 and $100 for each of those committee workers.  

But we'll provide you with all of the costs associated with 

honorariums for all the committees. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, I welcome your staff here this evening.  Madam 

Minister, I have several questions that I want to quickly go 

through different areas, and it has just come to my attention 

that you had sent to our caucus an estimates package.  So if 

some of the questions are answered in the package, just make 

reference and I can follow those through later. 

 

Madam Minister, on some of the cost savings in your 

department, now the total budget for the department is 

increasing by eleven and a half million dollars.  Now that's an 

increase of six and a half per cent.  Now what benefit will the 

people of Saskatchewan receive as result of this increased 

spending? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The increase in our budget is attributable 

to the infrastructure program of $10 million, and also we had 

an increase in the futures allocation under the rural conditional 

grant program.  So when you combine that with the decreases 

in other areas, what you end up with is an increase overall in 

the budget of $11 million.  But most of it can be attributed to 

the infrastructure program. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On page 4 

of the budget speech, it says that . . . and I quote: 

 

 Last year, almost $18 million was saved by making common 

sense changes to the day to day operations of government . . . 

 

 This year, we will save an additional $12 million . . . 

 

Madam Minister, could you please tell me where your 

department made its share of these savings last year and where 

you intend to make the savings this year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Last year when we amalgamated the 

departments, we had a savings of $2 million.  This year, there 

was a further reduction of $800,000 by doing certain 

streamlining within the department and some program cuts and 

efficiencies within the personnel in our department. 

 

So we had an $800,000 what we call a program expenditure 

reduction this year.  And last year we achieved the $2 million 

by virtue of amalgamating the departments. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  In these 

areas that you spoke of, as far as the 



2162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

decision-making process that was used to identify these savings 

and go ahead with them, did you use outside consultants or 

efficiency audits?  Were they performed?  What other methods 

of identifying cost-cutting measures were used? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Our individual managers and associate 

deputy and the deputy minister did the assessment and made 

the decisions about where the efficiencies could be gained.  So 

we did not use any external management company to do an 

audit or review.  It was the management people within our 

department that made the recommendations for the cuts. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The total 

staff has been reduced by about nine full-time equivalent 

positions but this is an overall total.  So how many employees 

have been hired in your department through the Public Service 

Commission in the past year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We can find that answer if you want to 

wait.  But you will find it also in the document that we passed 

over to you and to the members of the opposition on prepared 

questions. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. I haven't had 

a chance to look at that document so I appreciate you telling me 

if it's in there or not. 

 

Of those employees that we're discussing, how many are 

classified as in scope, and how many are management and 

professional classification, which is out of scope? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's in the document you have.  It's the 

first question on the second page of the document.  How many 

are in scope -- 299 are in scope and out-of-scope people are 96. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, how many employees 

have been transferred from in-scope to out-of-scope status 

during the past year?  I'd ask to be provided with a complete 

list of those transfers, including employee name and 

department, old classification or title, new classifications and 

titles, and salary change if there was any salary changes.  If it's 

in here, just let me know.  If not, I guess you could provide that 

in a written statement instead of verbal. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There was no one who was transferred 

from in-scope to out-of-scope positions. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- How many employees have been 

reclassified in your department in the past year through the 

Public Service Commission's reclassification process?  And 

was the reclassification process initiated by the employee, or by 

the department, or the Public Service Commission? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The answer is question no. 2 on the 

document, which is 12.  But in regards to who initiated the 

process, some were initiated by the 

department and some were initiated by the personnel.  So the 

reclassification in numbers is 12.  The process can either be 

through recommendation from the management or 

recommendation from the employee. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, of the 12 that you 

referred to in this document now, we have all the names and the 

positions and the numbers and all the information on those 12? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, you only have that number.  If you 

want the detailed information, we'll provide it for you. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Yes, Madam Minister.  Well if you're 

going to have the detailed information provided, then can you 

include that position number, employee name, department, 

classification or title, and salary change, and the full gamut? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We'll provide you with that information. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Did your 

department abolish any positions or terminate any staff in this 

last budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The answer to your question is no. 3 on 

the information packet that you have.  It includes the employee 

and the position and so on and so forth . . . termination of 

contract.  I can read it out for you if you like, but it's behind 

question no. 3. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  On March 

l8, 1993, the budget day for the '93-94 fiscal year, your 

government cut 291 government positions.  The minister for 

Public Service Commission has already confirmed the cost of 

the severance to those individuals was 2.8 million for all of 

government.  Could you advise this House of the cost of 

severing those employees in your department? 

 

And I ask you to provide me with, I guess, a list of information 

that I could send over to you, but it's positions abolished, 

including position number and working title, name of employee 

employed in the position at the time of abolishment, seniority 

or years of service of each terminated employee, amount of 

severance paid to each employee, whether the employee has 

since been re-employed within the government and where, and 

what has the domino effect been in the departments where staff 

were eliminated.  For example, how many jobs were 

reclassified and at what cost in order to absorb the duties of the 

terminated employees. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- A number of the answers to the questions 

you've asked is in the document that you have.  In regard to the 

total amount of severance pay when we downsized our 

department, the number is 279,938.  That was the number I 

gave the member from Thunder Creek a few minutes ago on 

severance pay, total severance pay. 

 

You had a number of other, more detailed questions there, and 

if you would send that over, we would 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

provide you with the answers, but there is some . . . some of 

that information is in the packet you have.  The global amount 

for severance pay is, again, 279,938.  And the answers to the 

other questions you have, we'll provide to you if you'll send 

over your question. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Would you 

care for me to send this to you so you have a list of the 

questions?  And I guess then you can just send them to us at a 

later date. 

 

In administration, your officials have saved 268,000 in 

administrative spending, and I'm wondering how this was 

achieved and where did you save the money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That number includes the following 

items. 

 

Program service reduction decisions taken in the 1994-95 

budget:  one, to eliminate funds for relocation was 45,000; 

reduce computer support was further 45,000; abolish an 

executive position was 50,000; savings on pension and benefits 

in housing was 12,000; reduce communication funds for 

15,000; absorb unfunded reclassifications for 11,000; and 

absorb recreation reduction for 40,000.  And that comes to 

$218,000. 

 

Mr. McPherson -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  How have 

internal administrative services changed as a result of these 

savings and are there any services your department is now 

going without? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- To your question, we will not be 

eliminating any services to our clients.  We have achieved these 

efficiencies by better management practices and we have relied 

more on branch managers to be able to internally manage their 

budgets better, instead of . . . and of course to absorb the costs 

rather than to rely on extra funds through budget allocation.  So 

I guess it's just a tightening up of management practices and 

relying on all the managers in various branches to be more 

efficient and to make better use of their personnel. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, the total staff count for 

the department is going down, but in the subvote under 

administration it's going up.  How can you explain this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- When we amalgamated the various parts 

of the government last year, we took personnel from both Rural 

Development and Public Safety from the old Environment and 

Public Safety department.  They transferred the people in our 

last budget but they didn't transfer the PYs (person-years).  And 

so what happens this year is that that mistake has been 

corrected and now the PYs show up, so we had three people 

that were transferred from Public Safety during the 

amalgamation process.  They weren't accounted for in the 

'93-94 budget as PYs, but they are accounted for in the '94-95 

budget. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under 

accommodation and central services subvote, 

there's a new charge for capital operating that appears in the 

budget.  Can you tell me what this means and how that money 

will be spent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That is long-overdue shelving at the 

Provincial Library.  The Provincial Library has had for a 

number of years some severe problems with their shelving for 

books, and we have this year undertaken to provide new 

shelving in the Provincial Library. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam.  Under municipal 

services, the budget shows an increase of $100,000 for 

financial assistance and policy services.  How much of this 

item is financial assistance, and does all of the increase go to 

financial assistance to municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are no grounds attached to that 

subvote.  What we have is a branch of the department that 

provides legislative and policy research and that number is the 

cost for the in-department service.  It doesn't pertain to 

providing grants to third parties. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Urban revenue sharing is down this year 

by 5 million, so which towns and cities will be most affected 

and how will the increase be apportioned, by a per capita or 

whatever? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The reduction was applied uniformly; 

everybody got an 8  per cent reduction from last year's 

allocation. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Eight per cent for cities, towns, it didn't 

matter, whatever? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Everybody got an 8 per cent reduction 

from last year's allocation. It doesn't matter whether it was 

cities, towns, or village. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- The urban-rural split in Saskatchewan is 

approximately 50-50, but the revenue sharing between urban 

and rural is going to be 58 to 42.  Last year the split was even 

greater in favour of urban municipalities -- 62 to 38.  How do 

you account for this being proportioned, a greater share going 

to urban municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The revenue-sharing pools have different 

criteria for the two different classifications of municipalities.  

On the urban side the pool is allocated mainly on a per capita 

but also on the cost of delivering services and urban 

municipalities deliver quite a wider range of services than do 

the rural municipalities.  In general the RM (rural municipality) 

grants are applied to road maintenance and construction. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Given that answer, is there exceptions 

made for a municipality like Corman Park where they have a 

lot more service to deliver? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As I understand your question regarding 

how do we allocate the money between 



2164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

various classifications of municipalities, they're based on a 

formula and it's . . . Corman Park is an RM and the allocation 

under the rural revenue-sharing grant is as the formula will 

provide.  I'm not quite sure I understand the nature of your 

question. Perhaps you could rephrase it and I could better 

understand what you're trying to get at. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Well your answer earlier, you had 

mentioned that it was based on the amount of services they 

provide.  And I just used Corman Park as an example because I 

know that they provide a lot of the same services that I guess 

perhaps the city of Swift Current does. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well your question is still not clear to us.  

But I think what we have to say is you have to look at how the 

formula is applied, and it's . . . there are a number of factors 

within the formula, whether it's the urban revenue-sharing or 

the rural revenue-sharing formula.  And it's based on their 

ability, or their assessment base, or their ability to provide 

services and their needs.  And so whether it's Corman Park or 

whether it's the RM of Flett's Springs, a formula applies so that 

there is an equal distribution of assistance from the provincial 

government to that municipality to cover its needs. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

allocation to urban municipalities is going down by 10 per cent 

but the allocation to rural municipalities is going up by almost a 

million dollars.  How do you account for this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm going to give you these numbers so 

that you can do your comparison.  On the urban revenue 

sharing, there was a reduction of 8 per cent, which amounted to 

$4.047 million.  There was an additional draw for SAMA's 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) core services 

from the revenue-sharing pool on the urban side of $1.167 

million. 

 

Now on the rural revenue side, there was a reduction from last 

year's revenue-sharing pool of 8 per cent.  That 8 per cent 

reduction amounted to $2.89 million.  The rural services to 

support SAMA's core services, the rural contribution to support 

SAMA's core services, drew down from the revenue-sharing 

pool $833,000.  But because of the change to accrual 

accounting and because we redesigned or put back money into 

the futures program again, there was an addition of $4.6 million 

going back into the rural revenue-sharing pool.  So there was 

an overall addition to the rural revenue-sharing pool because of 

the change in accrual accounting and because of the allocation 

of the futures grants, which was increasing it by about 4.5, $4.4 

million this year from last year. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

allocation to SAMA is going down from seven and a half 

million dollars to four million dollars.  Now I can also see there 

is a transitional grant of two million, presumably to help 

SAMA ease toward a reduced budget.  What is changing at 

SAMA that makes a lower budget possible?  And will SAMA 

be offering its 

services on a cost-recovery basis? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have to go back to some history on 

SAMA here, and look at SAMA's budget.  And as you look at 

their internal budget, there was an allocation made of about $4 

million to cover what we call core services.  And $5.3 million 

was allocated to cover what we call field inspection services. 

 

What we did this year was to split those two parts of SAMA so 

that it could be defined, the core service side from the field 

services side.  The provincial government allocated $2 million 

towards those core services and transferred from revenue 

sharing another $2 million that I talked about from the 

revenue-sharing pool a moment ago. 

 

So the core services, which are the main brain or the nerve 

centre of SAMA, are funded by $4 million, and there is a $2 

million transitional assistance program to SAMA to cover part 

of the cost of the field services which was the 5.3 that I had 

mentioned.  So from the provincial government to SAMA this 

year there is an allocation of $6 million, 2 from the General 

Revenue Fund, 2 from the revenue pools, and 2 additional 

million from the General Revenue Fund as transitional 

assistance. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm going to 

back you up a question for a moment just so you can explain 

something to me.  As I recall, some of the municipalities were 

saying when you changed the futures that they were building 

their roads on, that I understood your department was saving a 

great deal of money on.  Did you not just say that you're 

spending $4 million more by changes to the futures?  Can you 

tell me how that works? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This has got to do with accrual 

accounting and last year we took a snapshot of the futures 

program and they were about $19.6 million into the futures.  

We wanted to stabilize it at about $15 million so last year we 

took $4.6 million out of it.  This year the futures . . . we put 

back into the futures $4.6 million so it's a matter of trying to 

adjust to the accrual accounting program that came into effect 

last year. 

 

And the futures program is complex as it is because it allows 

certain municipalities the ability to draw down on their future 

allocation.  And what we wanted to do was stabilize that fund 

at $15 million, not allow it to go over it.  So we have it 

stabilized at $15 million at this point in time by the reduction 

last year of 4.6 but this year we put back into it 4.6.  But that is 

money that the municipalities do use; it is money that they have 

allocated to their conditional grant program. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Madam Minister, if I understand what 

you're saying then is last year you went from 19.6 to 15.  And 

now you're remaining at 15 even though you put $4.6 million 

more into the futures program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I think we're going to have 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

to send over some paper for you to show you how this works, 

because as I said, the accrual accounting that we did last year 

took a snapshot of the program.  We decided to stabilize it at 

$15 million.  This year we put $4.6 million back into it.  It is 

money in addition to what their revenue-sharing grant provides 

for them. 

 

You will have to see how the program is designed in order for 

it to make sense.  But we'll provide you with a detailed 

breakdown of that information from the officials. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Can you also provide me then a detailed 

breakdown of each RM that was using the futures . . . into the 

futures and where they're at?  Give me the snapshot of where 

they're at in the futures? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, we can do that.  The futures money 

is applied to the designated road program and so some 

municipalities if they have less, I think less than -- how many 

years into the future? -- if they are less than three years into 

their futures, they have access to that money.  And for other 

municipalities, if they are further into their futures then they 

can't draw down from the futures program because they've 

already borrowed into the future too much. 

 

But we'll provide you with a breakdown of which RMs are 

drawing down the futures this year and how much that is and 

what it relates to as far as road development. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- The budget allocates 21 million for the 

municipal assistance program.  And first I'd like to confirm that 

this is a provincially funded portion of the federal program and 

I'd have to know if that was, first of all, correct.  There seems 

to be a delay in soliciting projects, selecting them, and 

announcing the money allocations.  Is the responsibility for the 

administration of the program in this branch of your 

department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There is an infrastructure management 

team that looks after the administration of those projects. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under the 

subvote of urban parks, the funding allocations for the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority, 

and the Swift Current Chinook Parkway are all frozen.  What 

are each of these agencies going to do to account for the usual 

increases in cost of living, input price increases, and increased 

fees?  Are there any activities going to be cut as a result? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's up to the park authorities to 

manage.  We transfer the funding to them and they set their 

yearly agenda and their projects.  And they have a number of 

ways.  They can look to other sponsors to help them fund any 

shortfall or they can do some internal reductions or 

readjustments. 

 

But what we do is transfer the money over to the urban park 

authorities and then they set their own internal yearly agenda 

and schedule of projects. 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam.  For both the 

authorities, how much of their budgets are made up from 

self-generated revenues? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have that figure.  What we do is 

simply transfer the money over to them and they set their own 

budget.  I know that in Saskatoon, the city of Saskatoon 

contributes to the Meewasin Valley as does the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So there are a number of different funding partners besides 

corporate and patron sponsors that they have.  We don't know 

what their total budget is but we can provide you with that 

information. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you.  You'll provide a list of the 

activities that they do to raise the revenues?  All right. 

 

Can you tell me what the Swift Current Chinook Parkway . . . 

is this a scenic route or are there toll charges being considered 

similar to those charged on the Coquihalla in B.C. (British 

Columbia). 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It's a recreational urban park.  It was an 

agreement that the last administration went into with the city of 

Swift Current.  It provides assistance to the city of Swift 

Current to develop their river park within the city. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

Wakamow Valley Authority recently hired a new general 

manager.  Are there any costs out of this budget in payment to 

the former manager?  And who is the new general manager?  

Can you describe the selection process for the managers? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We don't have any influence over the way 

the local park authority manages its internal affairs.  They make 

the decision about who they will hire and the programs that 

they deliver.  All we do is transfer to them a grant and they 

develop their budget.  So we do not have that information. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Under 

public safety, the budgets for fire safety and building standards 

are both going down.  It appears that much of the costs will 

come in the usual operating expenses.  Where will the cuts be 

made and how will this affect public safety? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- In the public safety division, we had two 

positions.  We eliminated two positions from the fire 

prevention officers.  That was a saving of $80,000.  In the 

building standards division we eliminated one technical safety 

inspector, and in the inspection services we eliminated 2.9 

full-time equivalents, and elimination of one municipal 

enforcement assistant officer under building standards for 

$56,000. 

 

How will that compromise our services?  They will not be 

compromised.  What we have done is amalgamate some of our 

personnel so that they can cover the two sides of the services at 

the same time.  So by making 



2166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

better use of our personnel in various locations we believe we 

can still provide the same coverage and the same advisory 

support to communities as we did before. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam.  Are any of these 

services contracted out? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, none of them are contracted out. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Are those positions and those employees, 

are they in this other booklet that you sent over? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, they are. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- The budget for the Provincial Library is 

practically frozen.  Literally thousands of new books are 

published daily, not to mention serials and government 

publications.  Will the Provincial Library be able to carry out 

its mandate with only 22,000 more dollars? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The Provincial Library has provided an 

excellent service to our regional libraries for many years and 

the staff there have been very dedicated.  They have been under 

pressure, for sure, for the last number of years as we've gone 

through funding reductions.  They have been able though to 

manage their services to the public.  And it has been difficult 

but we believe we can maintain the same level of services 

today as we have in the future, but we have to be very careful 

that we make sure the Provincial Library is not depleted of 

resources because they provide a valuable service to all 

residents of Saskatchewan.  And we're trying to build 

partnerships through our multi-type library board and to look 

for better ways of making use of all the library services that we 

have in Saskatchewan. 

 

So your question is . . . it's been difficult for the Provincial 

Library.  The staff over there have undergone some cuts and 

some frozen budgets for the last number of years.  They are 

coping well.  They are providing an excellent service.  And we 

hope that in the years to come we can continue to enhance this 

service. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The 

multi-type library that you talked about, how does this budget 

support that initiative? And exactly how many dollars are 

allocated to it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have $200,000 in a special initiative 

for libraries,  $100,000 of that has been dedicated to the 

multi-type library development.  And we have allocated an 

extra 12,000 to provide research services for the multi-type 

library board, advisory board, that we just recently established. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As you 

know, we live in an information-rich environment and we are 

witnessing the development of the information super highway, 

I guess it's coined.  The growth of Internet is a notable 

achievement and 

efforts are currently underway to create SASK#net link of the 

Internet.  Is the Provincial Library involved in this effort? 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, they have been intimately involved 

in the development of this service, through partners in the 

education institutions and in the research institutions.  The 

Provincial Library is working with those partners to provide 

access to information and computer services for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  They are providing access through their own 

database and through their own systems of access to 

information.  So it is a valuable service.  We're building on it. 

The library system is one of the partners in that Internet system 

and we think in the future it's going to be a great asset to the 

people, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Can you 

describe other efforts by your department to integrate with the 

emerging information networks? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have one pilot project in partnership 

with the provincial government in the active living for the 

environment program, so the recreation services have accessed 

the information highway to the extent that they're in 

cooperation with the federal government like a 

participaction-type of an approach to active living. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Is any money in this budget being 

allocated to SASK#net? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have provided $3,000 as a special 

grant to the library system to access SASK#net. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- There's considerable pressure to 

amalgamate school and public libraries.  On one hand they 

have different roles and on the other hand there are potential 

savings.  What is your department's position on this matter and 

have you conducted any studies to assess the costs and savings?  

If so, where are the savings and if not, will you be conducting a 

study? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well first of all, we are not amalgamating 

and we are not trying to push amalgamation on either the public 

education system, or library system, or on our public library 

service system.  What we're trying to do is explore areas where 

we can cooperate and find efficiencies, but it is up to both the 

library trustees' association and the school library association to 

try to provide us with those answers.  So we don't have any 

agenda to amalgamate any library systems in Saskatchewan, 

but we do certainly want to promote enhanced cooperation and 

coordination where it's practical and feasible.  And really, that 

is the essence of the multi-type library board -- to look for 

those ways of working more closely together and providing 

better services. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you.  I would like to thank 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

the officials from the Department of Municipal Government 

that have been here tonight and have been here on a number of 

other occasions.  I appreciate their support and their advice.  

And I also thank the members of the opposition for their 

questions tonight. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:21 p.m. 

 


