




















































Hansard: March 17, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 957 

 March 17, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petition has been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) is hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the city of Saskatoon humbly praying that 

your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the Minister 

of Health to examine the proposal to close emergency and 

cardiac care at City Hospital. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, it's my 

pleasure today to introduce to you, sir, and to all the members 

of the Assembly, five very special guests who are seated in the 

Speaker's gallery.  I'm of course referring to the members of the 

Sandra Peterson curling rink, the Canadian champions.  Sandra 

Peterson, skip -- perhaps you could stand as I introduce 

you -- Sandra Peterson, skip; Jan Betker, third; Joan McCusker, 

second; Marcia Gudereit, lead; and Anita Ford as the alternate 

and the coach. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to congratulate 

these fine athletes on their victory at the '93 world women's 

curling championship in Geneva, and like thousands of people 

right across this province, across this country, I followed, we 

followed, their progress with great pride and admiration. 

 

Today, I wish to congratulate them once again on their Scott 

Tournament of Hearts victory earlier this month and offer our 

very, very best wishes for this year's forthcoming world 

championships. 

 

I know all of the members of the Assembly would agree that 

this rink, the Peterson rink, truly represents the very best of 

Saskatchewan's winning spirit. 

 

It was my pleasure to be with them today at luncheon and get 

all the inside scoop as to how they won the Canadian 

championship and how they're going to win the world 

championship.  Win, lose, or draw, they will represent Canada 

very, very well. 

 

I know that they are going to win, and on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan and this Assembly, we congratulate them and 

wish them well.  And after their world championship, have a 

real big, royal Canadian celebration in this Assembly as we did 

last year. 

 

Congratulations, and welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to join with the Premier in congratulating the five ladies. 

 

There are some perks to this job, Mr. Premier, that I'm envious 

of, and I wish I could have been at the luncheon with you.  Just 

some, mind you.  Just some. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Buy the lunch. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Right.  Well we, on behalf of the official 

opposition, we want to also extend our congratulations on just a 

wonderfully well-done job. 

 

I make this introduction with some trepidation.  Last year in my 

concluding remarks -- and they will remember this; Sandra's 

laughing already -- I did wish them well at the Brier.  And I 

won't make that mistake this year. 

 

But congratulations on winning the second time the Scott 

Tournament of Hearts.  You've got a good chance of doing it 

next year because you will automatically be in there again.  

And let's make this an annual event.  How's that?  Okay, let's 

go for the hat trick then. 

 

And I wish all members to congratulate them once more. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thanks, Mr. Speaker.  Of course we too as 

the Liberal caucus and the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 

would like to congratulate you. 

 

We love it that you're making this a habit.  So to you, Sandra, 

to Jan, Joan, Marcia, and Anita, it was such a privilege to 

observe excellence.  And you really do raise the spirits of every 

single person who has the honour of being able to watch you.  

Again, congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through to the House, I would like to introduce a couple of 

friends from Regina, Ross Joorisity, and Petria Racette, up in 

your gallery and I would ask that members of the House 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 

20 grade 11 and 12 students from Martin Collegiate seated in 

your gallery.  They're here today with the illustrious curling 

team and I know that all members will want to welcome them 

here today in the gallery and I hope you enjoy question period. 

 

We will be meeting with you after question period for photos 

and drinks and I look forward to answering some important 

questions at that time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



958 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

St. Patrick's Day 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, today is St. Patrick's Day, a day 

when everyone in North America is more Irish than the Irish, 

the day when the colour green is given to products it was never 

intended for. 

 

In Canada we acknowledge St. Patrick's Day for the simple, 

important reason that Irish settlers were one of the major 

groups of settlers who came to this country in the early 19th 

century and later.  In fact, an early English account called 

"Roughing it in the Bush" states that in many ways, the Irish 

and the Scottish settlers were much better prepared to succeed 

in the New World because they were not encumbered by 

outmoded aristocratic assumptions.  They came to prove their 

worth by working, and prove it they did. 

 

In the process, of course, and over the years, Irish people have 

contributed much to the mosaic that has come to define 

Canada.  Their laughter, their music, their love of the language, 

their story, and the myth, have enriched us all.  Most of all 

though, we have been given the story of the man who 

single-handedly confronted evil in the form of snakes and 

defeated it. 

 

The truth of this story is in its message to us, not in its 

historical accuracy.  That is why the story endures and that is 

why we celebrate St. Patrick's Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prairie View School Division Teachers' Institute 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to let the Assembly 

know on Monday I attended a teachers' institute for the Prairie 

View School Division in Yellow Grass. 

 

One of the sessions was on the contents of the High School 

Review Advisory Committee's final report.  It is too early to 

comment on the report itself, but I'd like to say a word about 

the process.  I was impressed, first of all, by the incredible 

amount of work that went into the review to make this report 

thorough and comprehensive. 

 

The committee, made up of teachers, representatives from the 

trustees, administrators, post-secondary institutions, business, 

and the Department of Education, gathered information from 

165 briefs, many of which were supported by oral presentations 

at eight public meetings.  As well there was an extensive 

opinion poll and several small group meetings conducted by a 

professional research company. 

 

The committee also met with small groups representing a broad 

cross-section of our communities -- aboriginal people, teachers, 

students, parents, and Northerners.  The watchword was 

consultation.  Consequently, the report can claim to be one of 

consensus building.  Of course there are 

controversial recommendations to be discussed, but in a diverse 

province such as ours this is inevitable and desirable. 

 

Their task was indeed a challenge.  I want to compliment the 

members of the committee who gave their time and expertise to 

this review.  In particular, I congratulate Georgia Joorisity, 

principal of Avonlea School in my constituency, who is a 

member of this committee and who did an excellent job in her 

presentation on Monday.  This review is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

All-China Youth Federation Delegation 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to inform 

the members of the Assembly that later this afternoon we'll be 

welcoming an all-China youth federation delegation to 

Saskatchewan.  These professionals from all over China are 

representatives of China's youth groups.  This trip was in part 

made a reality by a constituent of mine, Dr. Hsieh, a professor 

at the University of Regina. 

 

Apart from this, Dr. Hsieh is also involved with the programs 

of twinning our province with a province in China.  The 

Chinese twin of Saskatchewan is Jinan, Regina's twin city is 

Jilin, and the University of Regina's twin is the University of 

Shandong.  This program was an effort to create greater 

understanding, cooperation, communication and appreciation 

between our two different cultures. 

 

Since the arrival of the all-China youth federation delegation 

earlier this week, they've been quite busy.  They have attended 

a luncheon hosted by Mayor Archer and a dinner hosted by Dr. 

Don Wells.  They've visited two schools, Campbell Collegiate 

and Dieppe School, and had a potluck supper that was 

sponsored by AIESEC (International Association of Students in 

Economics and Commerce) and the University of Regina 

student union. 

 

Today they have visited the University of Regina's Faculty of 

Administration for a brief lecture on the Canadian economic 

system and banking system.  They also have come here today 

to see our beautiful Legislative Building and to visit with some 

members of government. 

 

We hope that they have enjoyed their visit to Regina, and I look 

forward to introducing you to them later this afternoon.  Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina Home Builders' Association 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My colleagues and I 

thank the Regina Home Builders' Association for having us to 

their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) night, their 

dinner meeting at St. 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

Athanasius hall in north Regina last evening. 

 

Each year the Regina Home Builders' Association use one of 

their general dinner meetings to network with each other and 

with MLAs. 

 

We were particularly pleased last evening to meet with Mr. Ted 

Bryk, the national president of the Canadian Home Builders' 

Association, and Ken McKinley, the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Home Builders' Association.  It was clear from 

the meeting, Mr. Speaker, that the home builders are concerned 

with their product, with professionalism, with quality, and 

clearly all of that is improving, thanks to their good work. 

 

It was interesting to hear them talk about the good economic 

base that has been built in Saskatchewan and the praise for the 

Economic Development minister and his department.  And it 

was especially heartening to hear the real optimism that was 

expressed, not just empty rah rah euphemisms, Mr. Speaker, 

but clearly the Saskatchewan home building business is set for 

ongoing, real, solid growth based on the real and solid 

economic growth that is taking place in Saskatchewan.  We 

look forward to continuing dialogue with the home builders' 

association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Origin of St. Patrick's Day 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, on this St. Patrick's Day I 

would like to remind the members that St. Patrick in fact was a 

Welshman who was kidnapped into slavery by Irish marauders 

and remained there for several years before he eventually 

escaped.  He returned after many years to Wales and then took 

holy orders, and from there returned to Ireland to convert to 

Christianity the heathens who had kidnapped him and so sadly 

misused him in the first place. 

 

And it is for this reason that this day I wear my Welsh tie 

emblazoned with a red dragon on a field of green, I would like 

to point out, sir, and claim St. Patrick in the name of his true 

race, the Welsh. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Standards Amendments 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

a few more questions for the Minister of Labour regarding The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

First of all, Minister, it appears that you were mistaken 

yesterday when you said that only 1,500 of the government's 

four-page colour brochures on the new Bill were printed and 

distributed.  It is my understanding that these brochures went 

out in the province's daily newspapers and there were also large 

ads taken out in the provincial weekly newspapers. 

Mr. Minister, could you please correct the statement you made 

yesterday and tell us what is the total cost of your advertising 

campaign to promote The Labour Standards Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member yesterday asked about 

the mailing.  I pointed out there were some 1,500 mailings, the 

cost of which was $47,000.  I also pointed out that those were 

done in completing an undertaking that I would get back to 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  We will await your 

answer on the rest of the costs involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also misspoke yesterday when he 

provided me with the complete Price Waterhouse report, which 

I have here.  He said that the complete report was made 

available to the media.  I subsequently found out that that 

wasn't the case.  But none the less I do thank the minister for 

providing me with this information. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Price Waterhouse confirms that the 

provisions of benefits of part-time employees will force 

employers to reduce the number of part-time employees or 

reduce the number of hours that they work.  It goes on to say 

that this will negatively impact the elderly, the disabled, and 

the students, and others who need and want the flexibility 

provided by part-time work. 

 

Mr. Minister, your independent study says that the elderly, 

people with disabilities, and students will be hurt by this 

legislation.  Why do you want to hurt the very people that you 

professed to defend when you were in opposition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Those are the members' conclusions.  

I wouldn't slander the authors of the report by attributing those 

conclusions to the authors of the report.  The authors of the 

report provided a costing, an economic model, and that's all 

they provided.  The conclusions which the member drew are 

clearly his own, and I suggest are your own, and aren't being 

drawn by fair-minded people across Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Minister, 

employment opportunities for the elderly people and the 

disabled and the students will decrease as a result of this 

legislation.  Now that is not my evaluation, Mr. Minister, that's 

the findings of your independent study.  This one, right here. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you determined how many of these people 

stand to lose their jobs as a result of this legislation?  And if 

not, why isn't this matter being studied?  When is it not clear 

that the labour legislation is going to hurt some of the most 

vulnerable people in our society, the people that can least 

afford to be hurt, 



960 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

are the ones that you're going to hurt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Perhaps it might be of some 

assistance to the hon. member if I quoted from a editorial in the 

Edmonton Journal.  It says of The Labour Standards Act -- this 

on March 15, '94 -- it says of The Labour Standards Act: 

 

The Saskatchewan amendments are not 

revolutionary -- despite the high-pitched reaction from 

some business spokespersons. 

 

They may have had the member from Maple Creek in mind in 

that comment.  It goes on to say: 

 

The only unusual aspect of the government's action, 

though, is that it isn't taking place throughout Canada.  

Every province has witnessed the marginalization of . . . 

workers (of its part-time workers) . . . Every government 

will face a bill for what amounts to a dumping by 

companies of their social responsibilities (on) towards 

workers.  The reaction of most governments . . . (and I 

might add, most oppositions) has been one of indifference. 

 

Well it's not one of indifference in this government; we're 

dealing with the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

Price Waterhouse study indicated that some levels of part-time 

work is good for employers because it provides flexibility in 

staffing and scheduling to handle such things as weekends and 

evening work, peak loads, and things like that. 

 

The study indicates that some levels of part-time work is good 

for employees because fully 65 per cent of those working 

part-time in Saskatchewan are doing so by choice.  They don't 

want a full-time job because it conflicts with their education, 

their family commitments, or they simply prefer to just work a 

few hours each day. 

 

But once again your government is saying you know more than 

both the employers and the employees, by bringing in 

legislation that will reduce the number of part-time 

opportunities for those who want part-time work, like the 

elderly and the people who are disabled and the students of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many part-time jobs will be lost as a result 

of this legislation?  And if you don't know, will you put this 

legislation to rest and put it on hold until you can do a study 

and find out how you're going to impact the people of our 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well unlike Liberals and 

Conservatives opposite who could care a whit for the plight of 

part-time workers -- and that's the only interpretation one can 

place upon your behaviour today when you judge a Bill without 

ever having seen 

it -- unlike the members opposite who could care a whit about 

part-time workers, this government seeks to provide some 

amelioration in their workday, and we think we have done so.  

We don't think there's going to be any decrease in part-time 

workers and we think there's going to be quite an increase in 

the quality of their working lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Salaries Recommendation 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I stand 

here today to report that the minister . . . Saskatchewan's 

Minister of Justice, the highest officer of law in the province of 

Saskatchewan, has knowingly and deliberately broken the law.  

He has failed to comply with the 90-day legal obligation to 

implement the decision of a binding tribunal regarding judges' 

remuneration. 

 

Regardless, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, of how tasteful the 

tribunal's decision may be, the legislation brought forward by 

the minister himself states that the minister must comply with 

the tribunal recommendation. 

 

Mr. Minister, most people are fined when they break the law.  

Do you feel it appropriate that as the Minister of Justice you 

can break the law with little more than an apology as a 

substitute? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that question.  If he has been paying attention he will know that 

the government has had great difficulty responding to the 

award of the commission. 

 

The problem, briefly stated, is that the award of the 

commission is much, much richer than we had ever anticipated 

would emerge from the process that this House agreed to -- and 

I emphasize, this House agreed to -- during the last session of 

the legislature. 

 

So with our fiscal problems it is a very difficult decision for our 

government to make, and unfortunately we weren't able to 

make it within the time limited by the Act.  This is known to 

the judges and the judges have stated publicly that it's not a big 

problem for them.  They are more concerned in what the 

decision is, rather than when it is delivered.  So in light of the 

fact that the people affected don't have an objection, we're not 

especially concerned with the fact that the decision is taking as 

long as it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, as we 

indicated the other day, we realize the predicament you've put 

yourself into with regards to your legislation. 

 

The fact is, the law is the law, regardless of the implications or 

consequences.  And in defence of your 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

action you have said that no one is really being harmed by your 

breach. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, if someone should run a red light, and 

no one is harmed, then that's fine.  The law is the law; you can't 

run a red light.  You'll be penalized, even if you don't hit 

someone. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've had three months to determine your 

government's action on this matter, yet you still find it 

necessary to break your own, as you've indicated, your own 

piece of legislation. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is what kind of message 

does this send to others who might feel that legal deadlines can 

be broken by the Minister of Justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well of course governments don't like to 

miss deadlines; no question about that.  It happens, and the law 

certainly is clear about what the deadline is, and we were not 

able to meet that deadline.  And I have said publicly that we 

regret that, and I say it again:  we regret that. 

 

Unfortunately the decision here was of a magnitude and of a 

consequence that resulted in us being unable to announce a 

decision prior to today.  I have said publicly, and the member 

will know this very well, we expect to be in a position to make 

an announcement tomorrow. 

 

Now if anyone is prejudiced then of course I should speak to 

them.  The lawyer for the judges' association has said quite 

clearly and publicly that they don't have a problem with it; 

they're more interested in what the decision is rather than when 

it is timed. 

 

So frankly, while I take the member's point that these legal 

deadlines ought to be met, in this case I don't think any 

prejudice is involved, and therefore we are . . . we just have to 

live with the situation.  We have to live with the situation as it 

is.  The decision takes as long as it will take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, if the 

commission had decided on no raises for the judges, the judges 

would have to accept the final decision and live with it.  Why 

not you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't know what point the member is 

trying to make with that.  Is the member trying to say that he 

wants us to just simply pay the award?  And if he's saying that 

I'd like to hear him say that.  If he's saying that we should 

amend the legislation, I'd like to hear him say that. 

 

The government is trying to come to grips with that exact 

question.  We've had extensive debates about this, extensive 

analysis, extensive consideration of the impacts, and we expect 

to be in a position to announce our decision tomorrow.  Now if 

the member 

has any advice to assist us between now and tomorrow as to 

what position we should take, I'd be glad to hear it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, a final question to the minister.  Mr. 

Minister, I think if we read Hansard, we did offer a suggestion 

the other day.  And talking to the media, we also offered a 

suggestion that possibly would have . . . should be looked at 

once this piece of legislation or this decision is made. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, thousands of farm families would love to 

have the same kind of leeway on legal deadlines that you, as a 

minister seem . . . feel . . . are free to break.  Crop insurance 

deadlines, fuel rebate deadlines, income tax  deadlines -- these 

are all significant deadlines.  However, Mr. Minister, and as 

we've seen a number of your ministers even last year . . . the 

date, the deadline -- March 31 -- is the deadline.  People had to 

abide by it. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you be willing to cut the same slack that 

you've given yourself, with respect to the law, to thousands of 

Saskatchewan farm families who were not offered the same 

privilege?  Would you be willing to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- There's always a purpose for a deadline.  

A deadline doesn't exist just for the fun of it.  A deadline is put 

in place because of some kind of considerations.  Normally, 

they're administrative and that certainly is the case with the 

filing of our income tax return. 

 

And the other examples that the member gives, I think, are all 

administrative requirements also. 

 

In this case the deadline was put in there after negotiation with 

the judges, as giving the government a reasonable period of 

time in which to respond to the award and put the regulations in 

place.  The deadline was there for the benefit of the judges. 

 

Now those people have said publicly and quite clearly that they 

have no problem with the fact that we haven't met the deadline.  

Therefore the purpose for the deadline has really not been 

violated and frankly we just . . . we have to take as much time 

as it takes for us to make this decision. 

 

Now as I understand the member's answer, he would have us 

pay this award and then come back to this House and review 

the legislation.  If that's not the position of the official 

opposition, I invite him to clarify just what their position is 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Long-term Care Funding 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, your cuts to 

health care are beginning to hit home.  Boards of long-term 

care homes in Saskatoon 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

were led to believe in your budget that there would be a 1.5 per 

cent increase in long-term care funding.  Days ago they were 

informed that they will face a shortfall of 7 per cent.  The effect 

on long-term care facilities, to whom we've spoken in 

Saskatoon, is that this will be devastating for elderly people, 

the most vulnerable in our society, because of bed closures and 

because of staff lay-offs. 

 

Madam Minister, will you confirm that Saskatoon long-term 

care boards have just three weeks to cut $2.8 million from their 

budgets?  And will you tell this Assembly exactly when you 

informed them of that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

very pleased to have a question today.  Having some Irish 

ancestry myself, I wouldn't want to avoid a question on St. 

Patrick's Day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I'll speak to 

the member from Gravelbourg later. 

 

In any case, with respect to the leader of the Liberal 

opposition's question, what we also pointed out in the budget 

was that funding was going to vary from district to district and 

that district boards would be receiving global budgets, and in 

order to equalize funding from one area of the province to the 

other, there would be a variation in how much funding each 

district received.  This is going to be a very slow process over a 

period of time, but eventually we will move to a more equitable 

distribution of funding across the province. 

 

With respect to notification received in Saskatoon, I don't know 

the details of that.  I will look into that.  However, the district 

board in Saskatoon will be administering the distribution of 

those funds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, there are approximately 300 new admissions to 

long-term care homes in Saskatoon each year, and the reality is 

that beds become available only when residents die.  This 7 per 

cent shortfall will likely result in at least 250 fewer long-term 

care beds in Saskatoon and substantial staff reduction cuts. 

 

Tell us right now where the elderly are to go when these beds 

are shut down. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, it is highly 

unlikely according to the Liberal leader's accusation that people 

are going to be moved out of their homes.  That is highly 

unlikely. 

 

I cannot comment on the details of the situation that she's 

describing in Saskatoon, and I'll ask the district health board for 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  We simply cannot tolerate the constant 

interruption when ministers are answering questions.  I would 

ask members to please resist from the temptation to interrupt. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, we are talking about dignity and respect and 

compassion for the very people who built this province, and 

they entrusted us with their care.  The Saskatoon Health Board, 

hospital administrations, and long-term care homes have 

already made very difficult decisions to accommodate your 

government's last round of cuts.  And many hospitals have 

planned to send level 4 patients to nursing homes simply to free 

up beds for acute care. 

 

And now the long-term care homes will have less beds 

available to accommodate those level 4 patients, people who 

were still in hospital because they were too ill to be in 

long-term care.  The staff cuts are going to put enormous strain 

on remaining staff and the delivery of adequate care to the 

elderly is becoming more and more difficult. 

 

Have you any idea at all of the possible dilemma that you've 

created for the directors of Saskatoon long-term care homes 

and the Saskatoon Health District Board? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I will 

get the details of that information for the member.  I don't 

necessarily accept her facts as she's presented them here 

because this will not be the first time that she's presented me 

with incorrect facts. 

 

So the best way to approach this is to get the details of her 

concerns. I'll talk to the Saskatoon Health Board and I'll talk to 

the Department of Health to determine what is actually 

happening. 

 

Now I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are very 

concerned as a government about elderly people and about the 

need for long-term care and appropriate services.  As a result, 

home care has been given something like a 40 per cent increase 

since we've taken government in order to provide more 

extensive services for seniors and elderly people in their home.  

So we have made seniors a priority. 

 

The Health Services Utilization and Research Commission has 

just produced a very extensive report to provide us with a plan 

for the future as far as seniors as concerned.  And if we can 

work towards that sort of plan in a non-political fashion, in a 

cooperative environment, we should be able to achieve results 

that everyone can benefit from.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Madam Minister, you have talked 

about incorrect information, and what it indeed is, is when an 

ambulance driver suspects a broken back but it ends up being 

multiple fractures of the pelvis.  And instead of taking four 

days to get treatment, it really took five.  That's really, really 

incorrect information.  It's amazing that that has little interest to 

you. 

 

Madam Minister, you talk about increases to home care 

funding.  We're talking long-term care beds here; 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

quite a different situation.  The local boards of directors are in a 

state of shock -- these are their words:  a state of 

shock -- because they had absolutely no idea that this was 

coming.  And your deadline is April 1?  They are in a state of 

absolute disbelief that they are being asked to adjust their 

budgets by April 1 when the funding cuts will take effect. 

 

Do you consider this to be giving these people fair notice after 

they've been planning, Madam Minister, for a 1.5 per cent 

increase indicated in your budget by your Finance minister, and 

they are now facing a 7 per cent shortfall?  I mean do you 

honestly believe that they can do this in three weeks? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think that the member opposite should 

be working more constructively with her district and her 

community, Mr. Speaker.  I think that what the member 

opposite should do is meet with the Saskatoon Health Board 

and bring the concerns of those people to the Saskatoon Health 

Board, instead of attempting to grandstand in the legislature.  If 

she is seriously . . . if she has the interests of the people at 

heart, she will work in a constructive fashion, rather than 

through a . . . ranting and raving in a political forum. 

 

I invite her to work constructively with the Saskatoon Health 

Board.  I will take her concerns . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to tell the member from 

Souris-Cannington that if he does that again I will not 

recognize him in question period.  He knows full well when 

someone else has the floor, he has no right to stand there and 

interrupt the member by his presence in standing in this 

legislature. 

 

Next question. 

 

Study on Private Vocational Schools 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- My question is to the Minister of 

Education.  Madam Minister, while in opposition as the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) Education critic, you said that the 

current rules for vocational schools are not being stringent 

enough and I think that the regulations have to be tightened.  

That's quoted from you on November 5 of 1990. 

 

In opposition you said that you would study vocational schools 

and see to it that students weren't taken advantage of.  And you 

did study them, Madam Minister.  In April of last year the 

government paid $69,000 to review private vocational schools. 

 

Madam Minister, what recommendations were made, and how 

has that $69,000 report benefited Saskatchewan students, 

specifically those students affected by the actions of vocational 

schools? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for the 

question.  I'm pleased to inform the House that my officials are 

preparing draft legislation based on the recommendations, 

based on the recommendations of the Private Vocational 

Schools Review Committee, chaired by Dr. Ailsa Watkinson.  

The new legislation  

will ensure the close and tight regulation of private vocational 

schools in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  It's good 

to know that there's draft legislation coming forward, because 

perhaps these questions will lead you to examine that a little 

more closely. 

 

Madam Minister, Ross Joorisity and Petria Racette of Regina 

believe that these rules have not been tightened enough.  They 

attended Reliance Business College for a short period of time.  

When both students quit after attending 11 to 15 per cent of 

their courses, both were told by the former owner that the 

proper percentage of monies the college received from student 

loans would be returned and that Ross and Petria would be 

responsible for only their percentage. 

 

That didn't happen, Madam Minister.  Money owed from 

Reliance College was not returned and the result is that Ross 

and Petria are left to foot the entire bill.  How stringent are your 

regulations to the 40-or-so private vocational schools when 

institutions can take thousands of dollars that rightfully belong 

to student loans and keep the money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I must thank the member for the 

question.  The regulations at present do outline specifically the 

kind of refund that students are entitled to, depending upon the 

length of their stay at a private vocational school.  So refunds 

are referred to in the regulation and the present legislation. 

 

The new legislation obviously is going to deal with the Private 

Vocational School Review Committee's recommendations.  

And I can tell you that the present legislation and the present 

regulations do make reference to refunds for students.  So 

students are in fact protected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister, for 

saying that students are protected because you're responsible to 

enforce those regulations.  In this particular case the students 

haven't been protected. 

 

In 1989 you said someone is benefiting from student loans and 

that may be the private operator of some of these schools which 

aren't regulated very well.  You also said to the minister of 

Education that he should be held accountable - 

_ as you are today, Madam Minister -- and that he better put 

regulations in place to protect the young people of our 

province. 

 

Madam Minister, now it's time to prove your commitment to 

that promise unless you are in the running for Mr. Mandryk's 

hyppy awards.  Madam Minister, in fairness to Ross and Petria 

and to the other students who seem to have been taken 

advantage of, will you personally look into this situation and 

launch  



964 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

an inquiry and if the law has been broken, take those 

responsible to task?  Will you do that now, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the House 

of this: that my officials advise me that these two students have 

been in contact with the department in the past four weeks.  

Department officials have asked these two students to provide 

further additional information.  I can assure the House and the 

member of the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan that our 

department is working with these students in order that they 

can receive their refunds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

create a Family Law Division and to enact Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to create a Family Law Division 

and to enact Consequential Amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

provide for Mediation 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act to provide for Mediation be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 10 -- An 

Act to amend The Vegetable and Honey Sales Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, this Act is an Act that a number 

of people have been looking forward to.  We've sent out the 

copies of the Act to many of the interested third parties.  We've 

had a fair number of response and there are concerns that have 

been raised with these members. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, instead of taking the time of the  

House to explicitly go through those concerns at this time, I'm 

simply going to wait until the Committee of the Whole and 

then we'll be asking distinct, direct questions of the minister 

based on that particular Act. 

 

So I have no problem at this time, Mr. Speaker, in simply 

letting it go to committee. 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's a little bit 

of confusion, I take it, as to what piece of legislation, which 

Bill is really before us.  Now that it's quieted down a little bit, 

Mr. Speaker, I think I can speak to this Bill.  I won't speak very 

long, but I do want to recognize the importance of this 

legislation for the small producers of Saskatchewan fruits and 

vegetables and for the honey producers in our province. 

 

Saskatchewan has almost 50 million acres under cultivation, 50 

million acres of land, and with the fresh water that we have in 

our province and the research capacity that we have in our 

province, especially in my constituency, at the University of 

Saskatchewan -- and the opposition will be interested to know 

that I'm very appreciative of the fact that there are good, 

first-class food science facilities at the University of 

Saskatchewan in the new agricultural building there -- we have 

opportunities for value added processing in our province.  This 

legislation strengthens the hand of Saskatchewan fruit and 

vegetable producers, honey producers as well. 

 

I note that the Saskatchewan food producers association have 

their convention in Saskatoon beginning tomorrow and I intend 

to drop into that convention and to look at some of the 

initiatives in terms of food processing that are taking place. 

 

As we all know, this is a growing business. Saskatchewan 

produce -- fruits and vegetables and honey -- goes all across the 

world.  This is only a very recent development, but there's a 

great future for the industry and this legislation is intended to 

help establish and extend our fruit, vegetable, and honey 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

speak briefly on this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 2 -- An Act 

to amend The Department of Economic Development Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

lot of things that we want to talk about this.  The information 

that I have is that the Leader of the Opposition wants to speak 

on it.  And since he just arrived, we will allow him to do that.  

And I will give him an opportunity to collect his thoughts, and 

with that we will begin. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'll excuse my seat 

mate for talking about my presence in or outside of the House, 

but anyway I do appreciate the opportunity to talk in the debate 

on Bill 2. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new corporation being proposed to take over 

the functions of the Department of Trade is an interesting 

concept because it talks about the partial privatization of the 

trade function of the Government of Saskatchewan.  And that's 

both with shares held and funding provided by people outside 

of government. 

 

I believe the intent is to provide an ongoing consultation with 

people that are involved in trade.  And as everyone in this 

province is aware, fully 80 per cent of the products and goods 

and services that we produce here are exported.  I don't think 

there's another province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that has to 

move so much of its product outside in order to economically 

survive, as we do. 

 

I think by doing this that government is looking at ways to 

control cost in association with these endeavours and I 

wholeheartedly agree that we have to take initiatives in trade 

matters.  We have to rethink trade policy and certainly we have 

to consult on a very regular basis with the people that do trade 

in an extensive way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our whole world as we've known it is changing 

very rapidly.  Saskatchewan being an agricultural-based 

province for the last several decades, had much of its trade 

channeled through quasi-government institutions.  And one 

only has to think of the Canadian Wheat Board which was set 

up in the 1930s to handle the sale and export of grains outside 

of the western Canadian basin.  And trade to many people for a 

long time in this province was a matter of driving your truck or 

your wagon to the elevator and dumping your product in the pit 

and someone else sort of looked after the function of moving 

your products. 

 

The changes necessitated, Mr. Speaker, in agriculture by low 

commodity prices and other factors have meant that a lot of 

people are now directly involved in that; that the 

quasi-governmental institutions no longer are the only people 

in the field.  And rightly I think the minister has recognized 

that.  He's done extensive travelling around the world and has 

associated himself with people who are opening up new 

markets and new opportunities. 

 

So we do applaud the concept because I think, Mr. Speaker, all 

of these new entrepreneurs out there who, because of the Free 

Trade Agreement with the Americans or now with the North 

American Free Trade Agreement or with other bilateral 

situations that 

are occurring around the world, are saying yes, I want to be 

part of that, I want a piece of the action, and I want to know 

that government agencies are there to offer support and 

direction when necessary. 

 

And I think it is a very important function that government has 

to play, not necessarily as the engine that drives the process but 

as the person that defines the playing-field and defines the rules 

by which people will play. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about what the minister's 

proposing though in a number of areas and ways.  I am 

concerned about the cost implications of switching the current 

trade bureaucracy from the mandate that it has had now to what 

is being proposed, the new one.  And I do this because the Act 

to me, Mr. Speaker, and to those around the province that we've 

shared this with, feel that there are no guidelines in this Act for 

the formation and operation of the corporation being proposed. 

 

And I think that's very important, Mr. Speaker.  It's important 

to establish from the outset.  I think when you're dealing with 

this new mix of government and private, it's important to 

establish from the very outset how responsive this particular 

trade corporation is going to be to the people that it is charged 

with serving. 

 

The details of the corporation announced in the minister's 

February 10, '94 press conference have the government holding 

the majority of the shares and providing a majority of the 

funding with private investors holding at best one-third of the 

corporation.  I believe the budget numbers that I remember, Mr. 

Speaker, are even more imbalanced than that.  I believe out of a 

$1.6 million projected initial budget, we're talking one and a 

half million from the government and only about a hundred 

thousand dollars from the private sector. 

 

Obviously the government will have a majority control of the 

corporation, and this is where some of the guidelines that I 

talked about, Mr. Speaker, not being in place really come into 

play.  Because will the government by matter of course be able 

to override any suggestions made by private investors?  

Because if that's the case, Mr. Speaker, then for all intents and 

purposes you have exactly what you had before -- you have the 

government with its Department of Trade making whatever 

decisions they make.  But obviously without some kind of a 

guideline to tell us how disputes would be settled or how these 

guidelines would be in place, anyone investing from the private 

sector would have to be very leery given the present scenario. 

 

It means then, Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, that the 

government simply has the ability to override at any time that it 

wishes, that we not only have wasted the potential investors' 

money but we've wasted taxpayers' money. 

 

An important element, Mr. Speaker, I think of guaranteeing 

both the accountability and the 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

accessibility of this corporation is the staffing component.  

Once again, there is nothing clear in the Act that tells me how 

the staffing of this new entity is going to be structured. 

 

If we are simply going to move the current component of civil 

service jobs from where they are in the Department of Trade 

into this corporation and the private sector component of the 

corporation has no say in staffing, then, Mr. Speaker, we have 

changed nothing. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is almost an 

admission of failure by the minister if that is the case.  Not 

because they are poor people, but the policy direction that the 

government has set, Mr. Speaker, since October of '91 has been 

a dismal failure.  And I think the job numbers and the welfare 

numbers and others would back that up, that that particular 

department has not been able to do very much at all with the 

mandate that it's been given. 

 

So I see this.  If this new structure that we're going to have 

simply takes the existing people and moves them over to the 

new one, then, Mr. Speaker, we have accomplished nothing.  

And I think that would be an admission that you've got the 

same old people doing essentially the same old job, and the 

private sector component of this corporation not having any 

say, then we do have a failure. 

 

And it's important, Mr. Speaker, if this is to work -- and I 

understand that there are other jurisdictions in Canada where 

this model has been attempted to certain degrees of success and 

failure -- but I think it's very important, Mr. Speaker, given the 

preponderance of people in this province that are dependent on 

trade for their livelihood, that this new agency not become 

simply a new whipping boy for government policy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately -- and it was raised again in 

question period today -- the reaction day after day after day in 

this Assembly from our Health ministers has been exactly that.  

I mean day after day they say, well that question isn't for me 

any more; that's for the board.  That's for your health district 

board to answer; that's got nothing to do with me.  I set their 

budgets and I provide a lot of the employees, but I don't have 

anything to do with the policy any more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that maybe is an easy way out for 

government ministers who are under pressure.  But that simply 

doesn't get the job done.  And it may be a way for, I see in this 

particular instance, for government ministers to lay off blame 

on their private sector partners. 

 

And I'll give you an example, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Economic Development, I think, was chastised quite roundly 

about a year ago for taking a round-the-world trip.  When the 

government was cutting back on services all over this province, 

taxes were being increased dramatically, and the Minister of 

Economic Development took off on a holiday to the Caribbean 

and other warm places at a time when the 

rest of us were staying in Saskatchewan under very cold 

conditions and freezing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, under this new agency I can see a scenario 

developing where the minister gets to fly off on one of these 

trips, but because there are some private sector partners 

involved in this new corporation, you can avoid public 

criticism because supposedly the approval and partial funding 

would be by the private sector.  In other words, there would be 

enough other folks there that the minister can say, well I'm not 

wasting taxpayers' money when I jet off to a warm, sunny place 

in the middle of winter on a fact-finding mission. 

 

(1430) 

 

And we recently saw the Minister of Agriculture off to 

California for a couple of weeks to study raisins and grapes.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, the relevance of the cooperative movement 

in California and the relevance of the cooperative movement in 

Saskatchewan, well that's a long bow to stretch, Mr. Speaker, to 

anyone I think in this province today. 

 

And those are the kind of examples, Mr. Speaker, that the 

public and people that the government hopes to have as private 

sector partners in this new corporation are frightened about.  

Because unfortunately this government has a habit of trying to 

find a scapegoat at each and every opportunity to allay any of 

the criticism that they bring upon themselves. 

 

This new corporation also allows the government, Mr. Speaker, 

I think, to reverse its stand -- and this was an election 

promise -- on foreign trade offices.  And I think they can do 

this relatively painlessly because, once again, they will be able 

to get their private sector partners to rubber-stamp any 

initiatives that they make. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it was wrong-headed move, but the 

government made, the NDP Party made, a lot of political hay 

by saying that they were going to cancel these very expensive 

trade offices. And they did, Mr. Speaker; they did cancel them.  

I think Saskatchewan has suffered correspondingly in a lot of 

market-places because they did that. 

 

But we know today, Mr. Speaker, that this NDP government 

and party would promise just about anything in order to gain 

control of the treasury benches in this province. 

 

And that's why people who have reviewed this Bill have 

brought that to our attention.  They said the government 

probably realizes it made a mistake, the NDP realize they made 

a mistake, and they now want to reverse that policy but they're 

looking for someone else to carry the can when they do it. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, as one looks at this piece of 

legislation -- and it will be interesting when we get into 

committee of the Bill how the minister will handle this -- but I 

think he's failed to spell out how he's going to go about 

attracting the private investors and 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

how this corporation will function if he doesn't get any.  

Because it's very clear, Mr. Speaker, that this entity simply will 

not function without a very large and aggressive private sector 

component attached to it. 

 

If the government achieves less than its target of one-third 

private investment, the Act, at least on the face of it, from what 

I've seen -- and I'll wait for the minister's explanation -- but at 

least on the face of the Act it means that the government is 

simply going to provide the extra funding that's needed. 

 

And if that's the case, what happens to the consultation 

process?  Does the government consult with only a few, if that's 

all they get?  Or do they still have the ability to consult with 

those that saw fit not to invest in this because they weren't 

pleased with the structure provided to them? 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, what assurances were 

there -- and I see none in the Bill whatsoever -- what 

assurances are there that investment in the corporation simply 

does not become a method to garner favour with the 

government?  In other words, I'll throw in a few hundred bucks 

here, a couple of thousand dollars there, just so that I make sure 

that my name is high up on the list when any of these foreign 

trade junkets take place; or if there are new trade offices being 

opened, to make sure that maybe I have some influence with 

whichever of the government's friends they decide to put in the 

trade office. 

 

And it's unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that I make that allegation, 

but what we've seen in the last week in this Assembly would 

leave me no other direction.  When I see an institutionalized list 

of 92 New Democrats in this province prepared to either step 

into the traces or are already there, pulling hard for their friends 

in government, if there are new trade offices I suspect that's the 

way it will go. 

 

Will higher levels of funding by the government, Mr. Speaker, 

translate into more government influence in policy direction?  

Because at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, what I think the 

whole purpose of the exercise was, to develop trade policy that 

was real, trade policy that was going to have Saskatchewan 

people enter the next century equal to those around them.  That 

the playing-field that is being established in North America 

which is, we hope, going to be a very level playing-field 

through the various processes involved in the North American 

Free Trade Agreement, the arbitration panels, the lowering of 

tariffs, all of those things that should allow our producers and 

our manufacturers and others smack dab here in the middle of 

North America to compete very actively and viably with others. 

 

Is that policy that is going to be developed by this agency going 

to truly reflect what's going on?  Because we have seen in the 

past this government and NDP politicians across Canada 

roundly criticize the very trading area that we're in.  They have 

criticized the North American Free Trade Agreement, they 

criticized the Canada-U.S. (United States) Trade 

Agreement; anything that didn't sort of build a wall around the 

province or the country, NDP politicians have criticized 

roundly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to this day I have not heard anyone in the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the present-day Government of Saskatchewan, 

stand up and applaud the new market-place that we live in.  It is 

reality and there's not a darn thing that anyone of these NDP 

politicians over here can do about it, Mr. Speaker.  It's the 

reality in which we live.  So I don't know why they don't 

simply face up to facts and get on with working as best as we 

can within the milieu that we have to work with.  It's a real 

ostrich-like mentality that you can go around sticking your 

head in the sand believing that this other stuff is simply going 

to go away.  You know, that the 100 million people in Mexico 

and the 250 million Americans next to us are simply going to 

disappear in a fog somewhere. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that that's the environment we live in 

and that's the environment we trade in and that's the 

environment that we're going to have work with for a long time 

to come.  So we should do it as smart as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the face of this Bill, the government has 

assumed that the new corporation will have private sector 

funding.  They said earlier.  We applaud that.  That it will 

provide a net benefit to the province, an increased trade 

activity, we applaud that.  But we do not applaud any moves, 

Mr. Speaker, that simply cost the taxpayers of this province 

more money by flipping functions into new entities that aren't 

any different than the old. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing I can see in this Bill that 

gives me, at present, the confidence to say that there aren't an 

awful lot of questions going to have to be answered before this 

particular piece of legislation sees the light of day in its final 

form, because there are so many areas that are grey and 

unanswered, Mr. Speaker.   And I think it's appropriate that the 

minister do more consultation before he's prepared to move this 

Bill through the legislature. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting 

that this particular Bill, An Act to amend The Department of 

Economic Development Act expands the mandate of the 

Economic Development department to allow the minister to 

create yet another arm of government to focus on economic 

development.  And to be fair, I don't think the province is 

lacking in departments or agencies to promote economic 

development and trade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Currently, we have the following agencies whose primary 

function is the promotion of those very ends, and I think we 

could get to a point where we have more departments than we 

have tangible results. 

 

If one looks in the government directory, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the trade policy branch, the policy and research branch, the 

trade development department, the Saskatchewan trade office, 

the market development branch, the development services 



968 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

branch, and a myriad of support departments throughout 

government.  In addition, there are countless independent 

agencies and local authorities working to promote trade 

development. 

 

What is in question here is whether the department is more 

concerned with development of the economy or development 

of the department, the Department of Economic Development. 

 

The legislation empowers the minister to establish corporations 

and I'm interested to know how the proposed Trade 

Development Corporation will function, what its goals and 

objectives will be and how it will better serve the people of 

Saskatchewan than what is currently in existence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of process, I do find it strange that we would be asked 

to give the minister authority to create something which has not 

yet been defined or mandated or explained to the public.  If 

there is going to be an agency or corporation of value that will 

be added to the expense of government during times of 

restraint, I think it is only prudent, Mr. Speaker, that we first be 

given the courtesy of examining the proposal in some kind of 

detail, so that we as representatives of the public can engage in 

debate as to the value of such an expenditure in direction of tax 

resources. 

 

I certainly believe in the development and promotion of 

increased trade for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but I do not 

understand what this particular body will do that could not 

already be done within the existing bureaucracy through 

repriorization of resources or redirection of the department staff 

if the desired results are not being achieved today. 

 

I understand that this will be a joint venture between business 

and government, but I also understand that the partners are not 

very clear on just what the cost of this particular partnership 

will be.  And I do not know of any business people who feel 

comfortable getting into a partnership without knowing what 

kind of a budget their partner plans to operate on, especially if 

they're going to be putting up part of the money. 

 

I think the minister is making a quantum leap between 

conducting a survey in which 70 to 75 per cent of businesses 

said that they would support the "concept" of a joint venture to 

promote trade development; he's making a quantum leap to 

think that business would expect the taxpayers to give the 

Minister of Economic Development a blank cheque to set this 

up without knowing the details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know what that smacks more 

of -- irresponsibility or some kind of arrogance.  Because we 

just came through a decade of having a government squander 

taxpayers' money without telling them what was going on.  

And then along comes a new government, elected on its 

promises of accountability, a government that puts forward this 

kind of legislation that is completely open-ended, as 

open-ended as the entire prairie scene of Saskatchewan. 

Now I have an article here from the Star-Phoenix that is dated 

April 12 of 1994 and it sheds some light on just how sketchy 

this proposal really is.  And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The development corporation would be financed by 

money currently in the Economic Development 

Department -- matched by private sector from either fees 

or contributions . . . (the minister said). 

 

Either fees or contributions.  Now just what exactly does that 

mean?  Were the 70 to 75 per cent of businesses who were 

surveyed and asked about whether they would like to pay fees 

or contributions?  I mean I'd be interested to know how many 

businesses would give government that kind of a carte blanche 

to bill them some unspecified amount for some undetermined 

service of unexplained value. 

 

The same article goes on to say, and I do quote the minister 

again: 

 

How much taxpayers' money is involved is still "subject to 

negotiations," . . . 

 

What kind of negotiations, one should ask, between the 

government and who?  And the article continues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

. . . he could not say exactly how many people the new 

authority will employ, (but the Minister of Economic 

Development) suspected it would begin with about four or 

maybe five people. 

 

I get very nervous when the NDP talk about adding to the 

bureaucracy in terms of beginning with four or five people.  

Because we never know how many they'll end up with, Mr. 

Speaker.  So I do have grave reservations about creating a 

corporation in this particular manner. 

 

Because the evidence is there that governments simply should 

be trusted to have a blank cheque to create bureaucracy without 

explaining how it will function and what it will accomplish.  

Obviously we need to do all that we can to enhance our trade 

development.  But I think that people deserve to have an 

answer as to how the money they spend is going to achieve 

results. 

 

The fact of the matter is that if this corporation is created, as 

suggested by the proposed legislation, it will be one full year 

into its operation and it could be almost two years before it 

would have to table an annual report, given the current tabling 

time frames.  The year end then, Mr. Speaker, could be March 

31, 1995.  But the document wouldn't be tabled until the spring 

of 1996, unless the Assembly is in session in July of 1996. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the corporation could operate for 

two full years, spending who knows how much money on who 

knows what, and there would be no accountability until perhaps 

after the next  



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

election. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am most concerned with the duplication of 

resources and the overlap of departments.  And I have sincere 

reservations about amending legislation to create something 

which is perhaps already in existence, or could be created from 

what already is in existence. 

 

There is no doubt that the passage of this amendment will result 

in a new corporation.  But I have doubts about whether the new 

entity will be better equipped to deliver trade development than 

any existing department, whether it was affordable or effective. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, when this Bill is considered on a 

clause-by-clause basis in Committee of the Whole, I will be 

proposing an amendment that would require approval of the 

Legislative Assembly before the minister incorporates a new 

trade development body.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 30 -- An Act 

respecting Victims of Domestic Violence be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to say one or 

two words on behalf of this Bill.  The Minister of Justice 

regaled us last week with the Inuit story of the two sisters who 

fled from an abusive father and an abusive husband.  After 

much deliberation and many alternatives, they decided in effect 

that there were no refuge to be found on earth and they fled to 

the heavens and became the thunder and the lightning. 

 

Now that was a very eloquent tale, sir, and I shall remember it.  

But today I would like to tell you the story that is only 10 years 

old.  It's equally eloquent, it's equally moving, and it is true.  

It's not the story of thunder and lightning but the story of a lady 

called Judy, and Judy is or was her name.  I won't give you her 

surname. 

 

Inuit fables have their counterparts throughout history and 

throughout the world -- ancient Greece, Rome, and the Hindu 

tales.  I've heard similar tales in Africa and I know of plenty 

from Australia.  And the story of Judy also has its counterparts 

in the Arctic, in the tropics, and in the temperate zones between 

and beyond. 

 

It was indeed a dark and stormy night.  It was a Saturday night 

in the depth of winter, and I was in the hospital after visiting 

hours when Judy appeared out of the snow and literally threw 

herself against the locked plate glass doors of the hospital and 

beat upon it with both fists and screamed for help. 

She was wearing a short, white cotton blouse, sir.  A short, 

white cotton blouse.  So short that it could not have been 

tucked into the top of her skirt or trousers had she been wearing 

any.  But she wasn't, sir   Nor any underclothes, nor any socks, 

nor any shoes. 

 

And the only relief from the white of her blouse and the equal 

whiteness of her skin was the red of the bloodstains from her 

head and face dripping down that blouse and down her legs. 

 

She had fled several blocks from her home to the hospital in 

this state, to an escape from her abusive husband.  It takes a lot 

to run virtually naked through the snow in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the hospital was her only choice, it was her only refuge.  

And rural hospitals are often like that.  There's nothing else in 

our small towns and this was the only refuge from many 

problems, and it still is.  And not all of those problems are 

medical. 

 

I'll shorten the story, sir.  We took her in and we protected her 

until the following Monday.  The police had no 

accommodation for her except a jail cell and it was not very 

warm in the middle of the winter.  And the social worker -- the 

nearest one was 75 miles away in Moose Jaw, and she wasn't 

going to come out on Saturday night or a Sunday.  But she'd get 

there on Monday if she could. 

 

Eventually the social worker did come, sir, and so did the 

RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), but it was too late, 

because Judy had returned to her husband because she had 

nowhere else to go and nowhere else to turn to.  And we did not 

hear from her for several months and when we did hear from 

her, she had left the town and she had moved to Moose Jaw 

with her husband where she knew absolutely nobody and had 

absolutely nowhere to hide. 

 

The minister told us that it's only after 30 acts of violence, on 

an average, that a woman will ask for help; 30 acts of violence 

which may vary from one slap in the face with an open hand to 

a thorough beating with both fists or a boot or a club or a belt; 

sometimes clubbed into unconsciousness, sometimes 

permanently scarred. 

 

But when Judy was found, sir, she had 49 discrete acts of 

violence which she'd suffered at one time -- 49 stab wounds to 

be precise.  And after these 49 stab wounds Judy was not able 

to ask for assistance.  And if any had been available, it would 

have been too late. 

 

Her husband, I understand, has already been released from 

prison.  I just hope he will not find another Judy. 

 

And it is to help people like Judy, her successors, that this Bill 

is introduced.  If it can create a refuge for one woman, to save 

one life, this Bill will be worthwhile. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm proud to 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

rise to support this Bill.  This legislation will strengthen the 

options available for responding to domestic violence.  It'll take 

a small but significant step in a new direction by providing 

remedies to help protect and assist the victims of domestic 

violence. 

 

After hearing the eloquent story given by my colleague, I have 

to say that many of us are tired of the denial that exists in 

society.  Tired of the denial that exists when people hide their 

heads in the sand of the violence that is taking place all around 

us daily. 

 

Domestic violence is one of the most pervasive and serious 

problems that we as a community have to address.  We know 

its magnitude in Canada and in Saskatchewan is shocking.  It 

has devastating effects upon individuals who are victimized 

and those who witness such violence. 

 

Statistics show that one in five occurrences of assault in 

Saskatchewan are spousal assault.  In cases of the worst forms 

of violence, homicide, as we heard just described, 

approximately two-thirds of female victims are killed by family 

members or persons known to them. 

 

A Statistics Canada survey found that one in four women 

experience violence in a relationship.  More than one in ten 

women who reported violence in their current relationship have 

in some point felt that their life was in danger. 

 

When we are going towards the year 2000, this kind of 

existence of violence is completely intolerable in a civilized 

society.  We talk about a civilized society, a society that is a 

Christian society, and yet we put up with this kind of violence.  

It is intolerable. 

 

We know that children, seniors, disabled persons, and other 

individuals in intimate or family relationships are victims of 

domestic violence.  In 1989 studies showed that 4 per cent of 

elderly people report that they have suffered domestic violence 

in their own homes.  People with disabilities are also more 

likely to be victims of abuse. 

 

And it's the children.  The children are the real victims in 

domestic violence.  Children are vulnerable in two ways -- both 

as victims and as witnesses.  Research shows that males who 

have witnessed violence against their mothers are more likely 

to abuse their spouses.  It is therefore devastating to note that 

almost 40 per cent of women in violent relationships report that 

their children have witnessed the violence. 

 

How can a child grow up and have the kind of decent 

relationships when all they have witnessed as they were 

growing up is relationships that were mean, violent, and 

inappropriate? 

 

Domestic abuse and its generational cycle must be stopped.  

We must address this through long-term planning.  But we also 

need to respond to those who are at risk right now.  And that's 

why I choose to stand up and speak on this Bill, because I am 

tired of the denial that I see around me, and that even in 1994 

people are still denying and trying to sweep this kind of 

problem under the rug. 

 

Like I said, this is just a small step, but it it a step.  Our new 

Victims of Domestic Violence Act helps victims in three 

important ways: emergency intervention orders, victim 

assistance orders, and warrants of entry. 

 

Emergency intervention orders mean immediate action.  They'll 

be available 24 hours a day from a select number of specially 

trained justices of the peace, which will be effective 

immediately when served and remain in effect as long as the 

justice of the peace directs.  Orders can be contested by 

applying to a court. 

 

And EIOs (emergency intervention order) can restrain an 

abuser from communicating with or contacting victims or the 

victim's family; give victims exclusive possession of the home.  

Women, like my colleague described, that have to run out in 

the night and leave their own home, will now be protected.  

The abuser is the person that should be leaving the home, not 

the victims and the children. 

 

This is two different ways of reacting to a very serious 

problem.  Next door we see the Premier of Alberta, and I quote 

this headline; it says: Klein scraps council on women's issues 

on the day of International Women's Day.  That's a different 

way of reacting than we have reacted in this province. 

 

And I think the proof of the pudding will be in how we act, not 

in the things that we say.  When I listened to the member of the 

third party, she talks about protecting women and women's 

rights but she voted against The Labour Standards Act that was 

going to protect most women.  And most of the women that are 

in situations like this are the women that are doing the part-time 

work and trying to struggle and make ends meet.  And yet she 

votes against The Labour Standards Act. 

 

So it doesn't matter all the fancy words that you have to say, it's 

how you act that really counts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- And I'm proud of this government and the 

Minister of Justice for putting this Bill forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

one of the fortunate women in society.  I am well loved and 

well supported in my relationship.  Other women, too many 

women, are not.  Too many women for too long have been in 

abusive situations.  Too many for too long, when the situation 

becomes intolerable, have had to pack up, whatever the hour, 

and leave their homes. 

 

Imagine this, Mr. Speaker.  It's winter, it's cold, there are two 

young children, the women has just been 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

physically abused yet again, and she's finally resolved to get 

out of the situation.  In the past, Mr. Speaker, she would have 

had no choice.  She would have had to leave the 

home -- hurriedly pack some essentials, bundle up the kids, and 

somehow get out of there; get out of danger and end her and 

her children's suffering. 

 

Too often, this might have been very difficult.  What if she has 

no car?  No friends or family near by?  And -- and this is often 

the case in rural areas -- no women's shelter to go to?  Does she 

walk?  Does she call a taxi?  Does she even have any money?  

A difficult, if not intolerable situation. 

 

What this government has done, Mr. Speaker, by introduction 

of this Bill, The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, is 

recognize the plight of these abused women and their families, 

and has given them and the people and agencies who work with 

them, for the first time, has given them the support of the law. 

 

This is so simple in its rightness, it is revolutionary.  Instead of 

the victims having to leave, leave the comforts and security of 

home and undergo all the emotional trauma that leaving home 

entails -- and this quite apart from the physical abuse they've 

already suffered -- instead of them leaving, this Act will enable 

peace officers to remove the abuser.  He will rightly be 

removed from the home and served with a court order. 

 

This satisfies my sense of justice.  And I'm sure I'm not alone.  

Why should victims suffer the punishment of having to leave?  

Mr. Speaker, I'm gratified by the early response to this Bill 

from women's organizations and the police who are most 

supportive.  It is clear that this is a piece of far-sighted 

legislation -- a piece of legislation that responds to those who 

are at risk right now. 

 

We, through this legislation, say that society finds domestic 

violence unacceptable.  And as a government we make the 

commitment to eliminate it in whatever way we can.  Mr. 

Speaker, when we think of domestic violence, we immediately 

think of women as the victims.  And I think it is particularly 

significant to women that this Act was introduced on 

International Women's Day. 

 

We think of women as the victims but we must not forget that 

seniors have suffered violence in their homes, and people with 

disabilities are also likely to be victims.  And this Bill is for 

them too.  Most tragically children suffer, and the sad legacy is 

that children of abusers often become abusers themselves. 

 

This Bill will give police, social workers, and justices of the 

peace, broad new powers to deal with spousal abuse.  This Bill 

will allow justices of the peace to issue wide-ranging, 

emergency orders to intervene in domestic disputes at any time, 

day or night, even over the phone, and remove an accused 

abuser. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a dramatic new development in the law.  

And the Minister of Justice and his department are to be 

commended on this relevant 

piece of legislation which will do much to help the people in 

this province who are victims of domestic abuse. 

 

I'd like to quote from an article in the Canadian Press.  It said: 

 

In a day full of speeches and marches, there was at least 

one concrete step in Canada to mark International 

Women's Day. 

 

That step, Mr. Speaker, was the introduction of this Bill.  That 

step was a defining moment for this government and this 

province.  It is this government's continuing commitment to 

lead the way with legislation which will help to make the lives 

of all citizens of this province better.  I give this Bill my 

wholehearted support.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to make just a few 

brief remarks on the substance of this Bill.  Every one of us, I 

believe, that ever aspires to go into politics does so because 

deep down inside you feel that you want to do something to 

make the world a better place.  And I think, I strongly believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that as a result of passing this Bill, part of that 

mission will be fulfilled.  Passing this Bill will be a small but a 

major step; small in terms of the size of the Bill, but major in 

terms of impact on making this world a better place. 

 

We have finally made a statement that says that tolerance of 

violence is approaching zero.  Using violence as a method of 

resolving disputes in the home is not to be tolerated, and we 

wish to approach zero tolerance on it. 

 

And I want to go just one step further than that, Mr. Speaker.  

Now that we've got the Bill partly in place, I would hope that 

we would be able to, as a society, address the whole concept of 

why it is that tolerance is acceptable in certain places in our 

society.  We have to really address the issue of why we permit 

and we tolerate violence on television and in sports in our 

society, because that's where a lot of this is learned.  And I 

think if we can also make a step of reducing the amount of 

violence that we see in the movies, in public, on television, in 

sports arenas, that we also will go a step further in making the 

world a slightly better place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I must warn members that the minister is 

about to close the debate on second reading.  If any members 

wish to speak, they must do so now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, I do want to 

make a few remarks about this Bill. 

 

The Bill I think is a good Bill and I think its intentions are 

honourable.  We on this side of the House agree to the thrust of 

the Bill.  We know that from the time it has 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

been released it's been hotly, I would say, debated and praised 

and criticized. 

 

I'm starting to get letters from people on this Bill, so I think that 

there could be a bit more discussion on this Bill before it's 

probably passed into law.  Because when I first viewed the Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke to departmental officials on its contents, 

and I agree that it was a Bill that's been needed and I agree that 

the thrust of the Bill is to assist primarily women who are being 

abused.  And we have no problem with that. 

 

The Bill allows for I think quick access to help from the police 

or others for the women, and it does I believe accord some 

safeguards for the accused, and specifically a reasonably quick 

review of the emergency intervention order.  And in that 

regard, Mr. Speaker, I would find it very hard to argue against 

this Bill in its entirety. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, knowing that it is high time that women 

and their children have access to the family home and the 

abuser is put out quickly, and it has been far too long that a 

woman has been forced to creep out of the house in the dark of 

night in some cases, Mr. Speaker, when the spouse has come 

home intoxicated and she has to wait till he's passed out in 

order to pick up the kids and go.  And then sometimes they are 

out on the street with no definite destination, and as one of the 

members spoke, it's very traumatic and it has to be fixed. 

 

So I continue to support this Bill.  And I support what it's trying 

to achieve.  I believe it's trying to achieve assistance to a 

vulnerable sector of our society, and that is abused women. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, while we continue to bring abused 

women to the forefront in our discussion and particularly in this 

Bill -- and I suppose, in all fairness, it is a case in the majority 

of spousal abuse -- but I would request that we also speak for 

others who are victims, Mr. Speaker, and I am of course 

alluding to seniors in this case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many seniors that face the same 

problems day to day that torture the abused women and 

children of our society.  Statistics -- and I know when you use 

statistics, Mr. Speaker, it becomes dull, but I think that you will 

agree and others will agree that statistics prove that there is a 

rise in violence against seniors.  And surprising, Mr. Speaker, 

surprisingly it is something that hasn't been brought to the 

forefront as aggressively as we should have I think, and it most 

certainly needs to be dealt with. 

 

I'm not talking totally about physical abuse.  We have heard 

cases where seniors have asked for repairs to their house for 

instance.  And when the repair man has presented the bill, it 

was totally, totally obscene.  And by almost threatening these 

people, they've paid the bill.  There's also that kind of abuse. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it has been a topic many times on TV.  

Several articles, various magazines and papers have talked 

about how vulnerable seniors are.  Just like  

women and children.  And yet it seems that we have somehow 

forgotten them in this Bill.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill could have included them.  And hopefully we will get 

some amendments to this Bill that will take care of that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the hardest part of the whole thing is to 

believe that children and grandchildren are often the abusers of 

their grandparents.  And it's hard to believe that seniors are 

beaten up, starved, not given necessary medication, and suffer 

other atrocities under the care of their own families, and owners 

of facilities that take care of elderly people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's hard for me to accept or even imagine, 

coming from a family as I do that have always been loving and 

supportive of each other.  And it's foreign to me.  And I was 

raised in that kind of a family and I still enjoy that kind of a 

family. 

 

But these things do happen.  And as you can probably guess, I 

am a senior.  And I've never experienced this kind of abuse, but 

it's brought to my attention and I find that it's very disturbing.  

And while we may argue that it's not as . . . maybe we don't 

have to look after that as quickly as we do the abuse of women, 

I believe it is something we have to face up to.  I think the word 

I was looking for is pressing.  You could get a debate going on 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's also unbelievable that there's such a thing as 

physical or mental abuse in our society.  That women, children, 

and seniors fear for their lives and for their safety, as a matter 

of fact on a daily basis in many cases.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that whatever members of this Assembly can do to alleviate 

some of the hurt, some of the pain, and help those people, that 

we should do it. 

 

I still feel that this legislation will assist those surviving in such 

a home life. However it is now becoming evident that the Bill 

could be susceptible to some legal challenges.  This issue was 

raised with the minister, Mr. Minister, in question period, I 

believe today and other days, and he has assured us that the 

department lawyers looked at this issue and it is definitely 

constitutional.  At this point in time we have to accept that it is. 

 

However, I have been talking to individuals in the legal 

community about this very same matter, but I have not 

completed them and I'm not quite satisfied as yet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now I want to reiterate that I believe the intent of this 

legislation is honourable, and fully support the minister's 

efforts in passing this legislation. But I'm not fully comfortable 

with some of the ramifications of the Bill on the accused. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue on with some 

consultations before this Bill goes to committee.  Obviously the 

official opposition are in favour; we're opposed to the 

legislation as it is.  If it's being put in a 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

position to protect victims from violence, then we must make 

sure, we must make sure that the legislation is sound. 

 

There are conflicting opinions and we want to speak to 

those -- those on both sides of the argument, that we may pose 

relevant questions during committee.  And I look forward to 

that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are several things that bothers me about this 

Bill and I'm sure that the minister will alleviate some of my 

concerns later on.  This Bill gives Saskatchewan courts new 

powers, powers to order abusers to compensate victims for 

expenses like legal costs, temporary accommodations.  But I 

haven't seen anywhere where the accuser is protected if this 

was found to be a false accusation and he or she is out of 

pocket. 

 

There's cost for temporary accommodation, and it will grant 

victims temporary possession of property such as a car or 

children's clothing, which is very good.  And it also restrains 

the abuser from contacting the victim, their family members, or 

associates. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that poses a little problem for me.  Because 

in the Bill it says that the accused cannot communicate with the 

victim or any of the children if it is to cause annoyance or 

alarm.  Well supposing now that the abuser is abusing the 

spouse -- he or she -- and the children are not being abused; and 

the spouse, the accused, wants to communicate with those, 

apparently he can't.  The way I read this Bill, he can't. 

 

There's another thing that says they cannot come near to the 

victim.  Well supposing that victim is a farm wife and the 

accused has to come to the farm to look after the business of 

farming.  He has to be able to come onto that property and get 

the tractor or whatever. 

 

Also, the way I read this, Mr. Speaker, the accused may not be 

able to go to his own church because it says he can't be near 

that victim.  Well if they belong to the same church and he 

wants to go to church, maybe the guy's sobered up by now and 

he realizes he needs to go and ask for some forgiveness some 

place; those are the kind of things that I think I need to be 

comfortable with. 

 

The other thing I might suggest as I'm going along is I 

get -- and I'm not a legal person, but it seems to me that 

whoever put this together could be paid by the word or the 

paragraph or something -- I see a whole page here where as a 

simple layman I could cover it in the one sentence that's at the 

bottom of the page, page 5.  Under the heading (k) it says: "any 

other provision that the court considers appropriate."  That 

covers everything; that's everything.  It doesn't matter . . . all 

this other stuff that's gone ahead doesn't matter a thing.  So 

those kind of things I'd like to develop with the minister before 

this thing goes . . . while it's in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina police chief, who is Mr. Ernie Reimer, 

has endorsed this legislation and he says it's a 

major step in law enforcement because it focuses on assisting 

victims instead of punishing the offender.  Well that, to me, is a 

little bit iffy.  If we don't punish the abuser in some manner, 

then what is to stop him from doing it again?  And while it's 

great and wonderful to look after the victim, but are we going 

to do it every second week, or should there not be some kind of 

a penalty? 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, this is a good Bill; we're certainly 

not going to carry a long, protracted debate on it because I 

believe the thing that I mentioned are things that could be and 

probably will be cleared up by the minister. 

 

There's one other thing that bothers me a little in this, and it's 

talking about action.  There's no action against the peace 

officer, no matter what he does almost, because it says, among 

other things, ". . . in the carrying out or supposed carrying out 

(of his duties) of any decision . . ."  Well who is to decide what 

he supposed was his right according to the decision?  I'd like to 

have that cleared up at a later time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's about all I have to say today, but I would 

certainly like to say to the minister: fundamentally, we agree 

with this.  We do think it can be fixed a little bit and I will be 

asking some more questions, and I look forward to that 

opportunity.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 

pleasure as well to say a few words with respect to this 

legislation.  Mr. Speaker, I find myself, whenever we discuss a 

subject like this, somehow feeling that as a man I'm on the 

defensive.  I can't help but get that feeling, Mr. Speaker.  Some 

people like to present it as simply men beating women and 

children, and that it is wrong. And I agree, Mr. Speaker.  And 

somehow or another it's the older sort of group of people that 

somehow or another have felt that this is an acceptable form of 

discipline, shall we say, or whatever, Mr. Speaker. And I agree 

that that is wrong too. 

 

And somehow or another it's felt that the old school of thought, 

that the man of the house was the lord and master sort of thing, 

is finally breaking down, Mr. Speaker. And I say that it's high 

time that that's happened; that a partnership within a family 

consists of a husband and wife running the operations of that 

family, and not the lord and master type of situation that a lot 

of us probably grew up in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And somehow I get the feeling that some people feel that it's 

the responsibility of only men to change, Mr. Speaker. And I 

don't think it is.  I think society has to change, and is changing.  

It's no longer acceptable, Mr. Speaker, finally no longer 

acceptable, finally, Mr. Speaker, for a man to come home at the 

end of the day from his work or from the bar and beat his wife 

and children around because he sees fit at the end of that day, 

Mr. Speaker. 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

This cuts across, Mr. Speaker, all kinds of social economic 

groups and it cuts across political groups as well, Mr. Speaker.  

There are Liberals that beat their wives and children, there are 

Conservatives that beat their wives and children, and there are 

NDPs that beat their wives and children and Reform Party 

members, I say, Mr. Speaker.  And it doesn't matter who they 

are, it is wrong and should not and will not be acceptable in a 

free and democratic society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Being Conservative does not mean you have a right to do 

anything like that, nor does it in any other group, Mr. Speaker.  

This Archie Bunker type mentality that seems to exist in a lot 

of people in society today is not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe that society is finally beginning to recognize that. 

 

Beating your children or your wife or your grandparents should 

not be condoned or is not acceptable in any shape or form.  Mr. 

Speaker, my heart goes out to the people that find themselves 

in such a terrible situation resulting from something that they 

absolutely had no control over or had no part in. 

 

As I said, men coming home from work or from the bar, which 

is often the case in these situations, Mr. Speaker -- alcohol 

abuse plays a large role in these kinds of problems -- deserve 

swift and immediate action, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that the 

legislation that the minister has brought forward is going to 

help in that area.  Removing the offender, I believe, is the right 

way to go. 

 

However that does not necessarily mean that it is over, Mr. 

Minister.  I can't help but have the feeling that you remove that 

offender from the situation; we'll say as some of the other 

members suggested, at 2 o'clock in the morning, someone 

comes home drunk and abusive, beating their wife and children 

around, raising supreme you know what in their home, and the 

police come, take that man from the situation, somewhat 

relieved I suspect, the wife and the children resume going back 

to bed, all of those kinds of things.  They take the man down to 

the police headquarters, Mr. Speaker, charge him with an 

offence. 

 

But is it over at that point?  And I ask the minister, is it over at 

that point?  I sincerely hope it is but I don't think that that will 

be the practice of what happens.  I suspect in a lot of cases what 

will happen, that man will be released from jail that evening, 

released on bail, whatever, go out, simply enraged by the 

situation that someone has driven him from his home, Mr. 

Speaker.  Maybe go back to the bar, resume the drinking bout 

all over again, and then go home to confront the people who 

have put him out of his home once again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I worry, I really worry that that might be the result of this 

type of action.  I hope, Mr. Minister, that you have done your 

homework in this regard.  I hope that that isn't going to be what 

develops, where the person goes home completely enraged 

once again because of the situation that's presented itself, where 

they're faced with a court action now -- dragged down in front 

of the magistrate at 2 o'clock in the morning and 

goes home and decides they're going to exact revenge for that 

evening's events.  And I sincerely hope that that isn't what 

happens, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister. But I worry, as I say, 

that that might be the type of development that can happen. 

 

I had occasion last night to speak to a former member of the 

RCMP that has had a number of dealings with these type of 

domestic situations, and it was his fear as well that that could 

and likely . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the member 

opposite who is on his feet and thank him for his indulgence in 

allowing me to rise, because it's a very important topic and I 

appreciate the remarks that he's making. 

 

Earlier I mentioned to the Assembly that I would introduce to 

you an all-China youth federation delegation, Mr. Speaker.  

They are present now in your gallery, and it's my pleasure to be 

able to introduce them to you and through you to the members 

and my colleagues in the Assembly.  I would ask them to stand 

as I introduce them, and please forgive me if I make any 

mistakes when I use a Canadian interpretation of their names. 

 

We have with us today Mr. Cai Wu.  Mr. Cai is the head of the 

delegation and deputy secretary general of the all-China youth 

federation.  Mr. Zhi Shuping, who is president of the provincial 

youth federation.  Mr. Yan Bingzhu, who is the general 

manager, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Beijing, 

China. 

 

Mr. Fang Tianlong, who is the vice-president of the Chinese 

Youth Entrepreneurs Association and general manager of the 

Guangzhou Beilong Products Development Corporation. 

 

Mr. Huang Rufeng, who is the CYEA executive council 

member and general manager of Yunnan Yuanfeng Packing 

Business Company.  Mr. Zhang Lingping, who is the president 

of the youth federation of Gansu Jinchuan Nonferrous Metals 

Company.  And Ms. Zeng Qingrong, who is an executive 

council member and president of Harbin Songlei Business 

Group. 

 

Mr. Wang Shihong, who is interpreter and staff member of the 

AYCF International Department.  And Dr. Hsieh, as I 

mentioned earlier, who is a constituent of mine, but a professor 

at the University of Regina and someone who has made this 

exchange possible. 

 

I ask the members to join me in saying ni hao to the delegation.  

Ne hah. 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 

saying, I worry that what will happen under those 

circumstances as I was talking about earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

where a person is put out of their home and then goes back, 

decides to exact some kind of revenge on their family.  And I 

hope this legislation has some way of dealing with that type of 

possibility, Mr. Minister. 

 

Because as I was saying, I met with an RCMP, a former RCMP 

officer who has had a lot of experience in these types of 

situations and people don't . . . His view was that under those 

type of circumstances, people aren't rational one little bit.  It's 

exactly that kind of thing that's on their mind, that they're going 

to go back and get even.  And I can't help but worry that that 

might be the situation, and I hope there's some way that we can 

deal with that type of situation, Mr. Minister. 

 

People who find themselves with the families . . . the women 

primarily and children that find themselves in those types of 

situation are scared, they're confused, they're battered. And we 

must, absolutely must find ways to protect those people. 

 

As MLAs I think we all from time to time run across 

occurrences of this type of incidents, Mr. Speaker -- people 

who phone us.  I've had calls of this nature, Mr. Speaker, where 

they don't know where to turn.  At 2 o'clock in the morning 

they phone you and ask what they can do or where they should 

go or any of that type of situation.  And they're so scared, so 

absolutely frightened to death that they won't tell you their 

name or where they are or any of the details surrounding it, 

only that they have to get out of that situation and have to 

remove themselves as quickly as possible because they fear for 

their very lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The beatings must stop.  Society owes it to the families of 

victims of abuse.  Small children watching in fear, Mr. 

Speaker, as their parents, often drunk out of their minds, decide 

to beat one another, Mr. Speaker; children growing up and 

watching and accepting this as an acceptable behaviour pattern; 

children growing up to become abusers themselves.  The cycle 

must stop, Mr. Speaker, and I think we are making steps 

forward in that area. 

 

I can't help but remembering, Mr. Speaker, the occasion I had, 

an invitation to visit the Saskatoon Interval House one time.  

And accepting the invitation, Mr. Speaker, and arriving at the 

open house -- is the way it was described that day -- walking up 

the stairs in what looked like an old apartment building that had 

been converted with barred windows and security cameras 

trained down on the entranceway of that building.  Knocking 

on the door, I was greeted that day 

by intercom, on an open house day, as I said, Mr. Speaker, 

greeted by intercom -- who was I, and what was the purpose of 

my visit. 

 

On an open house day security could not be let down, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the fear that the people inside had of the 

circumstances as they may present themselves.  Then I stated 

the reason for my visit and who I was.  My name I'm sure was 

being checked against a list of people who had accepted 

invitations that day.  I heard what seemed to me was about four 

deadbolt locks being unlocked, Mr. Speaker, and then the door 

opened. 

 

Upon entering at that point, I found myself as the only man, I 

think, in attendance that afternoon, at that particular point 

anyway.  And it felt, Mr. Speaker, like every eye in the entire 

place was burning through me at that moment. 

 

And the reason for that was simple, Mr. Speaker.  These people 

had a tremendous mistrust of any man that entered that room or 

that building that day, I think.  You looked at them and there 

was worry in their face and fear in their face.  I think the reason 

was simple, Mr. Speaker. They wondered who I was there to 

see and who I was there to potentially beat, Mr. Speaker.  I 

think that that was the reason of the fear in their eyes, as a man, 

and I think it would have been the same in any case no matter 

what man walked in that afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These people had been victims of abuse; they knew what it was 

all about; they could see the kinds of things that had happened 

and had felt the kinds of punishment that can be enacted on 

them, Mr. Speaker.  And as I say, I'm sure they were wondering 

what the reason for my visit was that day.  Fear in their eyes, 

bruises on their face and bodies, Mr. Speaker.  Just looking at 

them you could feel the kinds of fear that they must be 

experiencing at that time. 

 

Children as well sitting there, Mr. Speaker, and looking up and 

wondering, I'm sure, who I was there to hurt, Mr. Speaker.  

Quickly, you know, quickly realizing what was going on there, 

I explained the reason for my visit and wanted to discuss their 

plight, Mr. Speaker. And at that point, and it was only at that 

point, Mr. Speaker, that I think the mistrust was replaced with 

an outpouring of stories of criminal abuse and intimidation. 

 

These women were in need of protection, or some measure of it 

was being given -- at least there was some measure of it being 

given to them at that time, Mr. Speaker.  Sorely underfunded, 

they were doing what they could however, Mr. Speaker, at 

Saskatoon Interval House. 

 

And I couldn't help, as I toured the facility, Mr. Speaker, to 

notice as I was walking by, I think the only telephone in the 

building.  And there was a big message above that telephone 

and it said, this number is not to be given out to anyone under 

any circumstances.  Please respect this message; all of our lives 

are at risk.  And that was the message that was 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

prominently displayed right above the telephone. 

 

And you couldn't help but wonder at what kind of telephone 

calls must come in there from time to time, Mr. Speaker, or 

what kinds of goings-on happen at the front door of that 

building from time to time, Mr. Speaker, where enraged men, 

generally speaking, I would think, pounding on the door at all 

hours day and night wanting to get in and thrash their families 

or their wives once again.  And I think that was . . . and 

obviously that was the reason for the security that was there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was one of the most . . . probably one of the 

most difficult days of my life, watching and listening and 

hearing what was going on there that day.  And I can only 

imagine, can only imagine what a day in the life of those 

women and children must be like. 

 

Mr. Minister, this Bill represents a quantum step forward in the 

area of abuse, and I congratulate you and your government for 

bringing this type of legislation forward and sincerely, 

sincerely hope that the legal opinion that you have that this 

legislation is constitutional is right, because the abuse must 

stop. 

 

And as members of this legislature we can all do our part, Mr. 

Speaker, and move this legislation forward so that this type of 

abuse can stop.  Society I think is progressing, Mr. Minister.  

Finally, I think, it is progressing, in short steps however. 

 

And as I said, the abuse must stop, and we are beginning to 

realize, I think society as a whole, that this type of thing is no 

longer acceptable, if it ever was.  And unfortunately it does 

seem that there are people out there even today, still, that 

believe their wives and children are possessions to be used and 

abused in any manner they see fit. 

 

But I think this type of legislation and other things, and 

education that we are beginning . . . through education we are 

all beginning to see what kinds of terrible injustices there are 

when you look at these types of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I firmly believe, however, that the attitudes of old, the attitudes 

of fear and the attitudes are beginning to change, Mr. Speaker, 

but ever so slow.  I hope that legislation like this will move that 

one step forward that much more quicker.  I think education, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, would help as well.  An educational 

process through the school system to encourage people to step 

forward when they know of cases of abuse would be helpful, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess in conclusion I'll say it once again: the 

abuse must stop.  I believe you're doing the right thing, Mr. 

Minister, by bringing this legislation forward.  I hope it's 

constitutional and I hope that the people of Saskatchewan 

respect the legislation the way I think all of the members of this 

legislature respect the legislation as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there's reason to believe that  

there's lots of folks out there that would like to have input into 

this piece of legislation.  We're receiving calls from people in 

our offices, as I'm sure the government is receiving calls from 

their offices as well about these types of things. 

 

I think it's genuine concern, Mr. Speaker.  I think there's 

concern.  I think most people want to see this legislation moved 

forward quickly.  However I think they also want to be sure, 

absolutely sure that this legislation will stand up and that the 

right thing will be done with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in order to give opportunity for as much 

input, to allow for a tremendously strong Bill to move forward, 

I think that we need to have additional time to hear from as 

many folks as possible on this subject, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move that we adjourn the debate on this further. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1545) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the minister to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

To my left is Merran Proctor, the deputy minister; behind her is 

Janis Rathwell, assistant deputy minister; behind me is Jeff 

Parr, who is executive director of policy planning and research; 

on my right is Terry Stevens, executive director, occupational 

health and safety.  I look forward to the members' questions. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Well, Minister, I want 

to welcome you and your assistants today.  And it's been some 

time since we've had a chance to go into estimates on Labour 

issues and to discuss the issues of our labour force and things 

that concern people who work for a living in our province. 

 

I don't know if I have learned very much over the past year, but 

hopefully we have.  And I know that you've been working hard 

at your job because you have brought forth some new 

legislation this year again, as you did last year, and that of 

course keeps us both fairly busy. 

 

Now I know that as we look at the estimates, Minister, that 

you've probably done some studies and research and spent 

some taxpayers' money to try to determine what kind of 

legislation you should bring in for the province to best balance 

both the needs of workers and labour creators in the business 

sector, as well as to  



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

balance the ever present political needs of our province, and the 

way to sustain that balance. 

 

So in those studies we would expect that you have expended 

the dollars, and we would like to examine with you just how 

some of those dollars end up being spent as we've progressed 

into the present time. 

 

And while it's fresh on my mind, I'm wondering, in your 

projections, if you estimated the costs of such things as the 

advertising program that you've gone into to promote the 

legislation that you're bringing in, as you did to some extent 

last year, and again more specifically did this year. 

 

Did you, in those projections, Minister, for example, as we 

discussed earlier today and also in question period on March 16 

. . . We discussed that there were approximately 1,500 letters 

sent out to do some advertising.  And I have a copy of the 

brochure that was sent out, and I showed it to you earlier today, 

and I'm sure you recall it very well. 

 

Mr. Minister, clearly these letters . . . or these brochures were 

not letters.  They were a brochure.  And in our office we 

received a copy of this brochure stuffed into the Leader-Post.  

Now would that have been some sort of an accident, that that 

got into our Leader-Post, or would that have been an indication 

that every Leader-Post in the delivery area would have had one 

of those brochures stuffed in it? 

 

And with that, Minister, I would ask you to let us know how 

many of those brochures in fact were put out in the Leader-Post 

and through other vehicles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know if I can tell you exactly 

how many were distributed.  We made a number available to 

the Leader-Post and they were distributed in the Leader-Post 

area.  I can give you the total cost of it or I can give you the 

cost of the . . . let me give you the cost of the distribution, and 

that may assist the member. 

 

I'm informed that the cost of the printing was $26,000, and . . . 

well I'll wait for the member's other questions.  The total cost 

was $51,000.  The cost of printing the pamphlet I'm told is 

$26,000. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Now you spent the 26, 

it's printed, and the total is 51.  Now that 51,000, would that 

include brochures that were sent out in other daily papers or 

weekly papers or were there other distributions other than the 

Leader-Post perhaps, like the Star-Phoenix, those kinds of 

things? 

 

In total, how many brochures did you send out altogether when 

you finished up with the printing of $26,000 worth of printing?  

How many copies did you buy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We got 300,000 copies actually 

printed and of course a goodly number of those have not yet 

gone out. 

 

No.  The answer to the member's question is no, this 

does not include further distributions.  It is anticipated we're 

going to send out some in the weeklies, and that'll be an 

additional $15,000 we estimate, for a total of around $67,000. 

 

The member asked also if this had been budgeted, and yes, all 

this money was within budget in previous estimates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I'm glad to know that you did in fact 

budget for it so that we won't wreck the whole process. 

 

But we've gone from 26,000 now to 51,000 and we're now at 

67,000.  So we've got 1,500 letters that were sent out, with this 

implied as the whole bag of goods in question period yesterday, 

but now we're up to 300,000 copies that have been printed, and 

we're distributing some rather significant figures here, Minister.  

I think maybe we'd better pursue this a little bit more just to see 

where we're going to end up here. 

 

You're going to put this out perhaps in some other newspapers.  

I can understand that because some of the weeklies don't go out 

right away.  But why won't you tell us how many copies of this 

brochure you've already distributed and how many you have 

left on hand and then tell us what you're going to do with the 

rest of this 300,000 copies that grew from 1,500? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We estimate that this will go in most 

of the weeklies.  I'm not suggesting all of them.  That's a fair 

number and some of them are of a relatively simple nature, let 

us say.  But we estimate that these will go in most of the 

weeklies. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  Now how many are 

you going to have left over when you finish with that process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're not going to have any.  This is 

just a best seller; that's all I can say.  We've got people calling 

every day that want them.  I'm sure this will go into many more 

printings.  This is one of the real best sellers in Saskatchewan's 

history.  I just doubt if we're going to have any left over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  I'm sure that the 

general public are glad that you have a best seller on your 

hands.  You are quite a salesman. I'm quite sure you'd sell your 

grandmother too. 

 

But let's get it back to reality here now.  How many more 

thousands do you anticipate that you might have to produce in 

the next run because you have this great demand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Actually that was an attempt at levity.  

There's no present plans to go into a second printing.  We have, 

however, had quite a demand for this information, not only 

within Saskatchewan but outside Saskatchewan.  So we think 

that 300,000 was none too many.  There's no indication at this 

point in time that a second printing will be necessary though. 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

But it might. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's probably just as well, Minister, 

because otherwise we'd likely have to take another look at the 

budget, seeing as how these figures seem to be growing so fast. 

 

So now you've distributed your best seller and you'll get that all 

out for everybody to see in the short run.  What other 

advertising tools are you using through your department for 

implementing the promotion of this particular legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There was in addition a print ad 

which will be in a number of weekly newspapers -- most of 

them, by the look of this document -- the total cost of which 

was $14,500.  And that, apart from the letters of which we had 

discussed earlier and in the question period, is it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Let me get this straight now.  Does that mean 

that the 14,500 is added on to the 67,000, or is it part of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it's part of the 51,000. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And do we add the 51,000 to the 67,000 or is 

that part of the 67,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can see why the members opposite 

were so creative in their own budgeting.  No, the 51,000 is 

what's spent to date.  We anticipate spending another 15,000, 

for a total of 67,000.  You can't add the 51,000 and the 67,000 

and come up with anything but nonsense.  We've spent 51,000 

to date; we anticipate another 15,000, for a total of 67,000. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, Minister, I'm sure that it is for your 

benefit more than mine that we get this straightened out 

because there are all kinds of folks that would be out there 

calculating a lot of different things.  And you know, just for the 

record, Minister, I've only had direct input into public budgets 

at the municipal level, and there I can report to you, over 12 

years of work, we had a balanced budget every year, and some 

years a surplus. 

 

And I anticipate helping you to make sure that that happens for 

the province.  Because we can't wait until the next election, that 

would be too late. 

 

On the back of this brochure, Minister, it states that for more 

information, call the department.  If you live outside of the city, 

you are invited to call collect.  If you require further 

information, you are invited to mail a coupon in and additional 

information will be sent to you. 

 

What is the additional information, to start with?  And . . . then 

we may as well let you answer that first. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It refers to two things.  One, we have 

fact sheets with more detail on it for those who have a 

particular interest in detail in a certain area -- we're able to 

provide that.  In addition, we 

receive a fair number of individual inquiries, individually 

addressed letters wanting individual questions answered.  So 

that's the kind of service they get if they utilize . . . if they take 

advantage of that invitation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, obviously now we've got a 

second draft of information, and even though it may be faxed 

out, it won't be a high cost, I suppose.  But there definitely 

seems to me like there might be some extra costs involved here.  

How much will this all cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well if we get as much interest in it 

. . . if the interest in this continues which we've seen to date, 

there may be a fair amount.  There may be a fair number of 

inquires; the total cost however would not be significant.  The 

cost of the first-class mailings are frankly not large; they're 

relatively small. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Perhaps you could just give us a little idea of 

what you consider to be relatively small. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well yes, a couple of hundred dollars, 

which was the . . . a couple of hundred dollars might be a wild 

guess.  I'm sure the member will appreciate I can't give you a 

very precise estimate until the matter's done, but at this point in 

time with just starting, yes, a couple of hundred dollars might 

be reasonable. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I can accept that as 

probably close to fact, but perhaps you would like to follow up 

by giving us that information when in fact you do wrap this 

thing up.  And if you'd commit to that, well we'd be satisfied to 

go on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I'll perhaps give the member the 

undertaking that when the session's over -- that's a couple of 

months hence -- we'll give you an update on how much we've 

spent answering these inquiries. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm sure there'll be some folks that'll be glad 

to know when we're going to wrap this up too.  So in a couple 

of months hence, we will look forward to that. 

 

How many local calls has your department received on this 

matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The resource centre received about 

300 calls since the legislation was introduced -- the vast 

majority of which, I may say, were fully supportive. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You say these calls were supportive.  They 

weren't inquiries for information? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Both. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, how many out-of-town calls has the 

department received? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We don't log them in that 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

nature.  We don't log the calls by source.  So I actually can't tell 

you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I expect that maybe, I guess, my next 

question would have to be then, Minister: do you set up an 800 

number there that says you can call collect if you want to?  

Wouldn't those calls be charged to your department and 

therefore be automatically broke down for you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We're in the process of doing that 

now actually.  We expect a fair number of calls about The 

Trade Union Act as well when it comes.  The 800 number had 

not been finalized with SaskTel so the details aren't in the 

pamphlet.  So that the calls which . . . anyone who reads that 

and calls will simply call collect and we'll accept the charges.  

We are however in the process of setting up an 800 number.  I 

gather the theory is it'll be cheaper than accepting collect calls. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So I suppose you could put a bit of an 

estimate on what that might cost us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we'll have to undertake to 

supply that to you; we don't just have that here.  Indeed we 

don't have the 800 number in place quite yet. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well we can certainly wait, along with the 

rest of this.  Because I think we're developing kind of a pattern 

of how things are progressing to cost a little more than most of 

us expect -- not unusual in life, of course. 

 

How many individuals requested additional print information 

so far? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can only answer the member's 

question in the most general terms.  There's been a fair amount 

of . . . there's been a fair number of people have asked for 

additional information.  Most of the calls which we received 

were . . . most of the 300 calls were for additional information.  

Some were complimentary in passing, and the odd one might 

have called only to be complimentary.  Most of those who 

called actually called for information.  So the majority of the 

300 would be calls for information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I'm sure that your track record will be a 

good one so far, Mr. Minister, seeing as how what you did was 

put out all of the information on those good things in the 

legislation, things that even I for the most part can agree with, 

until we read the fine print and find out the detail of the 

negative side, which of course there always seems to be a 

negative side. 

 

How many staff members are dedicated to taking these calls, 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are five people in the resource 

centre, of which one mans the phone, or persons the phone 

continuously and the others assist.  So call it five, with one 

person more or less  

on the phone continuously. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So we've got one person working pretty 

steady at this telephone here and everybody's helping out and 

that's good that they cooperate.  How many staff members are 

dedicated to sending out the additional information that's 

requested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well that's the same five people. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But not the same one that's answering the 

telephone, I'm sure, because she's totally busy with all of this 

great interest and so we probably have one other person 

assigned to a full-time wage to do that job.  If I'm terribly 

incorrect there, I'm sure you'll set me back on my ear here 

quickly. 

 

While we're at it, maybe I should let you respond to that.  You 

probably then have two people that are on full-time salary, and 

this will go on for how long? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The resource centre is permanent and 

is, I may say, much utilized.  And also I may say we receive a 

fair number of compliments on both the quality of the material 

available and the service they receive.  But the resource centre 

is a permanent structure within the Department of Labour.  At 

the moment their time is, I would think, almost fully consumed 

with this project.  But it's a permanent feature of the 

Department of Labour. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So even though it may not necessarily be 

affecting the budget it definitely has tied up your crew.  And 

then if they were employed full time doing a full-time job 

before, how do they manage to squeeze in all of this extra work 

without needing some part-time help? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to say for the benefit of 

members present and in the presence of the very few staff who 

are here, that they have worked long and hard, way beyond the 

call of duty in getting this legislation ready. 

 

This portion of the public service have worked very hard.  

These Bills have been a labour of love, and they have worked 

nights and weekends.  If we had only been able to command 

that level of services for which we were paying, the public 

would never have got a fraction of what they have got out of 

this department.  This department has worked extremely hard 

on these Bills, and they're working just as hard to provide the 

service afterwards.  They just work longer and harder when the 

demand comes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I certainly want to compliment your 

staff, Minister.  It's one of the kinds of things that I can 

appreciate more than anything else is people that really do like 

their work and that will work hard to do their job.  But reality is 

that we've been bringing in The Labour Standards Act here and 

we're bringing in The Trade Union Act pretty soon.  It seems to 

me that the very nature of these Acts is to provide fair labour 

practices to people.  Perhaps the union should take a look at 

how you're handling your people and 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

making them work all of these extra hours in overtime and 

cutting all these other folks out of their jobs. 

 

I see the minister does want to respond, so I'll let him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well it's conceivable that we may get 

complaints from the union.  I think it's more likely to come, if it 

comes at all, about the contents rather than the hours which 

have been given us, you know, in some ways freely and 

voluntarily, above and beyond the call of duty. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I think we'll just let the union 

take care of you.  I wonder though if you do have kind of an 

idea of the total cost now of the employees and what it's going 

to cost us, so that we could put together with that $300 for 

other kinds of calls and that sort of thing, a little bit of a kind of 

an agenda of costs.  And while you're at it, I do want to know, 

so that we don't double up too much here, I do want to know 

what the additional information consists of that you're sending 

out.  Could you provide me with a copy of that so that I don't 

have to phone the 800-number. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes.  I'm not sure if I've got a copy of 

it here.  If not, we're certainly have it tomorrow when I gather 

the House leaders to reschedule these estimates.  So we'll 

certainly have that here tomorrow.  Perhaps we'll also have 

these other answers, these other questions. 

 

There's been no increase in staff in the department.  These Bills 

. . . I say again, these Bills have imposed an enormous 

additional load on this department which it has just simply 

carried in addition to all its other work.  And that's what I say, 

for this department these projects have been a labour of love or 

they would not have been done at all.  This department is one 

that has worked evenings and weekends, and the public have 

been extremely well served by this department.  I am very 

proud to be the minister in charge of a department which has 

worked this hard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Someone found them so I'll ask one 

of the pages to table them, and he'll make copies available to 

you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, I appreciate that.  Now I 

did want you to talk a little bit about the cost of all this sort of 

thing, if you happen to get it.  I'll just check those over in a 

minute to see if they are much different than what we've seen 

before. 

 

Could you tell me, Minister, have there been any past examples 

where your department or the department that you are now the 

head of under someone else's direction perhaps, has advertised 

proposed legislation that was going to be brought in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we did it last year.  We had a 

publicity program last year.  I invite the member to look at the 

material.  It is factual; it is not partisan.  I've not done the 

members opposite a disservice, for 

instance, by including in the material their voting record on 

these Bills.  It's silent as to that. 

 

This is factual material, non-partisan material.  We're 

attempting to inform the public of Saskatchewan of what we're 

doing.  And there is, I may say, a good deal of interest in what 

we're doing.  So this is factual, non-partisan material, and I 

think it's a perfectly legitimate use of advertising dollars. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, obviously you would have to 

say that.  You've already spent the money, so you have to 

justify it, and we would expect nothing less from you.  And we 

certainly would expect nothing less from you than to be 

non-partisan because obviously you probably would be in 

conflict with some other rule some place. 

 

But anyway, I will be checking this over and reading through it.  

Now you mentioned that we did this last year, and I'm 

presuming that you did this sort of exercise with The Workers' 

Compensation and The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 

 

Now could you answer a few details maybe about that because 

that would have been into last year's budgeting, and we need to 

know what type of information was distributed at that time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It was more or less the same.  It 

might take us a moment to put together the precise cost of that; 

we didn't actually come with that.  This was more extensive, in 

part because our schedule of meetings was more extensive.  At 

each of the meetings we had -- and someone estimated there 

were a couple of hundred of them -- we would pass around just 

a pad with lined paper on it and say, if you want more 

information, sign, name and address.  It was rare that the pad 

went by anyone without them putting their name and address 

down; everybody wanted the additional information. 

 

We took it from that there was a good deal of interest in what 

we were doing and thus we tried to carry through with that and 

inform them what we're doing.  That was the source of all the 

letters which were the questions in question period and it's been 

the reason why we have carried on with this. 

 

Last year, the tours -- we called them labour tours, the 

meetings -- last year the labour tours were much less extensive.  

And I would guess, without having the precise figures, that the 

cost of the communications may have been less expensive 

correspondingly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  So you mention you 

had some tours.  What kind of cost did we have involved with 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I can provide you with a breakdown 

of that.  It was not extensive.  We did use the executive aircraft 

in part, and in part we used the ministerial vehicle which was 

provided to me.  We all piled into the Buick and away we went.  

There were some hotel rooms and some meals.  It was very 

minimal.  We normally used halls which . . . didn't 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

normally have to pay for the hall.  Normally someone would 

provide it to us.  It might be a school, it might be an MLA's 

office on occasion, and so on.  We rarely had to pay for halls, 

although we did on occasion. 

 

The general cost of these was normally meals, some hotel 

rooms, and occasionally the use of the government aircraft 

where the travel arrangements were such that we could not 

drive from one location to another. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm glad to hear that nothing 

you do is very expensive.  But unfortunately it does seem to be 

sort of piling up a little bit at a time here, sort of like stacking 

pennies. And the pile's getting kind of wobbly already; it's 

getting fairly high here. 

 

So let's talk a little bit about this executive airplane.  How 

many dollars an hour does that thing cost to fly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I think I can provide the member with 

the cost.  I have a sheet which sets out the cost from April 28, 

the first flight we made last year, to November 30, 1993 -- and 

that was not the last flight which I made and it's not in a very 

convenient form.  I could read it or I could have it ready 

tomorrow, or I could read this to you.  I will be guided by the 

member's request.  I can give you the total; perhaps that would 

make sense.  If you add the figures of $1,364, which was the 

cost from April 28 to November 30, of my flights, when you 

add to that the cost of $1,142.27, those were the cost of my 

flights.  And so I think that's perhaps the information you want. 

 

If you want the detailed breakdown, I'll provide you with that 

as well, but I can't do it because it's not in a single sheet that I 

can tear out and give to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- If the minister would like to deliver that 

tomorrow, that would be just fine.  We'll certainly appreciate 

having that.  Were there other people that travelled with you on 

these plane tours and car tours?  And who were they and what 

was their role? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, on many occasions, but not all, 

the deputy minister travelled with me.  On most occasions there 

was a ministerial assistant as well with us who was responsible 

for arrangements and such not.  So there were normally three 

people -- myself and two others -- on these labour tours. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think I heard you say two staff members, 

basically.  Okay.  Any other MLAs help you to sell this 

program or get involved with you on this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think most of the members at 

one time or another were involved in this, none of whom, 

however, ever travelled on executive aircraft.  And I don't 

think -- well I know because you couldn't do it under The 

Legislative Assembly Act -- none of whose expenses were ever 

paid by the department or by Executive Council, so the only . . . 

If this is a question about expenses, the only expenses which 

were charged was that of the deputy and the 

ministerial assistant and of course, my own. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So when you included the other MLAs and 

your back-up minister and all of those folks, they basically then 

would have travelled by car.  They would have to recover some 

costs somehow, and even if it were just through their own 

pockets, then there is a cost associated to selling this program. 

 

However, it is the cost to the taxpayer that I'm concerned about.  

So what I'd like to know is if they travelled or if they ate out or 

if they stayed in a hotel, how would that be charged against the 

taxpayer and how much would it amount to?  We just want to 

come up with a total figure of what your selling package 

actually cost the people of the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- As I think the member knows, under 

no circumstances . . . the member may not.  When the former 

government was in office, everybody was either a minister or a 

legislative secretary and could therefore charge expenses. 

 

It has been the policy of this government not to have any 

legislative secretaries, and therefore none of the members who 

participated with us could charge any expenses.  It all came out 

of their own pockets.  And that's the rule.  If you don't have 

legislative secretaries, there are no expenses.  The member 

cannot charge any expenses.  What you pay comes out of your 

own pocket.  All the taxpayer paid for was the deputy minister 

and the ministerial assistant who is responsible for the 

arrangements. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I'm glad to hear that 

you didn't run up the bill too high.  But still, there seems to be a 

lot of cost involved here. 

 

I'm wondering, Minister, you've kind of boasted a little, and I 

don't blame you, about the kind of good legislation you've 

brought in and how great you think it is.  Do you really think it 

was justified to spend a lot of money selling something that 

you think was so good that it should have sold itself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I certainly do.  The success of the 

labour tours could be measured in a number of ways, but one 

way to measure them was the number of people who came out.  

I don't apologize for holding a meeting if a goodly number of 

people are interested and come out, and in almost all cases 

there were. 

 

The labour tours also assisted us in knowing what people 

wanted, in knowing what would work and what wouldn't.  Yes 

indeed, the tours were in some ways exhausting.  You got sort 

of windy and sort of baggy in the knees after you went on with 

this for awhile, but when you talked to this many people you 

knew what people wanted, and people couldn't manipulate you 

because you knew the truth from fiction. 

 

And I think the . . . We said this so many times among the two 

of us -- the three of us -- who were travelling: 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

it was a great shame that only the three of us could share the 

experience, because these tours across the province were one of 

the finest experiences in the 19 years that I have had a privilege 

to have a seat in this Assembly.  These tours were one of the 

finest experiences I have had. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm glad that you had so much 

fun and enjoyed yourself.  I'm sure that an extended holiday 

around the province would be something I'd enjoy myself. 

 

Now we need to know what you've accomplished after having 

this road show, other than talking to your good buddies in the 

union.  We need to know if you talked to any people who are 

going to have to pay the bills. 

 

But I want to go back because we need to find out just how 

much money you're spending in all of your advertising.  And I 

didn't quite finish off with getting the detailed figures that we're 

going to need for the cost of the advertising of The Workers' 

Compensation and The Occupational Health and Safety Acts.  

Now we were getting on the edge of the truth there and the pile 

of pennies was getting pretty high, but I wanted to know how 

many pieces of information did you distribute on that particular 

campaign, and what was the total cost per piece, and how much 

did that come to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we'll recreate the information as 

best we can.  I'm not promising that'll be ready by tomorrow 

morning.  That's not easy to recreate.  That's a year old and 

those records are not readily available, and I'm not certain to 

the extent to which they actually will be available, given any 

amount of diligent searching.  So we'll provide the information 

what . . . we'll provide the member what we can with respect to 

the 1992-93 fiscal year.  It's not the year under review but we'll 

provide you with what we can, but I want to warn the member 

that that is old information and our records may not be 

complete.  I just say that it was less extensive than this because 

our visits around the province were less extensive than this. 

 

I don't want to let the cheap shot which the member took with 

respect to talking to a few of my union buddies . . . Every 

community we were in included a visit with the chamber of 

commerce, included a visit with the municipality. Most 

included visits with school trustees; most included visits with 

health workers where that was possible.  A day spent on these 

tours was anything but a vacation.  We started at 7:30 in the 

morning.  A typical day starts at 7:30 in the morning with a 

chamber of commerce breakfast.  The last meeting is at 7:30 at 

night.  In between we would hold six, eight meetings with 

different groups.  We just went quickly from one meeting to the 

next, met one over lunch hour, usually met one over the supper 

hour.  This was anything but a vacation; this was an exhausting 

process. 

 

If it hadn't have been so informative it would have been an 

impossible experience to endure.  It was 

rewarding, not because it was a vacation, but because it was 

informative and it was inspiring to see the people of 

Saskatchewan genuinely wanting to solve problems, genuinely 

wanting to work with each other to construct a Saskatchewan 

which doesn't just survive in the 1990s, but thrives in the 

1990s.  It was really a rewarding experience to see how much 

people wanted to work together and how little patience they 

have for members opposite who want to try to divide and 

conquer. 

 

You don't have to look a long ways to find out why you 

members opposite have sunk so far in the polls.  One of the 

reasons is your style of politics belongs to a bygone era.  The 

future belongs to those who cooperate.  The past belongs to 

those who want to fight.  And the past clearly belongs to the 

Conservative Party.  I think the future belongs to us. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's an interesting analogy, Minister.  

How many miles did you travel with your cars when you were 

doing this dog and pony show around the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member may not be aware of 

this: with the ministerial vehicles it is not necessary to log 

miles because there are very few restrictions on the use of the 

vehicle.  This is one of the perks of office, has been since 

sometime back in the '30s.  The vehicles may be used for 

virtually any purpose by myself.  And so no member of 

Executive Council actually logs miles.  I actually can't tell you.  

I might be able to reconstruct it by simply guessing at the 

number of miles between Regina and some of these centres but 

I don't think I could honestly provide the member with 

anything that is accurate enough to be useful. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you kind of have an itinerary 

of where you went to.  Maybe you could give me a kind of 

estimate of the cost that it would take so that we will know how 

many dollars the taxpayer actually put into the advertising of 

this particular Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll give you the miles; you can do 

your own math.  How does that sound?  Because we don't keep 

track of the vehicle in that fashion.  So I'll give you the miles, 

you do your own math. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, we'll accept that.  And 

we'll dig out a calculator by tomorrow and figure it out for you. 

 

Now we were wondering, when we got to talking into the area 

of the political gist of this thing, we got kind of sidetracked a 

bit from the line of questions.  So I'd just like to go back and try 

to finish off the costs -- you were alluding to the past and you 

said you didn't have the figures from last year all together.  But 

just generally speaking if you could, by tomorrow, come up 

with an estimated cost of what the advertising program was for 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act and the one for The 

Workers' Compensation Act so that we could give the people a 

general idea of what's being spent to advertise. 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

Now obviously, Minister, the Labour department's brochure 

went out with pretty much a one-sided promotional labour 

agenda.  Now I've read that and I haven't read the follow-up 

pieces just yet, but I'm presuming that you naturally are trying 

to sell your point of view. 

 

Now I don't have to tell you that this legislation is somewhat 

contentious to certain people in our society.  While people in 

the labour force are anxious and always glad to have rules in 

their favour, there always is a very ticklish area in labour 

relations, and that being the fact that you do, by necessity of the 

fact of the way the world works, have another side to the 

equation, and that is the employers, the people that have to 

somehow make enough money out of the labour, whatever it 

be, to be able to pay the wages and all of the benefits. 

 

Now you've put out this brochure and you've followed up with 

telephone calls that are free to the public.  You've got 

secondary information sheets that you're able to send out.  The 

cost of this whole process, we don't know what it is exactly yet 

but it looks like we're getting into the hundred thousand area or 

very close for this particular Bill.  If that were the case for four 

Bills, you could say we're getting close to 400,000.  Who 

knows where it could go before we get finished. 

 

Now if we start calculating all the costs of the mails and all of 

the time that the others members spent away from their normal 

duties attending these kind of meetings, it certainly could get to 

be a fairly expensive exercise.  So you've presented your side 

of the story and you've done a fairly good job of it.  You've told 

us how good you did.  We accept that. 

 

But the other side of the story hasn't been told -- the side of the 

story that business and the folks that are going to pay the bills, 

the taxpayers of the province who are going to end up paying 

the bills because of the extra costs to their school units, the 

extra costs through their teachers and all of the educational 

programs, the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), all of their councils, employees, 

everybody in this province is going to pay more money. 

 

And we've seen figures from a few million to several millions.  

Many millions, in fact, that it could cost.  And it's pretty 

flexible and variable.  It's almost as variable and flexible as the 

costs we were talking about when we started out with 1,500 

brochures that grew today to 300,000.  And those figures are 

getting pretty long and stretched pretty hard.  So we've got to 

try and track this down a little now. 

 

From the business point of view, what are you going to do to 

square the argument on behalf of them, to get their side of the 

story out?  Are you going to do a brochure that tells their side 

of the story?  Or are you suggesting to them that they should 

. . . or maybe you're encouraging them that they should put out 

a  

campaign of some kind to tell their side of the story and how 

much it's going to cost the people and where the downside is 

and the loss of jobs rather than the creation of jobs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just want to say that these Labour 

tours were done on a shoestring.  We didn't fly if we could 

drive.  We didn't rent halls; rather, we begged and borrowed 

halls.  We didn't stay in the most expensive accommodation in 

any community.  They were done on a shoestring. 

 

I have absolutely no apology for travelling around this province 

listening to people, and no one ever suggested we should.  This 

department is the subject of a fair amount of criticism, given 

the very nature of the work and the area it's in.  But in all the 

criticism which is levied at the Department of Labour, you're 

the first person to suggest that we should not be travelling 

around the province listening to people.  That's a new way to 

approach politics, I must say.  I give you an A for innovation, if 

nothing else. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm afraid you got it all 

wrong.  You see, you're not listening to the people.  Nobody in 

Saskatchewan believes that, absolutely not.  You couldn't 

convince one person, whether it be your own supporters or 

somebody else's even.  You got a dog and pony show on the 

road to try and sell something here and that's what you're doing, 

nothing else.  You're selling a product.  You're a marketer and 

you're out selling your marketable product, and you're not out 

there listening to folks on this trip.  You were telling them what 

you're going to do for them that's good for them.  You were 

selling a package. 

 

And what we're saying to you is that you are being one-sided 

and unfair in the way that you do this because you have not told 

both sides of the story.  You've spent a hundred thousand 

dollars on one Bill that you're bringing in and the changes to 

one Bill.  That could go to 400,000 for four Bills.  And you 

haven't spent one dime to offset that by telling the truth about 

the problems that it may cause for the business sector. 

 

And what I've asked you to tell us is, would you encourage the 

business sector now to promote and go out and tell their side of 

the story?  And in fact when you do that, don't you think you 

should actually even financially assist them to provide their 

side of the story to this issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry to be so disrespectful of an 

elected member, but you're right off the wall.  You really are.  

What we would do is go out, I would give a talk of about a half 

an hour, then a question period of about an hour, which 

followed.  When I met with the chamber of commerces -- and I 

met with them in every community -- the question I ended on 

with: how is this going to work for you?  And they'd tell me 

and that was a very useful thing to hear. 

 

And the proposals which we initially went out with were 

greatly modified as a result of those conversations.  So it was a 

fact-gathering . . . it was a  



984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

fact-finding tour, more than anything else. 

 

I really regret that the hon. member speaks from abject 

ignorance, and you do, because you didn't attend any meetings.  

You don't know what you're talking about, quite frankly.  If 

you'd attended a single meeting you'd be just as big a fan of 

these meetings as I am.  Regretfully, I went to the meetings and 

you didn't.  I say quite frankly to the member from Maple 

Creek, you don't know what you're talking about. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm not going to stand here 

and trade insults with you.  The level of my intelligence is not 

on trial; yours is, you're the minister.  And I expect that 

probably the ratings are going down because you haven't 

answered the basic, fundamental question here which is: how 

are we going to stop a confrontation between labour and 

management now that you have fuelled the fires by putting out 

a hundred-thousand-dollar campaign to promote one side of the 

issue without promoting the others, and leaving the business 

community in no other position except to have to fight back 

with an expensive campaign against your retroactive legislation 

that puts this province in a distinct disadvantage in competition 

with Alberta, Manitoba, and Montana and North Dakota as far 

as labour centres are concerned? 

 

You have placed them at a distinct disadvantage in many ways 

and they cannot do anything now but fight back. 

 

And you have fuelled the fire of discontent.  And you have 

done, Minister, very deliberately that act because you know it's 

good politics to have the labour unions mad at everybody so 

that they side with you and vote for you in the next election.  

And it's nothing but politics, and you don't give a darn about 

anybody in business or anybody having a job, only getting 

re-elected for yourself in the next term. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, you've missed a step in this 

process.  That was the approach of the former administration 

when they were in office.  When the minister of Labour sat at 

that end of the front bench, whose name was Grant Schmidt, 

that's exactly what he did -- attempted to set the province 

against organized labour so that he would appear to be the 

defender of the province against the viciousness of organized 

labour. 

 

When we ran in 1991, we ran on a platform which would end 

that.  And the member from Riversdale, the now Premier, went 

through the province talking about the need to end 

confrontation and the need to get people of this province 

working together to resolve our problems.  We were elected on 

that basis with an overwhelming mandate and we have stuck to 

it. 

 

And when I went around this province, I spoke repeatedly of 

the need to end the confrontation between management and 

labour.  And I gave that speech innumerable times.  And I say 

it's a great shame 

that the members opposite weren't the beneficiaries of that 

speech because I think they'd have a whole new outlook on life 

if only they'd heard it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, if I want a new outlook on 

life, I don't think I'll be coming to ask you for it because the 

outlook on life that you are presenting to this province is one of 

confrontation that is deliberately driven and cannot now be 

avoided. 

 

Because, Minister, quite frankly why would you, why would 

you as the government have to engage in a public relations 

exercise to sell a piece of legislation?  You're the government.  

You have a heavy mandate.  You've got 50-some-odd members 

that would show up to vote most days if you really needed 

them. 

 

Now having that kind of strength in this legislature, why would 

you have to spend one red cent promoting a piece of legislation 

that you believe is so right, that you believe is so correct?  If 

you believe that this is needed so much by the people of 

Saskatchewan, why wouldn't you simply have put it through 

this Assembly and have it passed and not waste all of this 

money and deliberately cause the confrontation of promoting 

business interests to the point of having now to defend their 

position because you've made them look like some kind of 

bunch of ogres who haven't been holding up their end in trade 

relationships within our province over the years. 

 

You've made them look bad.  You've given them a black eye in 

public and now they're going to have to fight back to preserve 

and retain their prestige and their honour and their dignity.  

You've taken that away from them.  And you didn't have to 

spend one red cent because you've got the power of this 

Assembly behind you.  You could have passed it without any 

confrontation and you wouldn't have had to go out and do a 

road show. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The labour tours around the province 

were undertaken, not with the view to selling legislation.  

That's not an easy thing to do before it is in fact developed.  

The labour tours were undertaken with a view to developing 

the legislation, and that's what they did.  The views which we 

got -- working people and business people around the 

province -- went into making up The Labour Standards Act. 

 

I may say to the member from Maple Creek, it seems since 

we've introduced that, there's been no need to sell it.  The 

legislation's selling itself.  It's obviously an idea whose time has 

come. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, what is selling -- as I pointed 

out to you earlier -- is the good points in the legislation.  And 

we didn't ever tell you that we don't agree with some of the 

things that you're doing.  What you haven't done though, is to 

tell the whole story. 

 

You've got the same situation developing here as we had last 

year with The Workers' Compensation Act.  You told 

everybody it was going to cost them 10 per cent.  Then when 

the regulations came out it ended up 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

I get a call from the head of, I think it was the Law 

Society -- one of those big groups in Saskatchewan anyway, if 

my memory recalls it.  They had a 2 or 300 per cent increase.  

And even after a whole lot of discussion, they were only able to 

get that broke down a certain amount. 

 

They were very unhappy because, you see, you hadn't told 

them exactly how it was going to work when you brought it in.  

You made it sound all nice and acceptable, but it wasn't in the 

end.  It was totally unacceptable to most people after you got 

finished with it.  And it continues, as these regulations go into 

effect, to be more and more onerous on the ability of this 

province to compete in the job market and to provide a job base 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now that is our interest here.  Now you've told the good side of 

the story and that's fine.  But you haven't told the whole story.  

And there's a downside, and we need to work on that downside 

and try to correct that, so that we don't destroy our province in 

terms of having all of the big businesses and all the little 

businesses ending up in Alberta or Manitoba.  And that's where 

they're going by the hordes.  You know very well what's 

happening. 

 

Now I want to know, Minister, how many committees -- seeing 

as how we're talking about legislation here right now and the 

way it works -- how many committees were established and 

appointed by the government to develop this legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure what you mean by this 

legislation.  If you mean The Labour Standards Act, there were 

no outside committees outside the government.  There were 

any number of internal committees but no outside committees.  

If you're referring to The Trade Union Act, there were 

two -- the committee chaired by Professor Dan Ish, and another 

committee chaired by Ted Priel, also of Saskatoon. 

 

So that is the answer to your question as to how many 

committees there were. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just for the record, perhaps I should ask you 

to provide us with the names of all the people that were 

involved in those committees that you have named outside of 

government.  And I would also like to know how many 

committees then within government were established and who 

actually sat on them and what was the purpose of their work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The Trade Union Act was . . . there 

are two organized groups on either side.  The Trade Union Act 

provides a framework within which organized labour and the 

management with whom they deal negotiate their differences, 

and negotiate the relationship between them.  You are there 

dealing with two groups, both of whom are well organized, 

both of whom are represented by organizations, most of which 

are quite democratic. 

 

And so we sought to set up committees which would get those 

two groups together and to see what form of 

consensus might be arrived at.  The persons involved: the first 

committee was the Ish committee, chaired by Dan Ish.  The 

persons on the committee were Daniel Ish, Joan Fockler, Pat 

Gallagher, Denis Lesage, John MacLeod, Ron Miller, Fred 

Rayworth, Gavin Semple and Len Wallace. 

 

Persons involved in the Priel committee were three in number:  

Ted Priel, Hugh Wagner and Mike Carr. 

 

The expenditures on the Ish committee were, actual, $98,734; 

the expenditures of the Priel committee were $55,645, for a 

total of $154,379. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, the penny pile that I'm 

stacking up here to try and keep track of your expenditures is 

getting really high, and it's really getting wobbly now because 

it wants to tip right over it's getting so high.  You're costing us 

more and more money all the time here. 

 

Now we've got the committee at $154,000.  We've got the road 

show where you came back looking so fresh and healthy after 

working so hard.  We've got MLAs taking off their regular 

duties and going out to promote this whole exercise.  This is 

getting to be rather an astounding cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Minister. 

 

Now these committees, when they made their 

recommendations, I just want to follow up here a bit.  Did you 

get unanimous agreement from those committees on direction 

that you should go? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, not in either case.  And I think a 

major part of the reason for that was because we'd just come 

through 10 years of Tory government in which it sought to 

divide and conquer, an agreement very hard to come by 

between the two.  The objectives of this government were to 

get labour and management working together for what at the 

end of the day is a single goal -- the success of the enterprise in 

which they both work. 

 

I want to say, this may sound to the member opposite like an 

astounding figure.  Well I say it isn't as astounding as the cost 

of a single trip by the current member from Estevan to China 

when he was premier.  All of this is considerably less than the 

premier of the Conservative government spent on a single trip 

to China. 

 

This was a barebones operation.  Not done because I think the 

public of Saskatchewan demand it when you're in 

Saskatchewan -- I think they're not terribly sensitive about 

travel expenses in the province -- it was done because that's the 

way the Department of Labour does business.  We look after 

the taxpayers' dollar to the maximum extent possible.  Simply a 

matter of conscience -- something that was noticeably absent 

when your party was in office. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, you raised some rather 

interesting questions in your preamble.  Now how did you, 

when you determined that these boards were not going to give 

you unanimous approval for 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

one direction or the other, how did you determine that they 

didn't make their judgements based on information they had 

now, but rather on the fact that the previous administration had 

corrupted their minds?  How did you determine which ones of 

those members had had their minds corrupted by the previous 

administration and which ones were actually the smart guys 

that had an intelligent overview of what was going on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The minds which were poisoned were 

the members of the minds which were in office at the time.  I 

have no other explanation for the kind of behaviour which the 

former administration exhibited in office.  The members 

opposite did not poison anyone's mind, they poisoned the 

atmosphere.  And we're going to be a long time undoing the 

damage which your party did in office, both federally and 

provincially. 

 

And if you are extremely low in the polls, from the point of 

view of someone who's trying to do something in the area of 

labour, you're just about where you deserve.  If you're at 4 per 

cent in the polls then you're within 4 per cent of being exactly 

where you deserve to be because you have made a mess of the 

whole area of labour management relationship -- poisoned it for 

years to come. 

 

And we're attempting to undo in this area the damage you did, 

just as we're attempting to undo the damage you did in Finance 

and in Education and in Health and in Highways.  And I could 

go on and list every department in government.  You poisoned 

the atmosphere, and this province is paying the price for it. 

 

And whatever we spent on these labour tours is a minuscule 

fraction of the cost of the style of labour management relations 

which you exhibited with such crassness when you were in 

office. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I just want to go back to your 

second last deliberation of why things happen. 

 

Now you said the committee members didn't all agree.  And 

you suggested -- and I think I heard you correctly -- you 

suggested that those members that voiced a different opinion on 

those committees did so because their minds had been 

somehow brainwashed and corrupted by the previous 

administration.  I'd like to know which members on those 

committees you thought had their minds corrupted, and how 

did you determine which ones were corrupted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I said no such thing, nor will any 

reasonable interpretation of my words bear that meaning. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well we'll just read the Hansard tomorrow 

and we'll check that out for ourselves.  We'll be at this for a 

long time, not a good time. 

 

How much money, Minister, has been expended studying this 

legislation to determine what you were going to do with it?  I 

want to know specifically for the 

committees -- the total -- all committees; and then a package 

for the whole process. 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't know that we can give you 

that.  I've told the member previously there were no additional 

staff.  This was done by people in the department.  And I mean 

we don't think we can estimate what percentage of their time 

has been spent on this legislation. 

 

The outside cost, the cost of advertising and committees, 

you've already got.  But if you want the total cost of doing it, 

including staff time, I don't think we can give you that.  I don't 

think we can, with any degree of accuracy, estimate what 

portion of the time of this department has been spent on this 

legislation.  So I don't think the figure you want is available, if 

I understood your question correctly. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I think that we've already 

piled up a sizeable number of dollars that it cost.  You could 

obviously take those, gather them together . . . if you can't 

remember them, you can go through Hansard tomorrow and 

pick out what you told me and add that up, and that'll give you 

a start. 

 

You've got a lot of fairly good officials with you there.  I 

suspect that, you know, given a little bit of latitude by yourself 

like a suggestion -- get your calculators out, boys, and go to 

work -- maybe they could come up with a reasonably good 

estimate of what those costs were.  Would that be too much to 

ask from the Minister of Labour? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the member can do his own 

math.  The Department of Labour doesn't have any 

hammerlock on mathematics; it's a science available to anyone.  

I know you didn't make much use of it when you were in 

government, but the science of mathematics is available to you 

as it is to us; you can do your own sums. 

 

You asked me what the committees cost; I told you.  You asked 

me what the advertising cost; I told you.  You asked me the 

total cost; I said we can't give it to you.  You can do your own 

sums.  The Department of Labour will provide you with the 

facts but you can do your own sums. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So I take it, Minister, you are refusing to give 

us the cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm sorry, I couldn't hear the 

member's comments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are you refusing to give us the costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I'll answer any question for 

which we have the information, but if you want the total cost 

including the PYs (person-years), I don't think we can give it to 

you with any degree of accuracy.  We don't log time in that 

fashion.  We just don't log time.  It's like the miles on the car; 

we don't log it and we don't have it.  All I can tell you is a fair  



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

portion of the time of this department was spent on this 

legislation -- I'd be ready to admit that.  If you want anything 

which looks like a precise estimate, I don't think we can give it 

to you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, it seems to me that you've got 

a pretty healthy budget here.  You've got a pretty large crew of 

folks around you to help you to figure out what's going on.  

You bragged a little earlier about how efficient your staff was 

and how they'll work day and night for you without 

compensation and without union benefits.  Non-union workers, 

I understand, because certainly they couldn't do what you said 

if they were unionized; they wouldn't be allowed to. 

 

So you've done all of this and you've bragged about all this, and 

yet you don't have the competency available to come up with a 

figure of what it would have cost you.  Now that doesn't seem 

natural to me.  Are you really sure that you're the Minister of 

Labour, or are you running under the guise of something else 

here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I'm just telling the member 

opposite, the information you want doesn't exist.  We don't log 

time.  We don't know how much of the time of this department 

was spent on this and how much was spent on other activities.  

You want to know how much the department spent; it's in 

estimates.  That's easy.  I know you don't have to ask that. 

 

If you want to know what percentage of it was spent on this, I 

cannot be any more precise than to tell you it was a significant 

portion of the time of this department was spent on this 

legislation.  These we regarded as important projects and we 

put a lot of time into them.  I can't give you a percentage and 

thus I can't give you the information you want. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well maybe you could give us your best 

guess. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I could.  All right, the best guess 

is somewhere between 10 and 90 per cent. 

 

I mean we don't have it.  The member wants something which 

doesn't exist.  We didn't keep track of it, nor is it relevant to any 

purpose.  No additional staff were hired for this.  There might 

have been some additional costs involved with drafting this 

legislation now that I think about it.  The member hasn't asked 

that, but I'd be happy to provide the extra cost of drafting if we 

hired outside counsel to do it.  That might be an additional cost. 

 

But really what the member is wanting to know is what 

percentage of our time was spent on it.  We didn't keep track of 

it and therefore it's information which doesn't exist. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So, Minister, you don't have a best guess.  

You don't have an estimate.  You certainly don't have real 

figures.  Who do you suppose in your mind, puts up the dollars 

that runs your department?  Do you not think that this would be 

the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan that would be putting up those dollars?  And 

don't you think that you have a responsibility, as a minister of 

the Crown in the province of Saskatchewan, to explain to the 

people in Saskatchewan how you are spending their money? 

 

Now you've put on a great exercise that has cost your 

department between 10 and 90 per cent of their time for Lord 

knows how long, maybe a couple of years now since we've 

started this.  We could be in the neighbourhood of millions of 

dollars now promoting one side of an issue that you are asking 

all of the taxpayers in the province to pay for, while 50 per cent 

of them are probably on the other side of the equation and not 

getting any direct benefit from the work that you're doing.  In 

fact, are being asked to pay twice.  First of all as taxpayers they 

are being asked to pay for your department to run against them, 

and then as business people are being asked to put up the costs 

of your new programs.  So you're double-charging half the 

people of this province and you have no idea what it costs. 

 

And you belligerently stand in your place and say it's not 

available, like they shouldn't have it, like they shouldn't be 

entitled to it.  Well I say to you, Minister, quite frankly I 

believe they are entitled to it.  And I think you better do better 

than this.  I think you better give us some figures or the people 

will want a new minister.  Someone that can figure out what the 

costs are and who's paying the costs. 

 

Now I want to know, Minister, do you feel that there is a 

balance of input on these tours that you've been taking, 

between both labour and business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think there was.  We, in all 

occasions, contacted the chamber of commerce and said, we'd 

appreciate an opportunity to meet with you.  Would any one of 

these days work?  Our experience was in all communities the 

local chambers of commerce, or sometimes they're called the 

board of trade, but the local chambers would as quickly as they 

could arrange a meeting, which was usually fairly well 

attended.  In all cases, without any exception, we met with the 

local chambers.  There were the odd community where we did 

not really meet with the workers because there was no such 

organized group.  But I think we did achieve a balance. 

 

We particularly wanted to hear from the business community; 

we particularly wanted to avoid creating unnecessary problems 

for them.  And I think to a large degree we've succeeded in 

that.  So I thought there was a balance in who we met with.  If 

there was any balance one way or the other, we undoubtedly 

met with more business people than we did working people.  

And in every community they're organized; the workers aren't 

organized in every community. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I know that you feel it's a 

balance.  I'm quite sure that if the business community had had 

five minutes of time to talk to you and labour had 45 years, 

you'd say that was balanced enough, because we know which 

side you're on in 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 1994 

this equation. 

 

But it is our duty in opposition to try to bring balance to those 

things that happen in the province so that people can continue 

to live in this province and can continue to exist. 

 

If you want to have a state-run province where only the labour 

force feels comfortable, then you must also accept the reality 

that you will have to supply the job base as a government, 

because private industry and private business will not stay here 

because they don't have to stay here.  We happen to live in the 

middle of a land-locked part of a big country and a big 

continent, where business can quite easily escape if they feel 

that they are being ill-treated. 

 

And I'm saying to you that while you claim there was balance, 

there isn't.  And what is more important is that you've got our 

province out of synchronization with the provinces and the 

states and countries around us.  We are out of balance, sir, and 

that is what's going to be devastating. 

 

Now we've asked you a lot of specific questions to try to 

encourage your mind to work and think about where you're 

going, and we're going to continue to do that because we think 

you are out of balance here.  We think you've got to draw some 

different conclusions, especially before we end up in the next 

week or two, going into the other part of the labour Act that 

you're planning to bring in, The Labour Relations Act, because 

obviously you know that that is the more critical Act as far as 

confrontation is concerned and the people not wanting to agree 

from both sides. 

 

Now we need to know, Minister, how we're going to get that 

balance back in here.  And I've been trying to demonstrate to 

you, as we've gone along, that by putting on such an exertion of 

selling campaign for how good your programs are, you have 

destroyed the balance by not also providing the business 

community with an opportunity to express their points of view 

to the general public if you're going to go public with the issue 

to begin with. 

 

Now I've tried to point out to you both the fact that you could 

have put this legislation through simply by talking to business 

leaders and labour leaders and not taking it on a public road 

show, but you chose to go that direction.  Once you made that 

choice then you had a responsibility to the taxpayers and to the 

business community to present their side of the picture as well 

as just the labour side of the issue. 

 

And I'll repeat once again so that nobody gets misconstrued 

about where we're coming from here.  We don't oppose all the 

things that you're suggesting to do or that you are doing in The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

We don't like the way that you gouged the people of 

Saskatchewan with The Workers' Compensation Act after the 

fact.  We don't like some of the police-state attitude in your 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, and we don't like what we 

hear is going to come in 

The Labour Relations Act.  But we do agree that workers do 

need some protection in The Labour Standards Act.  However, 

it's the regulations that are coming, as you bring those in, that 

people are fearful of. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan want to know where their 

comfort level comes from in all of this.  Where is their comfort 

level that this Act won't in fact turn out to be their worst 

nightmare when the new regulations are all put into effect and 

we find ourselves waking up, as we did with the workers' 

compensation regulations, putting everything a way higher than 

anybody had ever expected? 

 

You see, you haven't provided that comfort level, sir, and I 

think it is incumbent upon you to do that.  You must provide a 

comfort level.  Nobody trusts your government any more.  

People just simply don't believe what you say when you tell us 

it's going to cost $1,500 to put out 1,500 brochures, when in 

reality now it turns out that it's not a few hundred dollars but 

it's now actually millions of dollars we're spending, that we've 

got 300,000 copies, of which maybe 47,000 of them might end 

up rotting in some back porch somewhere.  We don't know if 

they'll ever be asked for because certainly the kind of demand 

that you have said is out there for them is absolutely a joke, my 

friend.  It's a total joke. 

 

You stuffed these things into newspapers so people would be 

forced to take them home without knowing that they had them.  

They'd be sticking them all in the garbage can in the Gull Lake 

post office if they fell out of the paper.  No way they'd even 

pick them up and take them home.  They'd chuck them straight 

in the garbage can.  I could guarantee you could probably pick 

up 75 to 200 copies if you go out there and want to pick them 

up.  You can recycle them and use them over.  They're not 

going to read them, they don't want to see this stuff.  It's all 

one-sided and the people know that. 

 

You forced this literature on people.  They didn't ask for it.  

They don't want it.  I never heard anybody call up and say, I 

want a brochure from the government so that I can find out 

how great their new legislation is going to be that's going to 

cost us a lot of the jobs that our students in this province are 

going to need and want and won't any longer have. 

 

The old folks in our province won't be able to get jobs any 

more -- your own report, your own big blue book here.  I'm 

glad it's blue but the reality is that it tells the whole story if you 

read it.  It's an inconclusive document at best, is what it says; it 

can't be held responsible for the results of it.  The first thing the 

book does is a disclaimer for any responsibility. 

 

The second thing it does is show that only 1,400 people 

responded out of 6,400, I think it was.  And you call that a 

report of the people?  And the whole report is based on a 

handful of responses by probably people in your own 

department who are the only ones that would take the times to 

answer it. 



March 17, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

And then you expect the people of Saskatchewan to have a 

comfort level because you show them, once again, the nice 

things that are going to happen in the legislation; and then with 

the regulations coming in later, you bash their heads in with 

regulations that will totally destroy them. 

 

Minister, you've got an obligation to this province and you're 

not living up to that obligation.  You're costing the people of 

this province their jobs.  This summer the students of 

Saskatchewan will have no place to work.  The disabled people 

of this province and the old people will have no jobs.  And the 

job base in this province is going down, not up.  You're 

destroying our province, you're not building our province, 

you're not creating.  You've got to take a different direction. 

 

And we're going to stand in this Assembly, sir, if it takes until 

next July, sun beats down, 110 degrees hot, to convince you in 

order to save this province and bring about some common 

sense . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, the Committee of 

Finance will rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


