




















































Hansard: March 11, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 813 

 March 11, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next, move: 

 

That there be an immediate public convening of the Standing 

Committee on Privileges and Elections and that the 

committee consider but not limit itself to determining the 

following:  the amount of money expended on postage, 

letterhead, and sundry expenses involving the February 15, 

'93 letter to New Democrats from the member from Yorkton; 

immediate restitution of the above expenses from the 

member personally or the NDP constituency association; and 

immediate and unequivocal apology from the member to the 

public of Saskatchewan and the Legislative Assembly. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

great pleasure for me today to introduce to you and through you 

to my colleagues in the Assembly, four guests seated in your 

gallery: Robert Cosman, who is well known to all of us as our 

Legislative Law Clerk; and his son, Douglas; and Douglas's 

two grade 4 friends, Caley Woods and Kevin Ulmer. 

 

The first thing I asked those three young men was why they 

weren't in school, but they assured me that their teachers were 

having an in-service today, so their presence here was quite 

legitimate. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming them here 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

House an old friend of mine who's seated in your gallery.  She 

left Regina in 1991 after winning the president's medal as the 

top graduate at the University of Regina and she's now 

continuing her studies at McMaster University in Hamilton, 

Ontario. 

 

When I asked her for her comments of what's going on in 

eastern Canada, I couldn't repeat anything she said without 

implicating either ourselves or the members of the third party.  

So I'd like to you to join me in congratulating Jill McKeen and 

welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  To 

you and through you to the House, I would like to introduce 

seated in the east gallery, Mr. Gary Shail of Regina.  This is 

Mr. Shail's first visit to the legislature and I would ask that the 

members welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like 

to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly a young fellow sitting up in the Speaker's 

gallery, my son, Carson McPherson.  He's known as "Sniper" 

around the hockey rink in Shaunavon and please welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It gives me 

great pleasure on behalf of the MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) for Kinistino to introduce to you and 

through you 28 grade 6 pupils from the Aberdeen School.  

They are accompanied by their teachers, Kevin Lester and 

Janise Brace.  And if my notes serve me correctly, there are 

also 11 chaperons in the bunch.  So I think most people are 

away from Kinistino these days viewing what we're doing in 

the legislature firsthand.  I would like to welcome you and I 

hope you have a pleasant stay. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatchewan Energy Policies 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Deputy Speaker.  Today I'm happy 

to tell you about the attitude of oil executives in our province 

today.  According to a recent editorial in Oilweek magazine, oil 

executives are being very complimentary about Saskatchewan's 

energy policies.  I'm glad to say there has been a rapport 

develop between citizens of the oil patch and our government. 

 

This is good news for the Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

constituency.  This has come about because of two basic 

reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker: fiscal realism and a willingness 

to consult before acting.  As a result of this communication and 

cooperation, the net present value of drilling wells in 

Saskatchewan has not decreased but increased. 

 

The advancement of science and technology plays a critical 

role in this particular situation.  The trick here is to identify 

emerging technologies and nurture them appropriately, without 

wasting any money.  A recent study by the Canadian Energy 

Research Institute said that 86 per cent of the province's 

conventional oil reserves are not recoverable with current 

production methods.  This means that recovery techniques will 

determine whether Saskatchewan has a viable oil industry well 

into the next century.  With today's prices and technology, 

established reserves equal merely 10 years production at 

present rates. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Next statement, please. 

 

Saskatoon City Land Exchange 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise today 

to publicly salute and to recognize wonderful cooperation 

between two levels of government.  And I'm talking of the 

cooperation between the city of Saskatoon and the two 

successive federal governments, actually, with respect to the 

land exchange that took place in my constituency of 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

Sutherland-University. 
 

This is a wonderful thing for the city because it basically 

involves a two-for-one swap of land that sees the city 

benefiting by getting proper land for orderly urban 

development, and sees Agriculture Canada getting land suitable 

for the continuation of their agricultural research in Saskatoon. 

 

The facilities at Ag Canada in Saskatoon do internationally 

recognized work in the breeding of oilseeds and forage crops, 

as well as insect and disease control.  And there are some 

particular experiments, I understand, with respect to 

non-chemical pest control that are very interesting. 

 

And so I applaud all those who were involved in this 

settlement.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Whitewood Curling Play-downs 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

take a moment today to just recognize an event that's taking 

place in my constituency through this weekend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the intermediate ladies' provincial play-downs are 

taking place in Whitewood, being hosted by the Whitewood 

curling club.  And I'd just like to acknowledge the fact that 

many rural communities have been excellent hosts over the past 

number of years, regardless of the event they are hosting.  And 

I want to commend the community of Whitewood and their 

curling club for their efforts and the hard work in organizing 

and hosting this event this weekend. 

 

I'd also like you to recognize the fact that one of the ladies' 

rinks happens to come from the community of Kipling.  The 

rink is skipped by Marlene Geis; the third is Mona Lynn 

Stender; second, Joan Balogh; and lead is Joanne O'Sullivan.  

And I just wish them well in their endeavours, and I just want 

to acknowledge that today.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

 

Lions' Provincial Curling Championships 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Starting 

tonight in the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood we 

also have a curling championship going on.  The Lions and the 

Lionesses of Strasbourg are hosting the Lions' provincial 

curling championships -- consists of eight Lions teams and four 

Lionesses rinks from all over the province that'll be competing 

for the title.  More importantly, Mr. Speaker, they will enjoy 

each other's company and have a fine banquet on Saturday 

night and for the visitors they will get to know a little more 

about the variety the province has to offer.  This is a social and 

a competitive event but we all know the excellent work the 

Lions clubs of Saskatchewan do for our society.  Provincially, 

of course they are a major contributor to the eye bank, but each 

local club contributes in its own way to its own community. 

 

The Strasbourg Lions, for instance, maintain the ballpark and 

the recreational facilities, as well as helping with a variety of 

other community projects.  I want to congratulate Ron Miller, 

the district leader, and especially the hard-working team of 

organizers and volunteers led by Darryl Reider and Ray 

Gritzfeld, and to all the participants I want to say, good curling.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Education Week Activities in Melville 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  As my 

colleague from Saltcoats constituency remarked a couple of 

days ago, this week has been designated Education Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Today I would like to inform this Assembly of some of the 

exciting things that have been going on in the Melville 

constituency this past week.  On Wednesday I had the pleasure 

of attending an oratory competition at St. Henry's Elementary 

School in Melville and I think many of us will remember our 

first address in the Assembly and sort of the trepidation we had 

over that and I'm sure we'll all sort of note the benefits that can 

come from such oratory participation of our students. 

 

I would also like to briefly comment on another event this week 

taking place at the Parkville school in Melville . . . Parkview 

School, sorry, in Melville.  They had displays and 

presentations, crafts, native ball games.  And one class built 

five life-size tepees.  There was a display of famous people in 

Saskatchewan, one of which I would like to note was of our 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like, through the Assembly, to congratulate the 

children who participated in various Education Week activities 

in the province.  And I would also ask that in keeping with 

Education Week of Home and School: Making the Connection, 

that this Assembly congratulate the parents and educators of 

those children, for they hold the key to our province's most 

valuable resource, our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Retirement of President of Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

today extend my acknowledgement to the president of SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) who's 

retiring today.  And I want to acknowledge the work that Mr. 

Bernard Kirwan has 

done.  Mr. Bernard Kirwan is a reeve of the RM (rural 

municipality) of Gull Lake and has resided in my constituency, 

just within the boundary of my constituency. 

 

He first became involved in municipal councils the same time I 

did -- in the early '70s.  And I worked together with him quite 

extensively.  He became a sub-unit director with the SARM, 

then moved onto being a director, and then later on president of 

the association.  I believe he has provided the people of 

Saskatchewan with leadership in the municipal business, and I 

want to acknowledge him and his work. 

 

Along with him, his wife Zella and their family, I want to say 

that they need to be commended for the responsible way they 

handled that association.  And I also want to say that just in 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

case you thought perhaps his politics was leaning to the left, he 

nominated me in 1986 and I appreciate that as well.  And I 

think that it showed the quality of the kind of personality that 

he had, that he didn't demonstrate any kind of flexibility but 

stayed the course as a president of SARM should. He directed 

SARM in the way that they wanted to go.  And I want to 

acknowledge that and his work to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Wheat Price Adjustments 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

I, as many other grain producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan today, would like to commend the Canadian 

Wheat Board on the price adjustment on the initial payments 

announced yesterday for many grades of wheat. 

 

Many grades have increased yesterday by 27 cents a bushel; the 

feed wheat and the soft white wheats have increased by 13 

cents a bushel, putting into the province of Saskatchewan 

approximately 80 to $100 million.  And as producers in this 

province want to receive their money from the market-place, 

that it illustrates the Canadian Wheat Board is doing the job 

that it should and they're receiving their money when they need 

it, when they deliver it at the elevator.  Thank you very much, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower White City Office 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my question today is for the minister of SaskPower.  

Mr. Minister, on Monday, March 7, on behalf of an individual 

from Southey, I asked about the lease held by SaskPower for 

White City district office which is closing.  Your response to 

this question was, and I quote: 

 

. . . the question is phrased on the premiss that the White 

City office is going to be closed.  The White City office, it's 

my understanding, is not going to be closed. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a photocopy of SaskPower's in-house 

publication entitled, On-Line, dated December 24, 1993.  The 

document states:  there has been an agreement to close the 

White City and Punnichy offices. 

 

Mr. Minister, is the White City office to be closed or not?  And 

why have the employees of SaskPower been advised through 

their newsletter that that is going to be closed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I thank the hon. member for his 

question.  And certainly there must need to be some 

clarification on this.  It's still my understanding that the White 

City office is not closing.  And I don't recall from memory 

what it says in the employee newsletter.  I'd be happy to check 

this out further, but I want to be on the record that it's my 

understanding that the White City office, it's my understanding, 

is not closing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Consultant Hiring 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I have another 

question for the minister on another topic. 

 

Mr. Minister, the other day we heard that the Premier . . . we 

heard the Premier admit that your government is already light 

years ahead of the former administration when it comes to 

making patronage appointments.  Today we learn that his lead 

continues to widen. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the former NDP 

nationalization guru, David Dombowsky, has been given a 

personal services contract with SaskPower.  And can you tell us 

how much you'll be paying Mr. Dombowsky, including any 

special benefits, services, and expenses he may be receiving? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I thank the member for his question.  It 

is true that there is a short-term contract with David 

Dombowsky to do some work at SaskPower.  I'd want to 

question the member on what he views as patronage and what 

he views as qualified work.  And that was the issue brought up 

in the House the other day addressed to the Premier, and I think 

the Premier addressed it very ably. 

 

I would want to point out that Mr. Dombowsky started with the 

provincial government back during the days of the Ross 

Thatcher government, actually in the Provincial Treasury 

department which would be the Department of Finance as we 

know it now.  He served as the deputy minister of Finance.  He 

served as the deputy minister of the Department of Industry and 

Commerce.  He's also been the president of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan.  And as to whether or not he's a 

New Democrat, I'd have to assume he is because you guys fired 

him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I'll ask 

the question in very simple terms so you can understand it.  

How much is David Dombowsky being paid by SaskPower?  

How much, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The contract is a short-term contract.  I 

believe it's for six months.  I don't have the exact dollar 

amount, but I'd be happy to provide that to the member.  I'll 

take notice to that portion of the question and respond to the 

House as soon as I have the information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Dombowsky 

apparently has been hired to open up international markets for 

SaskPower.  That's the same David Dombowsky who almost 

single-handedly shut down the international potash markets 

through your government's potash nationalization in the 1970s.  



816 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

It's also the same David Dombowsky who was the business 

partner of Jack Messer in a consulting firm in Manitoba and 

managed to suck $640,000 out of the Manitoba NDP 

government during the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't that somewhat of a conflict of 

interest -- Jack Messer hiring his former business associate and 

partner?  Did you express that concern to Mr. Messer, Mr. 

Minister, or is this just another of your long lines of battles 

with Mr. Messer that you've lost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I actually prefer the sparring with 

you in the legislature, but I'll try and answer your question. 

 

I did in fact address this very issue that you bring up.  I'm 

convinced of Mr. Dombowsky's credibility in the international 

potash market.  It is Mr. Dombowsky's job, on a short-term 

basis, to draw together a business plan as to how we would 

market the expertise that we have at SaskPower. 

 

This doesn't mean he's going to go out and start international 

travelling.  He's going to be in Saskatchewan drawing up a 

business plan.  We need to identify what the technology is that 

we can market internationally.  And we need to know which 

countries there are around the globe that need our technology. 

 

And while identifying those countries that need the technology, 

we need to know which countries can also pay for it, because 

humanitarian causes are very great throughout the world.  It's 

not the mandate of SaskPower to fulfil that role.  And if this 

makes good business sense we're going to do it; if it doesn't 

make good business sense we're not going to do it.  Because 

this government uses common sense. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to direct 

my next question to the man who runs the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  But since Jack Messer isn't here I'll direct it to 

the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, this is exactly the same kind of patronage 

appointment your government promised to eliminate if elected.  

You restated that commitment just the other day.  But your 

actions simply don't square with your words.  You've appointed 

37 former NDP candidates and MLAs in the past two years 

since you took office, and then you appoint the former 

nationalization tsar and Jack Messer's business partner. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'd like to quote from your party's democratic 

reform document: 

 

 Another disturbing practice which has raised . . . controversy 

in the past two years has been (your) government hiring with 

personal services contracts. 

 

 The growing number of high-profile patronage and otherwise 

questionable appointments has increased public cynicism. 

 

Mr. Premier, how does your appointment of David 

Dombowsky square with that statement, which is the written 

policy of the New Democratic Party? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I don't understand, Mr. Speaker, 

why the member from Kindersley would stand and try and 

destroy the credibility of very well qualified people in this 

Assembly. 

 

I would tell you that Mr. Dombowsky has served as the deputy 

minister of Finance in this province.  He's served as the deputy 

minister of Industry and Commerce.  He's served as the 

president of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation).  He served as the president of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan.  In fact I would say that Mr. 

Dombowsky has a proven track record in establishing new 

businesses. 

 

When the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan came into 

existence, the very first year of the presidency and every year 

after his presidency, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

was profitable.  In fact in its third year of existence the 

company made a profit of $167 million. 

 

I'm surprised that the member hasn't asked about Mr. 

Dombowsky sooner because Mr. Dombowsky has been doing 

work for the government previous to this coming to your 

attention.  And what he's been working on is some of the deals 

that the former administration put together and has literally to 

this time saved us tens of millions of dollars that otherwise 

those people would have squandered under their previous 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

Complaints against Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

Adjusters 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is to the minister responsible for SGI.  Mr. Minister, 

I've been contacted by an SGI client, Gary Shail of Regina.  

Mr. Shail has a major complaint about SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) adjusters.  The first adjuster assigned to 

his family's case which deals with a sewage back-up damage, 

spoke disparagingly of Mrs. Shail.  He insulted this woman 

because she had not cleaned up her own basement quickly 

enough for the adjuster.  Mr. Minister, the Shails complained 

about this adjuster, and to the credit of SGI, were assigned 

another adjuster.  Mr. Speaker, this adjuster then accused the 

Shails of fraud. 

 

Mr. Minister, are SGI adjusters allowed to speak to clients in 

this way?  If I forward the adjusters' names over to you today, 

will you look into this situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I will be looking after this 

case as soon as the member from across brings it over to me.  

I'm surprised that he didn't bring it over, you know, prior to 

question period and that type of thing.  But I'll be looking into 

this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

Shails have talked to your . . . to SGI about this and not 

received any satisfaction.  Mr. Minister, what is your policy on 

this?  You took notice of it but you didn't explain whether you 

thought it was allowable for SGI adjusters to speak to their 

clients in this manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, these are very specific issues 

that the member from across raises.  And I think that it is 

highly unfair for him to bring forth these questions unless he 

gives notice to me.  And he's now given notice in this public 

forum and I'll indeed look into it a little bit very, very, very 

carefully and deal with it right after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Obviously the minister doesn't know any of the policies of SGI.  

Mr. Minister, the second adjuster assigned to the Shail case did 

far more than accuse them of fraud; he had their insurance 

policy cancelled.  And his reason for this action was, and I 

quote: because they were tired of unemployed bums.  End of 

quote.  They, one can only assume, refers to SGI. 

 

Mr. Minister, this adjuster cancelled the Shails' policy.  Will 

you review this case and have the adjuster disciplined for his 

comments and the treatment of the Shails? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, the policy of SGI is pretty 

straightforward -- it's to provide excellent service to the people 

of the province.  And I'll be looking into this case, you know, 

as the member has described it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  One final 

question for you.  Mr. Minister, I strongly believe that any 

public employee represents the government and serves the 

people.  And the specifics of this particular case distress me.  

There were changes made to the human rights Act in the last 

session, and this change was the inclusion of the following, and 

I quote: 

discrimination against place of origin or receipt of public 

assistance. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you refer this whole matter to the Human 

Rights Commission for investigation, based on racial and 

socio-economic discrimination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well the fourth and last time, you know, 

to the member.  I think he hasn't understood yet, you know, that 

indeed our policy is one of providing fair and good service to 

the people of the province.  And indeed if the facts bear out as 

you present them, we will correct the situation.  And indeed 

we'll be looking into it right after this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Farm Bankruptcies 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question is for the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, last 

year 188 farmers went through bankruptcy proceedings.  

Recently a Court of Appeal challenge, Mulatz v. the TD 

(Toronto Dominion) Bank, had an outcome of very serious 

concern to farmers. 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, under the current Saskatchewan 

Farm Security Act and the corresponding federal bankruptcy 

legislation, what effect the declaration of bankruptcy might 

have on a farmer who will try to get back into farming through 

the leaseback program?  In other words, is there any prejudice 

arising from legislation that would prevent farmers from 

qualifying for a leaseback arrangement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for her 

question.  We're aware of this decision which was handed 

down a couple of weeks ago.  And we're urgently considering 

the implications of it and urgently considering what action this 

legislature might take in response to the decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In spite of 

commodity prices and grain prices coming back somewhat, the 

albatross around the necks of the agriculture community really 

is farm debt.  And some 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

farmers, as you know, will never recover from the economic 

set-backs of the 1980s. 

 

In your 1991 election platform you promised, and I quote from 

page 7 of that platform document: the NDP government will: 

 

Work with farmers . . . to design a debt restructuring 

program to keep (farmers) . . . on the land. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your government proposing? And can 

you tell us whether you plan to include amendments to the farm 

securities Act which will protect farmers who are forced into 

bankruptcy from being excluded from the leaseback program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member 

opposite, the member I believe is talking about the number of 

bankruptcies in the province.  And I agree with her that 166 

bankruptcies in a farming sector is too many.  And I want to 

tell her that it is down from last year 13 per cent, as it is down 

in Manitoba some 13 per cent, while it's up in Alberta some 10 

per cent. 

 

The reason I believe it's down in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is because of some things this government has done, 

like the AG 2000, the ag strategy to protect the farm family; the 

six-year leaseback program; ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) working with individual farmers 

on an individual case; $20 million into a farm equity fund, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; developing a new farm support program that's 

taxpayer friendly; and changes to crop insurance.  So yes, 166 

bankruptcies are still too many, but we are working with the 

farm community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, in fact 

it is 188, not 166 as in the paper.  And that's 48 per cent of the 

total in all of Canada.  And even though you say that they're 

down in Saskatchewan, we have 13 times as many bankruptcies 

as the province of Manitoba and twice as many bankruptcies as 

the province of Alberta. 

 

The results of this particular recent court challenge puts many, 

many farmers at the mercy of the banks and farm credit 

agencies.  And if a farmer is deemed to have unsupportable 

farm debt and is forced by ACS or lending institutions into 

bankruptcy, then it is important that conflicts between 

provincial and federal legislation don't take away these farmers' 

options in order to get back into the leaseback program. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your government prepared to do to ensure 

that farmers are not denied access to the leaseback program if 

they're forced into bankruptcy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  To the 

member opposite: as I mentioned before, the number of 

bankruptcies is still too high in the province of Saskatchewan.  

It is down from 1991 when the previous administration was 

there.  And at that year the bankruptcies were 224; 1990 they 

were 189; this year, and my figures state, to the member from 

Greystone, that it is 166. 

 

We will continue to work with the farm community.  The 

six-year leaseback is a very important program and it's used 

extensively in my area in the north-east part of the province; 

the announcement of a $20 million ag equity fund -- these 

things are important to the farm community.  They diversify.  

Specialty crops up 17 per cent. 

 

But I want to tell the member opposite, the party that is now the 

federal government and the Minister of Agriculture for Canada 

says in November he wants to make cash advances interest 

free.  He pledges to immediately work on farm support 

programs so they are more generic and less product oriented.  

And he will raise the concept of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I shall pose the question again for people in this 

province who are farm families who have been forced into 

positions of bankruptcy, often told that this is the position they 

should be taking, and then turning around and discovering that 

they have no option to be involved in the leaseback program.  

And that has come as a great shock to these people. 

 

Would you please . . . you are responsible for your government 

and their decisions.  What are you prepared to do for these 

people who have been denied access . . . are being denied 

access into the leaseback program? 

 

They feel that they've been forced into bankruptcy with no 

options; they were not told that this was then going to be the 

result.  What steps are you taking specifically in order to assist 

these individuals so that they can stay in farming? 

 
Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

Minister of Justice says that we are looking into that case and 

we are.  But I want to say, what are you doing, Madam 

Member from Greystone -- what are you doing in talking to 

your counterparts in Ottawa who on one hand say an 

interest-free cash advance, on the other hand cuts Crow by 5 

per cent?  What are you doing with your federal minister, 

Madam Member from Greystone? 

 
Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 
Rural Emergency Health Care 

 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Health.  Madam 

Minister, last Friday night during a peewee hockey game in 

Arborfield, one of the Arborfield players, Marlin Frisky was 

slammed into the boards.  Unfortunately Marlin's head and 

shoulder suffered most of the impact.  Afraid of severe injury 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

or paralysis, the local emergency number was called. 

 

You know the former hospital at Arborfield is now a wellness 

clinic, Madam Minister, so when the emergency number was 

phoned it was picked up at the local care home.  The RN 

(registered nurse) at the home said she'd be over as soon as her 

shift was over. 

 

Madam Minister, there was one RN and one nursing assistant 

manning the home and the RN could not leave the home to tend 

to the hockey player convulsing in the arena. 

 

Madam Minister, is this your idea of emergency medical 

attention for rural Saskatchewan people, when people have to 

wait until the next shift begins before they can get medical 

help? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I will have someone look 

into the situation that the member opposite has raised, and if 

indeed there's any foundation to his facts, if corrective action 

has to be taken it will.  But my experience has been on cases of 

this nature that the member opposite and other members in the 

legislature have not been correct in their facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, the 

nurse arrived after the boy was carefully moved to the dressing 

room and did what she could while awaiting an ambulance.  

The game was delayed.  Finally the third period was played.  

The players cleaned up and had a hamburger after the game. 

 

Madam Minister, after all of this time the opposing team then 

boarded their bus for home and the Meath Park coach said that 

they met the ambulance that was supposed to be picking up 

Marlin Frisky right outside of Nipawin.  That was about one 

and a half hours after Marlin was slammed into the 

boards -- one and a half hours, Madam Minister. 

 

Do you still believe the people of rural Saskatchewan have 

adequate emergency medical care?  Do you honestly believe 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 

members opposite tend to exaggerate the evidence.  They tend 

to take things out of context.  And if the member opposite was 

truly concerned about what was happening, he would have 

come to the Department of Health, told us of his concerns so 

that if they were found legitimate, an immediate action could 

be taken.  But he's not concerned about what is occurring 

because he chooses to grandstand instead of working 

cooperatively with the district board to make sure that services 

are in place. 

 

The member opposite is not interested in the safety of the 

people at the community level.  What he's interested in is trying 

to score political points as opposed to working out -- if there is 

a glitch in the system -- working it out with the district board.  

If he was serious about patient safety, he would have attempted 

to do that already instead of grandstanding and distorting what 

actually takes place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, the only thing you seem to be 

concerned about is whether or not someone is critical of you 

and your department, not in the care of the people of rural 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister.  That's the thing that you're 

concerned about, is criticism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- It takes about 40 minutes for the ambulance to 

reach Arborfield, leaving immediately from the nearest 

hospital, and another 40 minutes to get a patient back to the 

hospital.  Madam Minister, Arborfield would like to buy their 

own ambulance and be able to transport emergency patients 

and avoid an hour and a half wait for emergency care for the 

people of their town, but they can't. 

 

Why aren't small communities like Arborfield able to do what 

they feel is best for their own communities?  Why isn't 

Rocanville -- a town that already has an ambulance and EMTs 

(emergency medical technician) -- able to transport patients in 

order to save lives, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the member opposite knows about 

the Rocanville situation and the fact that this is not a certified 

ambulance under regulations.  That is an example of how they 

distort the evidence.  They come forward here with untruths in 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker.  It's evidence of the fact.  He 

knows full well that that is not an ambulance under the 

regulations.  That's an example, and I pick up on that one point. 

 

The fact is the member opposite is not concerned about solving 

these problems.  He's only concerned about scoring political 

points.  And he's prepared to involve himself in scare tactics 

across this province by distorting information and coming 

forward with half-truths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, you 

might like to know, we have spoken to the mayor of Arborfield 

who is very upset about this incident, to Marlin's coach, to the 

father of another hockey player, and others attending the game, 

Madam Minister.  And every one of the individuals said they 

were scared, Madam Minister, scared about the next time that 

something like this happens, this type of emergency that might 

result in a death. 

 

That's what they said, Madam Minister, that they were scared 

that it might result in a death next time.  They 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

are willing to talk to anyone who will listen to their concerns, 

Madam Minister, anyone at all.  And I suggest that you give 

them a call, Madam Minister.  Will you personally meet with 

the mayor of Arborfield and a group of concerned citizens up 

there to discuss the situation and come to some kind of remedy 

to that situation -- that serious situation, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said right at the 

beginning that we would look into this.  I've also told the 

member that if he was genuine with his false concerns, that he 

would have already met with the chair of the district board to 

seek a solution because they will be implementing any 

solutions that may be necessary.  If the member opposite was 

genuine -- if he was genuine -- instead of grandstanding in the 

legislature, he would start working with the people in the local 

communities who have the authority . . . 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

SaskTel 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

happy to report to the legislature today with the results of 

SaskTel's second issue of credit TeleBonds.  As the members 

will know, SaskTel has a long tradition of technological 

leadership, from being the first telephone company in North 

America to provide private-line telephone service to all its 

customers, to its ground-breaking work on the communication 

system for the Channel Tunnel, the Chunnel. 

 

A story that is perhaps less well known, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the corporation's continuing efforts to cut its operating costs so 

that it can continue to deliver high-quality service in the 

competitive telecommunications market-place.  The latest issue 

of credit TeleBonds is an important piece of that strategy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

For the past few years SaskTel has been working to reduce its 

long-term debt.  Why SaskTel's debt should concern 

Saskatchewan people is the same reason the province's 

accumulated debt should concern all of us.  The more debt, the 

higher the interest payments, and ultimately a higher cost of 

doing business. 

 

In 1990, SaskTel's debt was 72 per cent of its equity.  By 1992 

this debt ratio was reduced to 63 per cent and that figure will be 

even lower for 1993.  SaskTel officials report that as a result of 

debt repayment, the corporation saved more than $13 million in 

interest payments in 1993 from the previous year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this debt repayment is coming at a time when the 

corporation is aggressively cutting long-distance prices so that 

Saskatchewan residents can receive the benefits of living and 

doing business in Saskatchewan.  In fact SaskTel customers 

received about $13 million in benefits from rate reductions in 

1993 and will receive $19 million of benefits in 1994. 

 

(1045) 

 

And rather than paying down its debt through price increases, 

SaskTel is paying down its debt through cutting operating costs 

and raising funds within the province.  Credit TeleBonds help 

fulfil this latter goal.  This unique investment allows 

Saskatchewan customers to receive a competitive annual rate of 

interest -- six and a half per cent -- directly credited to their 

telephone bills. 

 

I'm proud to report to the legislature that SaskTel customers 

strongly responded to this investment opportunity, purchasing 

about $35 million in TeleBonds this year.  This is truly a 

positive initiative for everyone in the province; Saskatchewan 

people benefiting through lower telephone bills and SaskTel 

benefiting through raising money within the province of 

Saskatchewan, paying down its long-term debt and reducing its 

operating cost. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the 

government of Saskatchewan and SaskTel that I want to 

commend Saskatchewan people for their strong support of this 

credit TeleBond issue and also SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We 

commend the government for carrying on with the program that 

was initiated by the previous administration, that being the 

SaskTel credit bonds.  This was a worthwhile program, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because it allows the people of Saskatchewan 

to directly invest and benefit from the Crown corporations in 

this province. 

 

When I look over and listen to the minister's address today, I 

find it quite humorous in spots, where the minister talks about 

clients of SaskTel receiving a $13 million benefit from rate 

reductions.  And indeed, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan have received a rate reduction on long-distance 

charges; but the minister goes on further to talk about paying 

down the debt -- but he's doing it, Mr. Speaker, through price 

increases in the basic rates for telephones for every person in 

this province through fee increases on every type of service 

provided by SaskTel other than long distance. 

 

Your jacks have gone up, Mr. Speaker, in your home -- every 

item touched by SaskTel is costing you more now under this 

administration than it was previously.  The only one that has 

come down has been the long-distance and that has happened 

because of competition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the private 

industry across this province. 
 

When we're talking about these SaskTel credit bonds, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, wouldn't it be nice, though, if this government 

would allow the same kind of opportunities, say with 

SaskEnergy.  If it's a worthwhile program in SaskTel, why not 

the other Crown corporations also, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

While we commend the government on the carrying 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

on of this program, we're concerned they are not carrying on in 

other corporations also. Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:49 a.m. until 10:57 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Romanow Pringle  

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Renaud 

Simard Murray 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Trew 

Shillington Whitmore 

Anguish Flavel 

Johnson Scott 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Wormsbecker 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Kluz 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons  

-- 35 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock  

Boyd McPherson 

Toth Bergman 

-- 10 

 

The Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 23 -- An Act to 

amend The Land Titles Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as my colleague indicated the other day, we don't have 

any real objections to this Bill.  But I would like to make a few 

comments on the Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I understand that the original amendments that were 

introduced in 1992 would make it easier for mortgages to be 

registered through the use of standardized forms.  However, 

there were a number of groups that were concerned at that time 

and felt they hadn't received enough consultation and the 

amendments were put off. 

 

But the fact that they've had a chance to review the legislation 

and they've been in contact with us and indicated that the 

amendments that have been introduced through Bill 23 are 

certainly amendments that they can live with. 

 

It's worth noting that the government indeed . . . and I 

commend the minister for having taking a little extra time just 

to consult to make sure that everyone felt that they had input 

and certainly had presented their views, and their views were 

adhered to, at least listened to and observed. 

 

The amendments, I understand, ensure that the use of 

standardized forms does not interfere with the registration of or 

action against mortgages in other ways.  I understand the 

amendments also clarify and set in law that people who have 

registered or caveated interests on a piece of land, such as 

someone who owns the mineral rights, have the same 

protection as the person who owns the actual piece of land. 

 

Generally, Mr. Speaker, I understand it improves the protection 

of rights of property owners, which is certainly nothing we 

could ever object to.  I also understand the Act is retroactive to 

1906 in order to provide equitable enforcement to all mortgages 

held in the province.  So that isn't one older form of mortgage 

existing alongside a new, improved mortgage that has different 

and substantially improved rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated, we have sought legal opinion.  

The responses we have received to date indicate that they feel 

that it is a substantial improvement.  And we look forward to 

ongoing dialogue and debate in Committee of the Whole on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 24 -- An Act 

respecting the Convention on the Law Applicable to Trusts 

be now read a second time. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, here again we do not have any significant objections 

to this Bill.  We find the wording though may be quite complex 

because it deals with 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

 international laws and conventions.  Its intent, however, is 

fairly simple and unobjectionable. 

 

The concept of trusts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not recognized 

by civil law systems such as France, so if a trustee of a 

Saskatchewan trust were subject to an action in France, the 

trust would be treated as his personal property.  We feel this is 

obviously unfair but we think it can be corrected by having 

Saskatchewan join the international trust convention as 

proposed by the legislation. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, that six of the nine common law 

provinces in Canada have enacted similar legislation, so the 

Bill brings Saskatchewan law into line with the accepted 

practices of trust law in Canada. 

 

Since this extends the protection and property rights of actual 

owners of the trust, we would have no objection to the Bill, and 

here again, Mr. Speaker, after having sought opinion and 

received responses, we look forward to dealing with the Bill in 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 25 -- An Act to 

amend The Trustee Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Just a few short 

comments before I again suggest we move this Bill into 

committee. 

 

We believe that Bill 25 is definitely an important Bill.  This 

Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allows for the family of the deceased 

to pay for whatever funeral expenses may occur, out of trust 

funds. 

 

I'm not sure if anyone in this Assembly has run into a problem 

where families are dealing with funeral expenses and may not 

have had access to the trust funds, and I think I'm getting an 

indication that some family members have. 

 

So it can be a frustrating experience for families to have to deal 

with someone who has passed away and the sorrow at that time 

and the anguish, and then to also find that all proceeds and 

finances are held in trust and can be tied up in legal battles for a 

while.  So I believe what this Bill is doing is just speeding up 

the process. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, when we're looking at it we will find 

that the Bill certainly addresses some of the financial hardships 

that families have experienced over the years because of the 

fact that there haven't been specific guidelines. 

 

I understand Bill 25 will eliminate some of this hardship, Mr. 

Speaker, and therefore I recommend we send it to the 

Committee of the Whole. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 26 -- An Act 

respecting Frustrated Contracts be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, here again we don't have a lot of comments and we're 

not going to tie a lot of time up in second reading or adjourned 

debates on this Bill.  However I must admit that as the minister 

had indicated when he reintroduced the other Bill, the wording 

in the Bill is certainly something that when you first hear it 

catches your attention. 

 

It seems to be bit ironic that the minister and his colleagues 

would be bringing forward a Bill dealing with frustrated 

contract since I think there are many people across the province 

of Saskatchewan who are frustrated with this government and 

some of their actions.  It seems to me that it's too bad this Bill 

wasn't made law before GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) contracts and civil service contracts and other 

contracts were broken by the province of . . . present 

government. 

 

But then again, Mr. Speaker, all the members opposite have to 

do is to continue the ministers' rights above anyone else in the 

province; to continue to place ministers above reproach and 

give them sweeping powers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the Bills brought forward by the 

members opposite, and we've seen over the past time, have 

ensured that decisions made by the minister responsible may 

not be challenged by the court of law.  And on that aspect we 

would really challenge the minister to come forward and be a 

little more open and accountable as the government has 

indicated. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we feel that some of the real questions 

and debate we want to enter into will be more appropriate . . . 

we can get into more of a dialogue with the minister in 

committee.  And I would move that this Bill move through to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

The Chair: -- I recognize the Minister of Social Services and 

ask him to introduce his officials to the committee and make 

any remarks that he might wish to make. 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce associate deputy 

minister, Neil Yeates; and our senior policy analyst for Social 

Services, Bonnie Durnford; and Madeline Robertson, Crown 

solicitor from Justice, and welcome them here. 
 

I can maybe make a few comments, Mr. Chairman, on this Act.  

Just a few comments said in the context.  The government 

recently announced a series of initiatives under the child action 

plan for children.  These initiatives are the result of much 

consultation and planning both within and outside government, 

and underline the importance we place on prevention and 

support services to children and families. 
 

Establishment of the child advocate as an independent voice for 

Saskatchewan children and youth is a key component of the 

action plan.  Consultations have made clear that Saskatchewan 

people want a Children's Advocate who will be a voice for 

children and youth in crisis, will have a role in community 

education and prevention, an advocate who is independent of 

the control or influence of any government department or 

minister, and is visible and accessible to the community. 
 

As a result, we are proposing implementation of a Children's 

Advocate to be associated with the Office of the Ombudsman.  

Many children have natural advocates, Mr. Chairman, 

responsible adults found within the confines of their immediate 

and extended family.  The Children's Advocate is not intended 

to replace the role played by these individuals. 
 

(1115) 
 

I want to emphasize as well that the advocate will have no 

jurisdiction to intervene in family relationships or conflict 

between parents and children.  The purpose of the advocate, 

Mr. Chairman, will be to protect the interests of children and 

youth receiving services from the government, including those 

in foster care, group homes, and young offenders' facilities, and 

to assure that these services are provided in an adequate way 

and appropriate. 
 

We strongly believe that the Children's Advocate must be able 

to function without any political or outside interference.  

Therefore the Bill provides for the appointment of the advocate 

for a five-year term by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

upon the recommendation of the Legislative Assembly.  This 

will ensure that the advocate remains independent of any 

government department or minister; public accountability will 

ensure through the provision of annual and other reports to the 

legislature. 
 

In addition to resolving disputes, conducting investigations, 

and advocating on behalf of children in receipt of government 

services, the Children's Advocate may conduct research to 

improve the programs available, to provide advice to any 

minister responsible for service to children. 
 

The Bill provides the advocate with the authority and 

responsibility to become involved in public education 

programs, to promote the interests and well-being of 

Saskatchewan children and youth. 
 

The Children's Advocate will play a significant role in ensuring 

the rights of Saskatchewan children and youth, that they are 

protected.  To recruit the most suitable candidate, we are 

committed to holding a public competition, Mr. Chairman.  The 

advocate is expected to work in partnership with families and 

communities to protect and care for children.  By building upon 

the spirit of community involvement which naturally exists in 

Saskatchewan and which has been encouraged through 

initiatives through Saskatchewan's action plan for children, 

both individuals and the community at large will be natural 

advocates for Saskatchewan children and youth. 
 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It'll be agreed at a later 

date, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and 

welcome to the officials.  I look forward to our dialogue this 

morning and I know some of my colleagues and I believe some 

of the Liberal MLAs have some questions as well. 
 

In general, Mr. Minister, as you've heard in our second reading 

speeches, we're not really opposed to the child advocate and the 

role that you're bringing forward today.  Mr. Minister, you 

indicated that this is a role or person that a number of people 

have been looking for or suggesting. 
 

And I believe as well that my colleague, the member from 

Rosthern, when he was in the position of minister of Social 

Services had certainly looked at this type of a format and a role 

as well and bringing someone in that children could look to, 

someone who would be . . . and if I hear you correctly, you're 

talking of an individual who'd be arm's length from 

government, who would be legally out there with an ability to 

understand some of the problems that children face, and 

accessible as a contact person to discuss some of the problems 

and issues that come across their way. 
 

I guess, Mr. Minister, I would suggest and I would say that 

many people probably have the same views as I do and the 

same feelings, and find it very difficult to understand how any 

one individual, be they a parent, be they a trustee, be they a 

person that's given responsibility for a child, would take 

advantage of a child, be they a very young age of maybe under 

1, 2, even 17 or 18, at teenage age already, while they're still in 

custody or under that roof of those individuals.  And to be 

honest with you, it really boggles my mind that we should 

really have to look into this and provide such an advocate, a 

person to be out there. 
 

Mr. Minister, you had indicated that this has been a request that 

has come to the province, has come from residents, come from, 

I gather from a large sector of the population.  And I'm 

wondering if you could indicate today the groups that have 

contacted your office and no doubt it's probably contact that's 

been there over a period of time; the different groups, the 

type of people that have contacted your office; and at whose 

specific request and the reasons for bringing the Bill forward at 

this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Thank you, I appreciate the general support of the member on 

the need to support families.  I know that that's been his interest 

in, and record, since he's been a member of this . . . or since I've 

joined and been a member of this Assembly.  The hon. member 

has always been very supportive to families and I appreciated 

your colleague's interest as well, comments he made the other 

day about when he was minister.  I know that was very sincere 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

and the independence of this position that you highlighted I 

appreciate as well, which was one of the central points, as you 

know, of the task force. 

 

Of course you're aware of the background to the task force and 

leading up to this recommendation in their report and I believe 

your office does have a copy of that report which lists at the 

end all the . . . I think over a hundred organizations and 

individuals that were contacted by the task force, a very 

extensive across . . . geographically across Saskatchewan from 

urban and rural settings.  And of course, there was a cultural 

mix to the task force, as you know, and there was considerable, 

I guess, considerable weight given to sort of cross-cultural 

consultation as well.  But we would be happy to provide you 

with the list of names of those that were consulted if you like. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I thank you, Mr. Minister, for indicating that 

you'd be willing to supply us with that list.  I think it would still 

be appropriate if you wouldn't mind, even though it's in . . . the 

list is in the report that has been drafted, if you wouldn't mind 

submitting that list to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Minister. 

 

I appreciate the fact, Mr. Minister, that you've at least taken as 

well, taken the time to consult with . . . or I'm not exactly sure 

if you personally have had the opportunity to sit down with 

every group or individual, but I understand you had a group of 

people come and certainly departmental people, individuals, 

have taken the time to consult with groups and organizations. 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if there are other provinces that 

have brought forward the same type or maybe even have the 

same format, child advocate, already in place.  And if you or 

your department have consulted with groups across Canada, 

and if our legislation that we're introducing today falls in line 

with legislation that is either in place or the intent of legislation 

to be introduced in other jurisdictions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you.  We will table the list of the 

consultations.  I'd be happy to do that, Mr. Chairman.  And in 

terms of whether I've met with the groups myself, I do have a 

list of groups that I've met with, organizations and individuals, 

since I've become minister.  I'm not sure if I have that here; I've 

got that in my office.  It includes 70 or 80 groups.  And I'd be 

very happy to . . . and the dates we met.  I'd be very happy to 

provide you with that.  And I may not be able to do that today, 

but the next day or so; it's right there. 

 

But these consultations were in large part around the child 

action plan generally.  And this child advocate was certainly, in 

many ways, front and centre to a lot of other important 

recommendations in the child action plan as we were 

developing this package.  And I would say that since the 

announcement of the child advocate, there has been just 

extremely positive feedback to my office, including a chat that 

I've had with Mr. Wardell, the chair of the task force, who is 

happy with this approach we're taking. 

 

With regard to your other question of consultations with other 

provinces, the task force did most of the consultation, the 

analysis, and made recommendations based on that study, of 

particularly Manitoba and Alberta, but other approaches across 

Canada as well.  And therefore stressed certain things like the 

independence of the child advocate to the legislature as a 

whole, rather than the minister, which is the case in Alberta and 

Manitoba, where the advocate reports directly to the minister. 

 

And I do not favour that approach because I can see a potential 

conflict there.  We want the advocate to be able to evaluate our 

systems and services and programs, and so we want as much 

independence as possible.  That is one of the key differences is 

the fact that, as you know, our child advocate will report to you 

and to this legislature. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, how 

many provinces in Canada have a specific legislation in place 

to date, how many are working on legislation, and also, is there 

legislation similar to what you're introducing in the House at 

present, the Bill that we presently have before us? 

 

And also another question I would have: have other provinces, 

in implementing this form of a person, have they done it in a 

similar fashion where we're bringing basically in a child 

advocate who's going to work under The Ombudsman Act?  Or 

have some provinces introduced a specific Act to deal with this 

type of format, like a child's ombudsman instead of a child's 

advocate under The Ombudsman Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you 

for your question.  As I mentioned, Manitoba and Alberta have 

an advocate.  In B.C. (British Columbia) the deputy 

ombudsman has responsibilities right in that office for child 

and youth advocacy.  Quebec has a similar approach to the one 

that we're adopting, and Ontario has a children's guardian. 

 

I think that one thing I would mention though is, in terms of 

scope we have one of the broader Acts with regard to the scope 

of the Ombudsman . . . or the child advocate, pardon me. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, in your 

second reading speech in your introduction of the Bill, you had 

indicated, you said: 

 

The action plan is bringing together individuals, 

organizations, communities, and government to eliminate 

some of the barriers which have long stood in the way of 

coordinating policies, programs, and services for children 

and families. 

 

It would seem to me what you're saying then is the child 

advocate is going to kind of basically fill in rather than having 

so many different areas or agencies that children can approach.  

With the child advocate we're basically giving one person as 

that person then becomes the contact of any one of these groups 

and organizations as we reach out to give children an avenue of 

contact and the person or persons that they can sit down with so 

we can coordinate endeavours of basically meeting the needs of 

children who may be facing abusive situations, or whatever 

format of problems that children may run into. 

 

(1130) 

 

If I understand you correctly, I would suggest that that's 

appropriate and I commend you for that, in forming one body.  

Because I thinks it's very difficult, whether it's children, 

whether it's women facing acts of violence, facing violent 

situations, or even men for that matter, or whoever it is, 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

whether it's people facing racial discrimination. 

 

I think on many occasions people have had a degree of 

difficulty in deciding who they should be going to.  And it 

seems that you may go to, say, the local police if they're handy, 

and all of a sudden you're shoved off onto, say, the public 

health nurse, or another avenue. 

 

I certainly commend you on the fact that we are bringing 

forward an agency whereby children can come and have a basic 

contact regarding their problems. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is how this program is 

going to work.  How will the child advocate then . . . Who's the 

contact person at the local level, I guess is what I'm looking for, 

for the child advocate?  Because certainly one person can't be 

in all parts of the province, and the need is probably stretched 

throughout the province.  So how is this program going to 

work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you.  In terms of your question, let 

me just say for a minute that the child advocate is one of a 

number of provisions in the child action plan.  As you know, 

the child action plan was sort of a  philosophical framework 

that would be supportive to children and communities.  We 

want to try and support families and strengthen communities, 

so it's mutually reinforcing. 

 

I guess the second thing the action plan does is it identifies a 

process whereby government and communities can work 

together.  And all of the child action initiatives that were 

announced recently are really community ideas.  In other 

words, we believe that communities have the . . . They know 

their issues, their problems, their opportunities; they can 

priorize their choices.  And it is up to us to play some 

partnership role which is more evolving to kind of a facilitative 

role as they take on enhanced rec services, for example, like in 

West Flats in P.A. (Prince Albert). 

 

There's I suppose two ways to try to answer your question as to 

how this office is going to work in practice, how will people 

know who to go to.  Certainly there will be a public 

announcement in terms of who's hired.  There will very well 

likely be a 1-800 number.  There will be pamphlets.  There will 

be an educational role that will be required as well by this 

office. 

 

So that's sort of . . . there are many ways in which I believe 

we'll be able to make available the ways in which to contact the 

individual and the duties of that individual with pamphlets and 

offices throughout the province and so on. 

 

In terms of your other question about how will it work, we are 

looking I suppose at really two ways.  One is where the 

advocate would be available to individuals to assist them.  For 

example, take a youth in the North Battleford youth centre who 

felt that he was not being treated appropriately or whatever, 

would have the ability to write a letter, confidentially, to the 

child advocate and would be delivered unopened, of course, to 

the advocate who could then follow up as appropriate.  So there 

will be opportunities for children to contact this office 

individually. 

 

And secondly, is more of a systemic role in terms of assessing 

systems and evaluating how things are working, whether it's the 

foster care system or any aspect of the child care system.  And 

of course we would be very open to recommendations on 

individual situations or systemic or systems procedures and so 

forth, or level or quality of service, if the child advocate has 

any recommendations to make in that area, and would be most 

welcome to cooperate. 

 

We want to make clear that for the 2,500 children who are in 

the care of the minister, we want to provide the best level of 

service possible for those children and their families. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I must 

apologize; I'm not sure if I caught all of your words, and I was 

wondering if you really gave me a response as to how the 

advocate would be accessible at the local level.  I must admit 

that you don't have the same boisterous voice as the member 

from North Battleford so we've got to pay a little closer 

attention. 

 

When you're talking at the local level, let's say someone in my 

area, let's say just for example someone in the community of 

Moosomin, a child feels that they're being mistreated in some 

form or other.  What is the process that they would follow, as 

you understand it, and what you're intending to present or bring 

forward through the Bill in which the child could approach the 

child advocate and spell out the problems they're facing. And 

then how would this  



826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

person, the child advocate, then respond to the child, and what 

actions will then follow, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman..  At this point 

what I will do is just table or send across to you a list of the 

groups I've met with so you have a better idea too.  And I'd like 

to provide that to the member if I could, just to give you a sense 

of who I've been meeting with on this and similar matters in 

terms of supporting families and communities. 

 

I think, you know, I take your point; it's a good point.  What 

you're really saying is that we need to make sure that families 

across Saskatchewan, children are aware of this office and what 

the role is.  And I would say again there, we will make sure 

there are pamphlets readily available, whether in the police 

offices, the NGO (non-governmental organizations) offices, 

municipal offices, certainly all provincial offices. 

 

And again we're looking at . . . the scope here is for children 

who we likely already know about or there may be an 

investigation required.  And so it may very well come to our 

attention anyhow or to the attention of the police. 

 

But we appreciate your point that we need to make sure this is a 

provincial office and that people in all corners of Saskatchewan 

are aware of the potential service here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So basically what 

you're saying, Mr. Minister, then, as you've indicated in your 

second reading speech where you talked about, there were four 

main themes you had outlined, dominated the feedback from 

the task force.  Number one, that this person would be a voice 

for children and youth in crisis; and number two, would have a 

role in community education and prevention; and certainly is 

independent of control or influence of any government 

department or minister; and is visible and accessible to the 

community. 

 

I take from that, Mr. Minister, that you are in the process of or 

will be in the process of -- I trust you're actually in the process 

of discussing some methods even right now on ways of getting 

out the information to communities, and certainly through the 

educational method of informing people of the child advocate, 

the role and the purpose of the child advocate, and at the same 

time indicating to children or youth that this contact is 

available. 

 

Now it's certainly fine to have pamphlets available, and 

probably one of the locations that they could be readily 

available is certainly in schools.  That's probably an avenue 

where you would run into a lot of children. 

 

And I think the public health system, the public health nurses 

that are operating out there right now are also involved a lot in, 

on almost on a daily basis, or weekly, or monthly basis, in the 

school system and in many cases involved in some of the 

educational aspects of, say, specifically family related matters.  

And they could be an avenue in which we could also get some 

of this information out. 

And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that if you haven't, these 

are some avenues that we can certainly look at.  And I would 

also indicate that I think my colleagues, and in fact probably 

any member of this Legislative Assembly, will do everything 

we can as well, once we have specific and total information 

available to inform people of this office and of ways of 

contacting the office. 

 

So I just throw those out as suggestions and just ask you where 

the department is to date in their deliberations and how they are 

going to get this information out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I didn't mean for my examples to be 

exhaustive.  Your suggestion of schools and public health 

offices and so on, is a good one.  And I think there are probably 

many other partners in the community where it would be 

appropriate to place the pamphlets.  That's just one form of 

making people aware of the role. 

 

I think the first thing we need to do is to make the selection, 

which we'll do.  And then one of the first tasks we have to do is 

to sit down with the child advocate to ensure that the advocate 

have a plan to outline the role, and how to access the services, 

and so on.  So the advocate will develop sort of an 

education-communication plan from that office and we'll 

cooperate -- as I know communities will -- in any way possible. 

 

Because as you outlined the four points, one of the key points is 

education of the community; secondly, visibility in the 

community.  We want a proactive person here.  That's the key.  

And so I believe that that will be one of the first interests and 

desires of the advocate as well and will be part of the very early 

planning. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, just looking over the second reading 

notes as well and comment, you talk about: 

 

The principles upon which the action plan is built . . . state 

that actions to enhance the well-being of children and youth 

must be preventative, culturally appropriate, supportive, 

collaborative, holistic, and empowering.  And the best 

interests of the child must be the primary consideration. 

 

When I take a quick glance at that, Mr. Minister, when we talk 

about the best interest of the child -- and don't take me 

wrong -- but at the same time, Mr. Minister, I think one of the 

things we must be very careful of is when we're talking of 

specific . . . just reaching down to . . . whether it's children, or 

whether it's women, or whether it's men or specific groups, we 

must also be careful that we're also . . . that we don't really start 

overstepping our bounds and responsibilities. 

 

I think with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and what we're 

seeing taking place with class action 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

lawsuits that are happening, not only across our land but 

certainly we see it in the States, I think it's very important that 

we recognize -- and there are many parents out there who are 

doing due diligence and trying to really be responsible parents 

and raising their children responsibly and giving them a loving 

and caring home. 

 

(1145) 

 

What I'm wondering, and what I'm hoping that is being looked 

at very carefully, is that when we look at the child advocate, 

number one, I guess a direct question is, what powers will the 

child's advocate have? 

 

Secondly, when the child advocate is contacted regarding a 

specific case, how is that case going to be reviewed, or that 

instance going to be reviewed so that at the end of the day 

we're not all of a sudden, because of actions taken immediately 

without sitting back and assessing the situation, we're not then 

turning around and maybe having to apologize to individuals, 

especially family members, over accusations that may be 

thrown out which may draw the advocate in, accusations that 

could end up being thrown out in a fit of anger. 

 

And I think one thing the child advocate does not end up in as 

well is, if you talk to local police forces one of the areas that 

they really detest getting involved in is domestic violence.  

They're called into a home and possibly a wife is being 

severely mistreated by her husband or her common-law partner, 

or her partner or whatever, and the police are called in.  And 

they step in to try and bring some, I guess, peace back into the 

home and all of a sudden they find both partners are working 

against them. 

 

And so I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, have we got some 

guidelines in place so that we are indeed looking at the whole 

family, and the well-being of the family, even if it's a foster 

family.  So that at the end of the day we've listened to, and 

we've understood, the problems the child is facing but we also 

will take the time to see what is happening in that family 

situation that may have caused that request to come forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: --Thank you very much.  I would agree 

with you that what is in the best interests of children is in the 

best interests of families and vice versa.  Perhaps I'm not 

making myself clear here, that the scope of the Bill is related to 

the services provided by government to children.  And so 

basically the scope is limited to case review, to case review of 

services provided by government, or to review of our programs, 

services, procedures in our systems. 

 

So I want to emphasize that the advocate will not have 

jurisdiction to intervene in family disputes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, it will not have that authority -- or in 

conflict between parents and their children.  The advocate will 

not have jurisdiction in that area.  And I might just hit very 

quickly the sort of four points of jurisdiction here, of powers. 

 

Number one, amendments provide the advocate with the power 

to receive, review, and investigate any matter that comes to his 

or her attention from any source.  Any source includes a child 

or could include a matter referred by the advocate or the 

Ombudsman. 

 

Secondly, the advocate may become involved in any matter 

where a child or children are receiving services from any 

department or agency of government.  This may involve the 

individual children or youth, such as a single child in foster 

care; or may involve groups of children or youth, such as all 

youth in Saskatchewan who are residing in young offenders' 

facilities.  The North Battleford example I gave. 

 

Thirdly, the advocate will not have jurisdiction to intervene, as 

I said, in family relationships or conflicts between parents and 

children.  And fourthly, we want to emphasize a 

problem-solving approach for the advocate.  Therefore the 

advocate will, where appropriate, attempt to resolve matters 

that come to his or her attention through the use of negotiation, 

conciliation, and mediation. 

 

So that's the jurisdiction and scope, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I guess that's one 

thing I was just wondering, as to what real role the advocate 

would play and who the advocate would call upon after they 

have basically researched a request that has come before them.  

So you have indicated that if a request comes before the 

advocate where a child or whoever raises an issue and the 

advocate kind of researches it, sits down, and then at the end of 

the day enters into a sort of a mediation process. 

 

Would there be anyone else involved besides the advocate in 

this mediation process?  And the reason I suggest that is just for 

the fact that you and I know that you don't really want it to go 

into say a conflict between two members by yourself, because 

at the end of the day you may find that what you took to be . . . 

what you understood of the situation and how that may . . . 

possibly was resolved, an agreement had been raised, but 

because you're only one and there's maybe two or three other 

individuals on the other side, you may be standing out in the 

cold because they may disagree with your understanding of the 

mediation process. 

 

And it would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that I think it would be 

appropriate, even though this person has been given specific 

authority, I think it doesn't matter who you are, but one just one 

individual, regardless of the authority you're given, if you 

ended up in a court of law, could find yourself . . . the things 

that you understood may not be really adhered to in the court 

because it's just one voice against maybe two or three others. 

 

So I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that if the department hasn't, 

they should look at a way in which the child advocate has 

maybe someone else with them as they're trying to work out 

agreements, if that's possible.  Mediate, whether it's through at 

the local 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

level, someone from . . . and I guess it would depend on the 

type of concern that's been raised.  Whether it's been a concern 

regarding violence or whether it's a concern just regarding 

verbal abuse that's been raised, and it would depend on the type 

of individual.  But I think it would . . . just for the sake of even 

the advocate, it might be appropriate to have someone that the 

advocate could call upon to verify the discussion that has taken 

place.  Is that possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, the fourth point I raised with regard 

to jurisdiction dealt with the mediation-conciliation role.  And I 

suppose, like the current Ombudsman now becomes involved, 

the process would be somewhat similar. 

 

A decision is made to do an investigation.  The advocate will 

become involved like now at the point where services have 

been provided, say, on a case-specific basis, and someone is not 

satisfied with the quality of service or not satisfied that things 

have been worked out and resolved satisfactorily, or has not 

been handled correctly in some manner.  So the investigation, 

the coming together, will occur at some point and the service 

providers will be identified.  And I would think anyone who 

has an interest in that specific case will be part of the solution, 

potential solution, that would be called upon by the advocate. 

 

I might just mention that, as we do now with the Ombudsman, 

of course when a decision is made to investigate a case 

situation or systems or procedures, then we cooperate fully, 

including interviews with staff, giving access to our files, and 

so on.  So that will be the same with the child advocate. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, who does 

the child advocate report to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Formally, the child advocate will report 

to the legislature in a formal way.  I suppose in many ways too 

the advocate will get back to families, children, to us, in terms 

of case findings and so on.  So if a child or a family initiates a 

complaint or a concern, I would assume that that office would 

feel some obligation to be accountable to sort that out.  So 

there'd be, I suppose, some accountability to that individual or 

family to have handled things properly from the advocate's 

office. 

 

But there's no doubt about it that the advocate is accountable to, 

in a formal way, to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what budget is allocated to the 

office of the child's advocate?  Or is that just covered under the 

Ombudsman's budget, global budget, or do we have a specific 

budget?  And roughly, how many dollars would you anticipate 

going into the office of the child's advocate, and I'm wondering 

if the dollar value that you're looking to would be strictly 

wages added on to say the Ombudsman's budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you.  For 1994-95, the allocated 

budget will be $350,000 -- 250,000 for salaries.  There will be 

five staff with this office, five staff members.  And 100,000 of 

the 350,000 is designated for administrative costs, travel, 

education and so on -- communication with the public. 

 

So the budget is located in the Ombudsman's overall budget, 

but it's a separate subvote in that budget.  We're trying to 

balance the financial economy with sort of a proactive person 

and preserving the elements that the task force felt were 

important.  So that's what we're trying to accomplish. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, you also 

indicated that the child's advocate is going to be an 

appointment of the Assembly by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council upon recommendation of the Assembly for a five-year 

term.  I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, what process you intend to 

follow in the hiring of the individual for this position?  Will 

there be a public competition for the position?  Will the Public 

Service Commission conduct the competition?  As well, Mr. 

Minister, would you look seriously at allowing a committee of 

this Assembly to be involved in that appointment process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The government is committed to 

enhancing democratic reform.  And as you know, there's a 

competition for the current Ombudsman.  The process will be 

very similar to that; it will be a public competition.  It will be 

publicly advertised.  The advocate, as I tried to say I think in 

my second reading speech, there'll be consultation with all 

parties of the Assembly and then there will be a decision made 

in the same fashion that the current Ombudsman is being 

appointed, same procedure. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want 

to pick up just on a few points that my colleague has been 

discussing.  But at the outset, Mr. Minister, let me just indicate 

to you that this process that you are embarking upon is 

overdue.  I know that I was filling your shoes a while back and 

it was always a troubling thought about some of the kinds of 

conditions that the younger, more vulnerable aspects of our 

society were being subjected to, and yet essentially did not 

have a voice as such.  And as such there was no ear to hear 

their plea, as it were, in many instances. 
 

I was glad to hear your reassurance that this office is by no 

means an attempt as an alternative to many of the good parents 

that we have out there who are indeed doing excellent 

advocacy on behalf of their own children.  And we will 

certainly hold you to that, recognizing of course that there are 

many of the children in our society that do not have that 

built-in advocacy in terms of parents, or a guardian for that 

matter.  And I speak to a lot of those foster home children and 

so on, and those that do not have adequate parents to voice their 

concerns. 

 

And indeed I know that as minister responsible for foster 

children and so on, you have one of the largest families . . . you 

have the largest family in Saskatchewan by a great deal, and 

you would like to 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

see that reduced, if at all possible. 

 

But I think if I suggested that that was going to happen, I would 

not be being realistic.  I mean it's part of the society and your 

job is to handle the symptoms and the fallouts or our societal 

system.  And I don't think it behoves you or me or members of 

this legislature to resolve those kinds of problems.  We have to 

deal with those kinds of symptoms. 

 

So I want to, at the outset, say that in principle we were 

working on it.  I know Minister Schmidt -- as much as he was 

sometimes suspected of not having his heart in the right place, I 

would disagree with that -- I think he on numerous occasions 

expressed a desire to do something; we didn't know what in 

those days.  And I know when Mr. Prebble was standing where 

I'm standing right now, he chastised me as well on a constant 

basis about not doing enough on advocacy.  And in those days 

he was still talking in terms of Ombudsman. 

 

And I'm glad to say, Mr. Minister, I'm glad to see that you did 

not take that route of Ombudsman.  I think that would have 

been totally unrealistic to set up a parallel system to the 

existing system of Ombudsman; and the child advocacy route 

quite frankly, in my opinion, was the route to go, which was 

what I was considering doing as well, when I filled your shoes.  

But unfortunately the people of the province said no, you're not 

going to do that; we're going to let somebody else do that.  And 

we see a role reversal here. 

 

So having generally given you my support in terms of the 

procedure that you're taking, I still think it behoves us an 

opposition to take a look at the legislation and say, how can we 

improve it even further.  And so with that in mind I'm just 

going to take this opportunity to ask you a few general 

questions based on what you and your fellow members have 

stated in the House during the second readings. 

 

And I'd just like to quote from page 673 of Hansard where the 

speaker says: 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Ombudsman Act provides 

the advocate with the power and responsibility to become 

involved in public education regarding the needs and 

interests and well-being of the Saskatchewan children and 

youth.  This provides the advocate with the ability to educate 

the public and to help reduce the number of children 

requiring services. 

 

Now that's an admirable objective, Mr. Minister, and I have no 

objection to that; but you were just telling my colleague from 

Moosomin that you have -- and if I understood 

correctly -- $350,000 additional funds for the Ombudsman to 

enforce the role of the child advocate.  And then you said that 

$250,000 of that sum is going to be used up for salaries, 

leaving in my estimation $100,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what I can't follow is, if the child advocate 

has this power to educate the public regarding the needs and 

interests and well-being of Saskatchewan children and youth, 

how is he going to do this?  How is he going to do this to have 

some kind of actual impact?  It sounds good in words but when 

I take a look at the funding that's being provided him, it's not 

there.  Or is it not that he will be doing the actual educating but 

call upon . . . and will he have the power then to, for example, 

to have the Department of Health or the Department of 

Education come forward with programs that are going to in the 

end, result in what your objective is?  Could you describe that 

for me, with such a limited budget, how these objectives are 

going to be accomplished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much.  Let me say first 

of all that I know that you as a former minister were committed 

to enhancing services for families and to enhancing the 

accountability of government systems as well. 

 

I do want to stress that, your point that most children have 

somebody who advocates for them satisfactorily already, and of 

course as you well know, as you have acknowledged, there are 

also some 2,500 children who don't, and maybe more.  So I 

know that you had been interested in this position, and 

appreciate that you agree with the general approach we've 

taken. 

 

With regard to the education role and the budget, I guess I 

would say that this is the starting point at this point, as we see 

it.  We're not trying to build a new system where the advocate 

would do all the work in terms of all the education, all the 

advocating, and so on, but rather to play a role in trying to 

bring together more closely those who are involved in 

providing services, support to children and families already. 

 

The $4.4 million child action plan was designed to try and do 

that as well.  So I'm sure that the advocate, the child advocate, 

will have suggestions and recommendations for government 

departments and specific programs and services whereby there 

may be better coordination, and we would be open to that kind 

of analysis and those recommendations. 

 

So it would be a complementary role.  The advocate wouldn't 

be responsible only to provide the educational services that the 

Bill talks about. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What I gathered from your comment, Mr. 

Minister, is that the advocate will then rely pretty well solely 

on the art of gentle persuasion, that he can recommend, and 

that's the end of it if the Minister of Health or the Minister of 

Justice or the Minister of Education don't agree or, as I suspect, 

will simply be saying, well we don't have the funds.  It's nice in 

theory but in practice, logistically we don't have the funds to 

carry any of those recommendations out. 

 

Mr. Minister, what in this Act, what parts of this legislation 

will actually guarantee that there will be action and guarantee 

that the advocate will have an actual impact in society? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- In many ways, Mr. Chairman . . . I guess 

you say the powers of persuasion.  I guess what 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

I would say is that any minister, any government, wants to do 

as well as it can.  And of course the child advocate will be 

required to provide a report to the Legislative Assembly every 

year and will have the freedom and ability to provide special 

reports at any given time.  I think that the child advocate will 

have the potential and opportunity to have a fairly high public 

profile in terms of children's issues and family matters in a way 

that isn't available now. 
 

And the report to the Assembly could very well be on the very 

issues you raised today -- some very good issues that you raise.  

And those of course would be looked at very seriously, and you 

would have the opportunity to take a look at those too. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman. This 

public profile, Mr. Minister, I want to pursue that just a little bit 

more.  You are suggesting what, by this?  That because of the 

public profile and because of the profile that problems as 

perceived by this child advocate . . . the public pressure would 

be such that public pressure would cause various ministers to 

react and to respond to needs.  Is this what you're saying? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, right now there is no 

independent voice -- proactive, highly visible voice -- with the 

independence for children, to advocate for children.  What 

we're trying to put in place is an office, an individual or a group 

of people, who will have the ability to do that as per the 

responsibilities as outlined earlier. 
 

I think any government takes seriously the report from the 

Ombudsman's office in terms of the quality and level of 

services that are being provided or aren't being provided.  And 

where gaps are identified, I think that all governments have to 

have good faith that they will . . . in setting up an independent 

voice where the accountability is with the legislature as a 

whole, all members have a responsibility to make sure that 

those issues raised are taken seriously. 
 

So I believe that the . . . the government believes that the ability 

of the child advocate to bring to high profile issues of concern 

is very possible in the current legislation.  And the advocate 

may in fact say that there are some additional things that could 

enhance his or her powers that would be desirable, and I would 

certainly be open to discussing those. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I agree with certain things that you said 

there, Mr. Minister, and that is that right now there is 

essentially nothing, I think is what you were saying, and so that 

this step that you're taking now is better than before.  And I 

agree with you, it is; it's a step in the right direction. 
 

But what I'm trying to do now is to ascertain precisely what 

you're prepared to do to make this thing work.  And what I 

think I'm hearing from you is that public pressure will be such 

that there will be changes.  And I guess that's what causes me 

some concern here, Mr. Minister, because I think you will also 

recognize that as far as your government's track record is 

concerned, public pressure does not seem to have any great 

bearing on any direction that you're taking. 
 

Now I don't want to start giving the litany of the things where 

your government has not listened to the will of the people and 

the request of the will of the people and they're saying, do this, 

do this, do this, and you have chosen not to listen to the people. 
 

So I'm not quite prepared to stand here and say, well right, if 

the child advocate is going to come up with certain concerns, 

that will be enough pressure, and public pressure will be great 

enough to cause your government to steer in a different 

direction, or make certain changes that they are requesting.  I'm 

sorry but I just can't give you assurance that my comfort level 

is high enough that this will be adequate. 
 

So I just want to pursue this a little bit further, because on that 

same page that I quoted from before, there's a paragraph here 

where your government is stating through its members: 
 

That concerns me, Mr. Speaker, because I believe there is a 

useful function here in having an advocate report to an 

all-party committee that represents the Legislative Assembly. 
 

Now I'm sorry I may have missed a discussion that you had 

with my colleague about an all-party committee that the 

advocate will be reporting to.  That's what it says here -- that 

represents the Legislative Assembly.  I want you to describe 

that for me, what is meant by that. And then further it says: 
 

I say that because the child advocate may indeed need an 

advocate when it comes to requesting appropriate funding 

and resources to carry out the mandate on behalf of children. 
 

So it seems to me, the way I read it is that the Ombudsman or 

the child advocate will report to an all-party committee and that 

this committee then will have some type of authority or power 

to advocate, on behalf of the children, to get appropriate 

funding and resources to carry out that mandate. 
 

Now I find this paragraph on page 675 somewhat confusing 

and I was hoping that you would be able to illuminate that for 

me. 
 

(1215) 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, what I would say is that as 

the Provincial Auditor now, as the current Ombudsman now 

does report to the legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 

it's okay.  I was just saying, as you know now -- of course you 

know very well that the current Provincial Auditor, the current 

Ombudsman, as a watchdog agency, similar to the child 

advocate, now will report to the legislature. 
 

Now there is no obligation now, as you know, for the 

government of the day to accept all the recommendations of the 

Provincial Auditor or of the current Ombudsman.  But I think it 

behoves any 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

government to ignore the issues raised by those bodies, so what 

we're really doing is fitting in the child advocate into the same 

structure as already exists.  We're not making any special 

provisions, any special powers to the child advocate that the 

Provincial Auditor or the current Ombudsman have. 

 

So we're treating all of these the same.  Were you quoting from 

me there or from somebody else?  I think you were quoting 

from the third party rep, and it's a nice idea but it doesn't fit 

with the way in which the current watchdogs report or have 

reported traditionally, even under your administration, to the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, I know it doesn't fit, and that's what we're 

trying to explore here, Mr. Minister, is there some way -- and I 

asked you this question previously -- is there some way that we 

can put some teeth into this thing?  And are you prepared to, I 

guess, back up in actions what your words are in terms of 

funding?  And that's the point that we're trying to make from 

this side. 

 

And again, Mr. Minister, I noticed you say that it behoves any 

government to listen to people.  And that's the point that I'm 

trying to make here, is that I don't think that your government's 

track record sustains any kind of level of comfort in the people 

that you are actually going to listen to the concerns that are 

there that the people have, or that the advocate might surface.  

And that's the concern that I'm expressing here. 

 

Mr. Minister, the added cost, the added cost is going to be 

$350,000, you're saying. And I'm wondering what caused you 

to go this route of the child advocate being incorporated with 

the existing Ombudsman's office, which by the way, and I 

repeat again, I concur with and I think that's the correct route.  

Why did you choose to do it that way, than going the route of 

setting up a child guardian, for example. 

 

These are the three routes, according to a paper that I have, that 

you could have gone:  the children's guardian route through 

legislation; or the children's Ombudsman as an official 

appointed by the legislature; or the child's advocate, the way 

you've chosen. 

 

I'm just wondering if you could elucidate some of the reasoning 

behind the decision that you made to go this particular route.  

Because there are pros and cons everywhere and I'm just 

wondering whether money was the overriding issue here and 

that you sort of reached a compromise position, as opposed to 

adopting the Cadillac operation, which would have been the 

children's Ombudsman itself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't mind repeating 

these explanations, as I did for the previous member; I would 

be very happy to do that.  But I would say that your question as 

to why we have chosen this route . . . and I remind you that I've 

talked to the chairman of the task force about the route we've 

chosen, and he's expressed his satisfaction with this.  What 

we're trying to do . . . And I heard you support the notion that 

we shouldn't set up another big office.  We're trying to say . . . I 

think I heard you say that; you can clarify it if I didn't. 

 

What we're trying to do is to gain some overhead efficiencies, 

economies. But we wanted to make sure that it was a proactive 

role, so the person would be visible in the community, play an 

educational role, evaluate systems after the fact -- not just 

investigations, but to look at the systems as a whole, to try and 

make recommendations so we can enhance accountability. 

 

I just would remind you that while you may be able to say that 

we should have gone farther here or there, the fact of the matter 

is that, unlike Alberta and Manitoba where the child advocate 

reports to the Minister of Social Services -- which I didn't want 

and I'm sure you wouldn't want it -- we have made sure we 

followed the recommendation of the task force to make sure 

that the child advocate is accountable to the legislature. 

 

Now that's a significant difference than the way our 

neighbouring provinces are doing it.  We think that's a 

significant improvement, and that enhances the independence 

of the office, and it puts it on the same footing as the current 

Ombudsman, the Provincial Auditor, and so on.  So we think 

we're in step with the desire to make sure that that individual 

can feel free to be critical, as necessary, of government 

practices and programs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I apologize for having to make 

you repeat some of the explanations, but I think you know how 

this system works.  Not every member is hanging on your 

every word as the morning progresses, so that's the reality of it, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Explain to me please, precisely what the mechanisms in the 

legislation are for this reporting process.  Does the child's 

advocate report directly to the Assembly or does he report 

through the Ombudsman?  And if so . . . the annual report, is 

that in conjunction with the other annual reports?  Is there a 

specific time?  I think I caught you saying at one point that he 

could, from time to time, table special reports.  But would you, 

precisely please, explain the reporting procedure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Section 15 of the Act ensures that, or 

allows for, and in fact obligates that the child advocate report to 

this Legislative Assembly once a year.  That's a requirement 

under section 15 of the Act. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to probably apologize, as my colleague did, as to some of 

these questions because they're going to be clear-up questions. 

 

I want to draw your attention to . . . under the power.  And I'm 

wondering, do you see the Ombudsman working under the 

Young Offenders Act.  I wonder, how do you see this working 

in conjunction with the Young Offenders Act because there is 

pressure, I 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

believe as you know, for changes in that. 

 

Where would this program come in working in conjunction 

with that, the pressure that's coming from different people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you.  The Young 

Offenders Act as you identified is of course, as you know, 

federal legislation and we're required to provide the services, 

programs and services, under the young offenders legislation. 

 

Because we're providing the programs and services, then the 

child advocate will have the ability and the authority and the 

jurisdiction to do case reviews.  If someone in a young 

offenders facility wanted to contact through, say, letter, the 

child advocate directly, that could be done.  The letter would 

have to get to the child advocate immediately and be unopened.  

So the follow-up casework could be assessed on an individual 

basis.  And also for any young offender programs and services, 

the child advocate has the ability to assess the quality of service 

and to make recommendations. 

 

So the authority is the same there because we're responsible 

provincially for providing those services. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, how do you see the child advocate in the role 

respecting the new Act, Act 30 I believe, in terms of abuse in 

the homes?  How does this interact with that new program, 

which gives me a little bit of uneasiness in some of the powers 

that that Act has.  Could you just outline for us how you see the 

child's advocate working within that Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act focuses on the relationship between 

adults in the situation.  To the extent that government provides 

any services to children in those situations, then there would be 

a role for the advocate.  So there's not a direct relationship in 

any way except if there are some children's services being 

provided.  So there isn't any other connection, as I see it. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  I understand you to say then that if 

there is a problem in a home between the spouses, the child's 

advocate don't have any role in that at all.  But in the Act, Mr. 

Minister, children are mentioned in that Act.  It even suggests 

that they could be taken away, out of that home. 

 

Now if . . . and please don't get me wrong.  I'm certainly not 

critical of the child's advocate Act as it is. But I was wondering 

if maybe you should maybe take a look and develop with the 

child's advocate what their role should be if there is . . . and I'm 

probably manufacturing a case here.  But supposing the two 

spouses were violently disagreeing. Then the children would, in 

my view, would be vulnerable at that case.  Would you maybe 

give that a little consideration, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Let me try and respond this way, and if 

I'm not clear, feel free to come back and I'll try to . . . 

 

The jurisdiction of the child advocate does not extend into 

conflict between parents or conflict between parents and their 

children unless there might be child protection concerns or 

unless government is providing some services on that kind of 

basis. 

 

So we would only have . . . the office would only have 

jurisdiction where there are services being provided. And I 

think your colleague from Moosomin was quite clear that there 

should not be jurisdiction . . . that this position should not have 

jurisdiction between normal spousal or parent-child conflict. 
 

(1230) 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  I probably missed a little of that because I . . . as a 

member mentioned, your voice is a bit like mine, it doesn't 

carry as well as some of the other more robust questioners, 

shall we say. 
 

I want to get a clarification on one more thing here.  The 

Lieutenant Governor . . . you're saying in that Act that the 

Lieutenant Governor can come into this, and I'm wondering, 

does that mean that if you have an unsatisfied client they can 

go to the Lieutenant Governor for redress in that case?  Is that 

what that is saying here? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Chairman, in terms of the Lieutenant 

Governor or through Executive Council, there is the 

appointment of . . . on the recommendation of the legislature.  

Then there is the . . . of course the Executive Council could 

request a special report.  But in your example, any child could 

go to the child advocate if there was a complaint about a 

government service, yes. 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd like to go back to 

the $350,000 budget again for clarification.  I understood you 

to say that was a standalone budget and that none of that comes 

out of the global Social Services budget.  Do I understand that 

right? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's correct.  This is new money to this 

position. 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

subsection .6 says that the child advocate can provide public 

education about his or her role.  And where would the funds 

come for this?  I read that to say that he or she could advertise, 

or put out pamphlets, or otherwise educate the public as to their 

role.  Does that money, that fund, come out of the remaining 

$100,000 of that budget or where do they get the funds for that 

extra role? 
 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, you're correct.  As I was suggesting 

earlier, the child advocate would want to develop, I would 

assume fairly early on, an awareness, public education aspect to 

that position and that office.  And so there would be some 

funds designated for that.  And of course that office can draw 

on other departments and agencies to help provide the 

additional information that's required.  So it's sort 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

of a partnership office with others who are interested in the best 

interests of children and families. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you care to 

identify those other agencies that would share their budget with 

the child advocate or does he or she have to go hat in hand and 

try to fast talk another minister or another department out of 

their budget.  I'm kind of wondering how it works over there if 

someone came to you and said to you, I want part of your 

budget as the Social Services minister.   I'd feel a little uneasy 

if, as the Social Service critic, if you allowed someone else to 

use your budget.  I think I'd like to see that all spent in Social 

Services.  So could you just outline who you think might share 

their money with the child advocate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  As you recall, the 

children's action plan generally . . . and this is a part of the 

children's action plan, this office.  The children's action plan is 

an initiative of some eight departments of 

government -- Health, Education, Justice, Social Services and 

so on.  And so all of those departments are involved in 

communicating and providing some educational supports and 

trying to provide information that hopefully contribute to the 

well-being of children and family. 

 

So it's a matter of complementing the educational role that the 

child advocate is playing between departments, more 

integration between departments of the message of service and 

supports to children and families in cooperation with the 

Children's Advocate role.  We will continue, as we look at the 

next phase of the child action plan, we will continue to be open 

to suggestions and ideas as to enhancing some of the decisions 

that we've made this year and, as you know, we've established a 

children's council made up of individuals across Saskatchewan 

from various geographic, ethnic backgrounds and so on, who 

will continue to advise the eight departments who are involved 

in the children's action plan, with the communities, on how we 

can further enhance services -- and that includes 

communication and education.  So we'll work I think very 

closely with the child advocate.  And I think . . . I hope that 

satisfies your question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Yes, I can feel 

probably a little easier when I realize that you've thought about 

this, and the different departments have agreed with you that 

there could be some. 

 

I've got another couple of questions, Mr. Minister.  Section 17, 

what does this really mean?  To me, I read that the child's 

advocate has the power . . . under the penalties he can say that 

some person was not forthcoming.  And I kind of read it like as 

if that person must answer his questions, even though it would 

be detrimental to that person themselves; in other words, it 

could be incriminating or something like this.  Can you explain 

that just a bit more for me, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, this section is 

intended to prevent people from obstructing the activities of the 

office of the child advocate and just as a protection.  In other 

words, this cannot be used in any other judicial areas.  I might 

add that this section has never been used, as of this point, by 

the Ombudsman in that there has been the cooperation that's 

been required and we would anticipate that that would be the 

case.  This is a safeguard. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, then 

the penalty says it could be $500 or an imprisonment.  Then if 

it's not being used, I'm wondering why it's in there. 

 

The other question . . . I think it begs the question, who is the 

judge, who is the person that says that this person -- and I know 

we're just picking a case out of the air -- is actually guilty?  

Who is the person that says that person is guilty?  And the other 

question you might answer is: who is the one that assesses the 

penalty?  Who does that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the provision is 

there -- as I meant to say -- as a safeguard only, and if the 

advocate is not getting the cooperation that he or she desires or 

needs, then that complaint, concern, could be lodged with the 

department, with myself, and ultimately through the courts. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  

I've taken a little more time than I was going to at this time so 

I'm going to allow some of my colleagues in and we'll be back 

together again on another day and I can thank you very much 

because some of the things that I was concerned about as we 

went along had been cleared up fairly well.  Thank you so 

much.  Thank you, officials. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Chairman. On behalf of the third party, 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to welcome your advisers today and 

reiterate what the member for Rosthern said, that the Children's 

Advocate is, as I stated in my speech before, a very laudable 

objective and I would like to determine today in this 

clause-by-clause debate whether we're going to achieve what 

the government appears to be setting out to achieve. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want you to explain to me the purpose behind 

restricting the powers of the child advocate to intervention in 

situations where the child must be receiving services from the 

government or an agency of the Crown. 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you to the member for the 

question.  We appreciate your support for the objective and 

your questions as to why did we restrict.  I might add that 

whereas in Manitoba and Alberta the scope is much narrower, 

confined to the child welfare system as a whole, we have 

expanded the scope to include any government services. 

 

And we believe, in light of the questions that some of the 

members were asking from the official opposition about just 

sort of what are the powers?  Can they extend into 

relationships -- into families between 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 1994 

parents and children with regard to normal parent-child 

conflict -- we believe that it goes farther than Manitoba and 

Alberta.  It's sort of a compromise between them and what 

you're suggesting, and we want to learn from the experience 

and provide some balance here, in scope.  And we will be very 

open to any suggestions from that office as to whether or not 

the scope could be expanded or, in fact, might be too broad. 

 

I'm not sure, personally, why Manitoba and Alberta have 

restricted theirs, but we want to go a little broader than they 

are, and I hope you can appreciate that expanding it from their 

experience is a step at least in the right direction. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  In my speech I 

raised an example of a young person who was subjected to 

what I consider, and certainly what his parents considered, an 

unacceptable procedure by the police.  In that incident it was 

not an issue of inter-family conflict.  And I can understand your 

concerns there, and the concerns of the opposition. 

 

I question why you would not think it is important for the 

advocate to be able to investigate the procedures followed by 

police in dealing with children, regardless of whether they were 

receiving services from the Crown.  Doesn't it in fact bestow 

special protection to children who are receiving care from 

Social Services, and doesn't every child have the same 

constitutional right to government protection? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I would agree with you.  I think 

every child has the right to do that.  Your example with regard 

to the police . . . The Police Act, 1990, provides for a public 

complaints investigator, who is a civilian, and that is the 

appropriate mechanism to deal with complaints with regard to 

the police. 

 

So I think that these Acts have to complement each other and 

overall we have to make sure that there is the support that's 

required.  This is an expanded scope from Manitoba and 

Alberta, and we believe that The Police Act provides some 

opportunity to accomplish what you're . . . the safeguards 

you're referring to. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, one further question I'd have 

on that, in the same avenue, is in terms of services delivered to 

children outside of government services, whether they be 

NGOs or other organizations that deliver services to children.  

Why would they not be covered under the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I think there are some cases in 

which the concern you raised can be addressed.  For example, 

where government is funding a non-government organization to 

provide services to children, that is through public funds, then 

the child advocate would have the jurisdiction as per the 

contract with that agency in terms of the contract between the 

department and the agency to investigate those services -- as 

the Ombudsman did, say, with Bosco Homes. 

 

So I hope that would maybe give you a comfort level that it 

could be beyond just the government services using the public 

funds, and the contract gives that opportunity to expand it to 

that wider scope that you're referring to. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

this is covered in that clause of the legislation, that NGOs, for 

instance, with government funding would be covered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's correct.  Where we have a specific 

contract with an NGO using public funds to provide services to 

children, yes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I think there should be some 

involvement as well in the removal or suspension provisions by 

other parties.  Is that something you are willing to consider?  

There is a specific reference in the Bill to the salary of the 

Children's Advocate being fixed by the government and of 

course expenses and related items as well.  Can you explain 

why you have chosen not to provide the Assembly with the 

proposed budget so that we can see how much you are paying, 

what you are spending, and whether this is up to what is 

recommended by the task force? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, the salary level has not been firmly 

established and I would be very happy to consult with you on 

your views regarding a specific number as a general range, but 

a specific number.  And the expenses would be sort of similar I 

think to normal office expenses of the other so-called watchdog 

agencies.  And with regard to removal of the person, it would 

be the same procedure that's in place now for say, the 

Ombudsman, but would require a resolution of the Assembly 

here.  Does that answer your question? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I think so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Okay. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, it's somewhat unrealistic, I 

think, for you to bring forward a Bill which establishes 

something as important as the child advocate, but not provide 

any details of the model; what structure accompanies the whole 

proposal.  Because the task force really did suggest a specific 

model.  And I'm wondering why the legislation does not have a 

model outlined. 

 

My role as a member elected to the Liberal opposition is to 

analyse and criticize and not necessarily from a negative 

viewpoint, because that is what criticism has come to mean in 

the Assembly, but to provide some critical analysis in the true 

sense of the term. 

 

Now I wonder just how the government expects opposition to 

analyse and offer constructive criticism of the child advocate if 

we don't know what your legislation is going to deliver, what it 

will do, and all those things left to our imagination. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I would 



March 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

hope that you would at least acknowledge that it has some 

elements of a model.  I've tried to outline as best I could this 

morning what elements it does have to a model. 

 

Now I would say that all aspects of the model aren't nailed 

down; this is evolving.  The person in the position will have 

some ideas about how to approach the position.  It's a five-year 

appointment.  It will be somewhat developmental. 

 

But we've given the basics.  It'll be independent.  The person 

will be hired by this Assembly through a public competition.  

We've indicated the budget, the staffing component.  I tried to 

articulate a partnership between the -- as I see it, as we see 

it -- between the child advocate, government departments, the 

communities.  The child advocate will be housed in the 

Ombudsman but proactive, highly visible in the community. 

 

I think that, as I said, I'll go back to my comment that in my 

discussions with the chairman of the task force, he is pleased 

with what we're doing.  So that's a pretty good endorsement, I 

think, of what we're doing.  I just have to, I guess, accept that if 

he's happy then this is satisfactory at this point. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well I would say it's a very good start, Mr. 

Minister.  I look at the task force and I see a group that was 

able to articulate very clearly what it was they recommended, 

what it would do, and how much it would cost, and I agree for 

the most part with what they were speaking of.  And I look at 

other provincial models and I compare them to the task force 

report.  And I see that the proposal has a good structure, a good 

community base, and it was much more detailed in the task 

force in terms of the involvement of a volunteer aspect of what 

they called the commission, and a good network of community 

advocates involved in assisting with the advocate department. 

 

They prepared a budget and they included it in their report, but 

the legislation as presented . . . your suggested budget is 

considerably lower, and I understand we're in difficult times.  

So is part of the reason it has been structured in the way it has 

because of budget limitations?  I'm not exactly sure why it was 

cut down from the recommendation that the task force 

recommended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say that in terms of the 

fundamental provisions, the fundamental recommendation of 

the task force -- and I've discussed these with the chairman of 

the task force -- we preserved the independent voice which is 

different than our neighbouring provinces.  Now that is very 

important; that is very important to the task force.  I talked to 

another task force member who is very happy about that.  We 

want the role to be proactive in the community with regard to 

prevention, and education, and trying to pull together the 

services where possible. 

 

We want the balance between providing direct 

services -- which is what a lot of the provisions of the child 

action plan do -- provide direct services to the families and 

children, relative to the monitoring supportive role.  I mean you 

can always put more money into direct services, you could 

always sort of set a greater target on that budget.  We're trying 

to balance in a very tight financial situation.  We're trying to 

preserve the provisions that they asked for and start with a 

model that we believe is workable and will, as I said . . . we 

will be open to the recommendations of that individual on an 

ongoing basis in terms of whether or not we're hamstringing the 

operation in any way. 

 

We believe that we've taken the responsible, balanced approach 

to housing a person with the Ombudsman, to gain some 

efficiencies there, but to make sure it's an independent role, and 

a proactive role, and has the same legislative accountability as 

the Ombudsman. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


