




















































Hansard: April 12, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1485 

 April 12, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

government to change the regulations requiring the 

replacement of underground storage tanks. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

honoured today to, through you, introduce to the Legislative 

Assembly some special guests who are with us today seated in 

your gallery.  We have with us Commander Neil Sorsdahl, 

commanding officer of H.M.C.S. (Her Majesty's Canadian 

Ship) Saskatchewan, as well as Commander Paul Weber, 

commanding officer of H.M.C.S. Queen Naval Reserve in 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1963 H.M.C.S. Saskatchewan, a destroyer 

escort of the MacKenzie class, was commissioned and fulfilled 

an anti-submarine role in the Canadian fleet and in recent years 

was a training vessel for naval officers.  In March 1994, this 

ship was retired from service. 

 

Commander Neil Sorsdahl is a native of Saskatchewan -- I 

believe from Moose Jaw originally -- and he commanded the 

H.M.C.S. Saskatchewan from July 1992 until last month.  He 

has returned to Saskatchewan to present "The Ship's Bell", a 

painting of the ship and her crest, which was done this 

morning, to Lieutenant Governor Sylvia Fedoruk, and the 

Premier, at a brief ceremony in the Legislative Library.  And I 

am pleased to say in the House, Mr. Speaker, that "The Bell" 

will be prominently displayed here in the Legislative Assembly 

as part of the history of H.M.C.S. Saskatchewan and a tribute 

to the service that Saskatchewan sailors have served in our 

navy. 

 

I just want to take the time very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to point 

out that Saskatchewan has played a very significant role in the 

military armed forces in Canada, and I found it very interesting 

when the commander pointed out to us this morning that, in the 

Second World War, 40 per cent of the sailors in the Canadian 

navy were from the prairie provinces. 

 

Now I don't think it was because they were trying to escape the 

drought, I think it was because of the kind of dedicated service 

that people from the prairies believe they should pay in the 

service of Canada. 

 

So I would like to ask members of the House, Mr.  

Speaker, to join me in welcoming Commander Sorsdahl to this 

Legislative Assembly and to Saskatchewan again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And while I'm on my feet, Mr. 

Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to introduce 

to you and through you to the members of the Assembly seven 

visitors from South Africa, who are also seated in your gallery 

and they are: Ms. Dawn Joseph, Mr. Dumisani Dlamine, Mr. 

Spector Mtolo, Mr. Max Makhubalo, Mrs. Markho Njobe, Mr. 

Kenneth Mathews, and Dr. Chhimenlal Lalla. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 

recently hosted the ANC (African National Congress) 

candidate for the premier of the Orange Free State in South 

Africa, Mr. Patrick Lekota. 

 

In the continuing effort to provide a useful example of 

government in action, Saskatchewan is hosting these eight 

South African civil servants to be a part of a familiarization 

program called the public service policy project established in 

South Africa about a year ago. 

 

The program participants have been identified by the ANC as 

candidates for senior management positions within the civil 

service at either the national or the provincial level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is very pleased to welcome the 

South African delegation as our guests and honoured to have 

been chosen as one of the participating provinces in this 

program.  I believe that this province and the Government of 

Saskatchewan can provide our South African guests with a 

unique perspective and insight into the workings of our 

government. 

 

And I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, again like to ask the 

members of the Assembly to join me in extending a warm 

welcome to our guests who are here from South Africa. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to extend 

my welcome as well on behalf of the Liberal caucus to 

Commander Sorsdahl and Commander Weber.  I had a most 

enjoyable evening on Saturday night at the mess dinner in 

celebration of the paying-off of the Saskatchewan.  And I'd 

ask the members of the Assembly to join me again in 

welcoming them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I also want to draw the attention 

of the Chamber to another member of the armed forces reserve, 

Malcolm French, who's with our distinguished visitors.  Please 

stand to be recognized. 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was going to add 

my welcome to Commander Sorsdahl and Commander Weber 

and point out that Acting Sub-Lieutenant Malcolm French is in 

your gallery.  Malcolm lived in Esterhazy in the mid-'80s and I 

got to know him quite well, and I wish all members would 

welcome Malcolm and the rest of the group to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Nipawin Trade Fair and Show 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, in Nipawin this weekend, the 

Nipawin Lions Club is sponsoring the 11th annual trade fair 

and show.  This is one that ought not to be missed.  For 

openers, there are over 100 exhibitors including a cheetah, and 

I plan to be racing the cheetah on Saturday and I'm going to 

give it a head start. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the overall theme of this show is diversification.  

On Friday and Saturday there will be seminars held on a 

number of agri-food industries and business.  These seminars 

are going to be conducted by private entrepreneurs, by experts 

from the federal and provincial governments, and by farmers. 

 

There are many subjects, from ostrich production to wild boar 

production, organic food production, maple syrup production, 

raising chinchilla and bisons.  There's really something for 

everybody.  As well, there are over 100 exhibitors displaying 

their wares and produce as I've already mentioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Lions Club will be collecting old eye glasses 

for the Lion's eye bank depot.  If for no other reason, this is a 

reason worthy enough to attend. 

 

This kind of a show put on by the people of Nipawin for the 

people of the north-east part of the province has been very 

successful now for 10 years.  And I expect it will be again this 

year.  And it's evidence that people in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan are vibrant, progressive, and active. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- My question today is to the Minister of 

Labour.  Minister, your new anti-business, anti-job-creation 

labour legislation is going to drive more employers and more 

jobs out of this province at a time when our economy is already 

in a disastrous downward spiral.  There are so many things 

wrong with this legislation, I hardly know where to begin. 

 

Let's start with the provisions to restrict the contracting out of 

services by the provincial government, 

municipal governments, universities, health boards, and school 

boards.  First you download on the other levels of government, 

and then you restrict their ability to reduce their costs.  This can 

only result in higher taxes, more job losses in municipalities, 

health boards, and school boards. 

 

Mr. Minister, why are you interfering in the autonomy of our 

local governments?  How much is this interference going to 

cost the local taxpayers, and how many more jobs will be lost 

as a result of this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member for Maple Creek will be relieved to know that we're 

committing none of the sins which gave him such concern.  We 

are not prohibiting governments from contracting out.  Whether 

that is good or bad is not a matter that would be decided in this 

legislation. 

 

The legislation does provide that where the employees of a 

place of work have decided that they want to be a part of a 

union, that should be respected, and that the rights should 

follow the sale of the business or the contracting out. 

 

Having said that, there is no prohibition against any level of 

government contracting out.  So the member's mind may rest at 

ease. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, one 

of the reasons the NDP (New Democratic Party) gave for its 

health district boards was to let the local boards have the 

opportunity to make its own spending decisions.  Now you are 

severely restricting that opportunity by allowing your 

hand-picked political board dictate which services can and 

cannot be contracted out. 

 

Mr. Minister, the NDP is already wasting hundreds of 

thousands of dollars paying Garf Stevenson $500 a day to delay 

the health board elections; now you're going to force local 

boards to spend thousands more unnecessarily by not allowing 

them to contract out services.  And not one cent of this money 

is going to the actual provision for health care services. 

 

Mr Minister, why is it necessary to restrict health boards and 

other local government bodies in this manner?  Why can't you 

just let them make their own decisions in this process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The kindest 

thing I can say about the member from Maple Creek is that he's 

reading his question without thinking about it and without 

listening to the answer.  In fact probably a more accurate 

interpretation of the member's conduct is that it is an intentional 

campaign of misrepresentation to divide and conquer people. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

The members did that when they were in government and 

they're doing that in opposition.  It didn't work in government, 

they got kicked out of government, and they're in the process of 

being kicked out of opposition for the same tactics.  All I can 

say to the members opposite is, at some point in the future you 

may want to give some thought to your tactics.  They didn't 

work in government, they're not working in opposition, and I'm 

not quite sure where you think they're going to work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is also 

to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, there are 12,000 fewer 

jobs in this province than when your government took office in 

'91.  That's an undisputed fact.  There are 25,000 more people 

on welfare since your government took office.  That's an 

undisputed fact.  The taxes are up; utility rates are up.  Those 

are all undisputed facts, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now the question is: why would you want to put a death grip 

on businesses in this province by bringing in two labour Bills, 

Mr. Minister, which are only going to make the situation 

worse? 

 

Mr. Minister, the number one priority, as your Minister of 

Finance stated in her budget speech, was to start employing 

people in this province.  Mr. Minister, you haven't listened to 

the people affected by this legislation.  When are you going to 

start listening, and when will you pull these two Bills to make 

sure that Saskatchewan people can be employed and get off the 

welfare rolls?  When are going to do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, all of the facts given by 

the Leader of the Opposition are in dispute.  Mr. Speaker, when 

the Disraeli government in 1844 abolished child labour, the 

Conservatives said, the sky is going to fall in.  When the 

Douglas government brought in medicare in 1962, the 

Conservatives said the sky is going to fall in.  Last year when 

we brought in occupational health and safety and workers' 

compensation, the Conservatives said the sky is going to fall in.  

Now that we're bringing in the trade union legislation, you said 

the sky is going to fall in. 

 

You were wrong the first time, you're wrong the second time, 

you're wrong the third time, and you're going to be wrong the 

fourth time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister can talk all the 

ancient history he wants in here.  The undisputed facts are, sir, 

that welfare rolls are up; jobs are down; people are leaving this 

province, Mr. Minister.  Why don't you settle the situation 

today?  You show us one  place in this legislation in either Bill 

where there is going to be an increase in employment in this 

province, Mr. Minister.  Show me one area where your 

legislation is going to create jobs, where your legislation is 

going to make Saskatchewan business more competitive with 

the people around them.  Can you do that, Mr. Minister?  Show 

us one place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't 

know whether the members of the Conservative caucus are 

going to make a seat for Chicken Little or not.  She certainly 

belongs in that caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take the position that progressive labour laws 

are not the end of civilization.  Indeed they are good for this 

province and it's an essential part of economic restructuring.  

These labour laws provide a framework within which business 

and labour may work together for what at the end of the day is 

a common goal. 

 

I know members opposite have an interest in dividing and 

conquering.  You may have a narrow political interest in doing 

that, but that is not in the best interests of the public of 

Saskatchewan.  This legislation is. It provides a framework 

within which they may work together.  And I suggest members 

opposite cease the tactics that have brought them to near ruin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, as you put this legislation 

together I'm sure that your department did some analysis of its 

effect on jobs in this province.  People are telling this 

opposition that businesses will be lost, that families will leave, 

and that workers in this province will be forced onto UI 

(Unemployment Insurance) and the welfare rolls. 

 

Mr. Minister, prove us wrong.  Table the analysis that your 

department did that says that that will not be the case.  Do it, 

sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'll be more than happy to do that.  

Unlike members opposite, the government deals in facts and 

deals in hard analysis.  We have done an analysis . . . we've had 

an analysis done by Price Waterhouse which suggests there is 

virtually no cost to this legislation.  I'll table that. 

 

And then I will expect the Leader of the Opposition to table his 

study which suggests that civilization is going to grind to a 

dead halt the day this is passed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Utility Rate Increases 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Madam Minister, yesterday your government issued annual 

reports for SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and SaskPower.  These 

reports confirm what we have known for a long time -- that you 

are raising utility rates, taking the massive profits that they 

generate and transferring them into general revenue.  That's 

called 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

taxation, Madam Minister, and so your dramatic pledge of no 

new taxes rings pretty hollow under those kinds of promises 

that you've made.  On average, Saskatchewan residents are 

going to pay another $130 a year more just for their utilities. 

 

Madam Minister, given that fact, that it is clearly a tax and it's 

demonstrated that it's clearly a tax, would you not agree that 

this legislature and the Saskatchewan public should have the 

right to provide a reason for grievance before supply for those 

taxes that you raised in utility rates?  Would you please answer 

that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting 

to have the opposition keep harping on the increase in taxes 

because of utility rates. 

 

I want to ask the question to the members opposite -- maybe 

some day they'll answer this question -- as when they're going 

to . . . why do they not consider taxes . . . when other provinces 

that have private utilities raise their rates, why are those not 

taxes?  Why are the only ones taxes when the public utilities 

raise them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My question is to the Minister of Finance, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Provincial Auditor has demonstrated that your 

government is moving more and more of your financial activity 

to the Crown sector.  Every sector that they move from here in 

the Legislative Assembly to the Crown sector allows less and 

less public scrutiny of those monies.  In fact, nearly half of the 

government's total revenues and expenditures are conducted 

through SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SaskPower, and SGI, and your 

family of Crown corporations.  It's not a coincidence that the 

last round of tax increases have come from the utilities. 

 

And, Madam Minister, my question to you is this -- now is the 

time to act -- will you do as the auditor has recommended and 

bring all government revenues and expenditures before this 

Assembly so that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

and the public can debate how and why tax dollars are being 

spent?  Will you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be pleased to 

answer that question.  And I do say again, you have to have a 

sense of humour when you hear the Conservative Party talking 

about openness and accountability in government.  But I do 

have a sense of humour. 

 

I'm not sure if the opposition read the same auditor's report that 

I did or that the press did.  I notice the press said: 

 

 Government accountability has come a long 

way in the last couple of years . . . 

 

The qualification the auditor has is on timing, and he is quite 

explicit about it.  He says: 

 

 "As provincial auditor, I always think that they're moving too 

slowly," . . . 

 

And that's his job.  His job is to edge us on more quickly. 

 

Another part of the story says: 

 

 The report paints a largely positive view of government 

efforts to clean up its financial reporting . . . 

 

So I think first of all, the context is, the auditor's comments 

about our practices were essentially positive.  He dealt with the 

issue of the Crowns.  Quite frankly, we had him at a meeting 

yesterday, and it's not clear to us that he's talking about the 

Crowns coming through this legislature in estimates the way a 

line department would. 

 

But I'll make this one commitment:  what we do share with the 

auditor is the commitment to ongoing reform, the commitment 

to continue our openness and accountability in government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Madam Minister, it seems 

you only take part of the auditor's recommendations, and those 

that are politically expedient to you and to your government.  

When he recommended you take a one-time write-off for 

certain Crowns, you did that.  You acted immediately to do 

that.  When he recommended changing accounting procedures, 

you immediately did that as well.  There was no concern about 

the bad perception of debt increases, Madam Minister, at that 

time and that is a fact, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, the auditor has recommended that Crown 

Investments Corporation should ensure that government's 

objectives for Crown corporations are clearly defined and 

presented before the Assembly for scrutiny.  Will you do that, 

Madam Minister?  Will you provide us with details about 

budgets in the Crown corporations and let us talk about them in 

this Assembly so that we can review at least 45 per cent of the 

government's expenditures and revenues in this fiscal year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, a couple of points.  

First of all, we have to remember the auditor is talking about 

the year 1992.  He's talking about 1992.  This is what he said 

about 1992, by the way -- in 1992, the government took an 

important step forward by preparing summary financial 

statements.  The statements provided for the first time in 

Saskatchewan's history, a complete accounting of the finances 

of the government. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

Now what I would say to the member opposite is some of the 

things that he says about openness in the Crowns as being 

problems in 1992, we've already fixed.  For example, when the 

members opposite were in power, it was possible and it 

occurred, that a subsidiary of a Crown corporation could be 

created.  It could lose taxpayers' dollars and the taxpayers didn't 

even have to be aware that that subsidiary existed. 

 

The auditor mentions that in his 1992 report.  In 1993, this 

government came in with The Crown Corporations Act, which 

changed that practice so that from now on it would be illegal 

for any government to act the way the members opposite have 

acted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Tax Rates 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions as 

well are for the Minister of Finance today. 

 

I received a call from a Saskatchewan taxpayer, Madam 

Minister, who was in the process of filing his annual tax return.  

And this gentleman did a comparison to see how much tax he 

would have paid in Alberta on exactly the same income. 

 

To his shock, he found that his taxes would have been $3,000 

lower than he will have to pay in Saskatchewan.  He believes 

that he would have more money in his pocket even after paying 

health care premiums and car insurance premiums and so forth, 

particularly in view of the fact that there's no provincial sales 

tax there. 

 

Madam Minister, this taxpayer wants to know from you 

whether your department has examined the Saskatchewan 

taxation system to make the rates, the tax rates, more 

competitive.  And can you tell us, please, what conclusions 

you've drawn. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would say to the 

member opposite that once again she's doing what the Liberal 

Party does in this legislature -- she's trying to have it both 

ways. 

 

She wants Saskatchewan people to have Alberta tax rates.  

Never mind the fact that they'll be paying, the average family 

will be paying, about $800 more a year in health care 

premiums; never mind they'll be paying to send their children 

to kindergarten.  But she wants competitive tax rates with 

Alberta, yet she, I'm sure, wants the quality of life that we have 

here.  Is she talking about massive cuts in education or health 

care? 

 

And she said in her last election in 1991, she was absolutely 

committed to balancing the budget of the province.  It's time 

the Liberal Party was accountable.  They can't have Alberta tax 

rates, Saskatchewan quality of life, and balance the books.  

They too have to choose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, there's one party that likes to have it both ways, and 

it's your own.  Your own paper, Madam Minister, in 1991 on 

tax fairness called utility rates a tax.  Now in government you 

have exactly the opposite point of view. 

 

On April 1, 1994, the deficit reduction surtax was jumping to 

10 per cent, and this is a major blow to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan.  For an average income earner making $30,000 

a year, Madam Minister, the government now collects $261 in 

deficit reduction surtax alone. 

 

It's interesting to note that the amount collected from this tax 

doesn't even appear as a distinct item in your budget, nor is 

there any obligation on your part at all in legislation to direct 

that money to deficit reduction. 

 

Madam Minister, what guarantee do the people of this province 

have that all of the money collected from the surtax will be 

applied directly to the deficit this year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, first of all I want to clarify one point.  The deficit 

surtax did not go up.  In 1992 it was a 10 per cent tax but 

because it came in July, it was only in for half a year -- the 

federal government requires you to put it on the form as 5 per 

cent.  So it was always a 10 per cent tax. 

 

I would add at the other end, I would add at the other end that 

the child tax reduction which assists low-income families also 

went up -- went up 50 per cent in the first year, '92, and went 

up the full amount in the second year, from $200 to $250 a 

year.  Okay, so I'd like to make that point. 

 

Now where did the money go?  Where has the member been?  

The deficit in this province has gone from $842 million to $294 

million, and it's going down to $189 million.  Where has the 

member been?  That's where the deficit surtax money has gone, 

to reduce the deficit.  Saskatchewan now has the lowest per 

capita deficit of any province in Canada and it's because we've 

been using this money for that purpose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, the problem is absolutely nobody trusts you in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  You have increased and allowed 

rate increases on every single Saskatchewan utility that exists 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Will the members please 

come to order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, you have allowed increases in every single 

Saskatchewan utility, multiple rate hikes in some of the cases 

of the Crowns.  The Provincial Auditor's report shows that the 

Crowns made $285.5 million profit in 1993, but the amount of 

monies that have 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

been applied to the deficit was only $60 million, and that leaves 

$180 million in retained earnings with absolutely no 

explanation from your government as to how these profits are 

earmarked or why further increases are needed. 

 

Madam Minister, how could your government go to the citizens 

of our province over and over again, families and business, and 

yes, seniors and others, with its hand out for more money when 

you have no clear-cut commitment to apply these extra 

revenues directly to reducing the debt of the Crowns and the 

debt of the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, in terms of 

who trusts us in the province, the auditor trusts us.  The auditor 

said we have gone from having among the weakest financial 

statements in Canada to among the strongest.  So we've been 

open and accountable. 

 

Again I'd like to correct the member's facts.  Last year the 

money that went from the Crowns across to the government 

was $4.8 million -- a pittance.  She asked, where did the money 

go from the rate increases?  Again I ask, where has the member 

been?  It went to all of the bad deals that we inherited from the 

members opposite, write-offs in SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation), STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company), NewGrade, the other upgrader.  It 

went to Meadow Lake.  It went to finance and keep afloat the 

megaprojects which we inherited from the members opposite. 

 

Again the member has to answer some questions herself.  What 

would she do?  Would she default on all those commitments?  

If not, where would she find the money?  We have found the 

money from the Crowns.  Where would she find the money?  

You have one of two choices: default and not meet your 

commitments, or pay for the deals that we inherited. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, absolutely any kind of governing would have been an 

improvement over the ineptitude of the previous 

administration.  You made a conscious decision to add to the 

burden of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the government members 

please come to order. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You have made 

a conscious decision to add to the burden of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers by having a deficit tax with no legislation in place to 

guarantee that it would go to the deficit -- no guarantee -- and 

that is fact. 

 

You increased utility rates on the pretence that the Crowns 

have large debts, but you have made no commitment to direct 

every dime of those revenues toward those debts.  And you 

chose, Madam Minister, you chose to borrow money you didn't 

have to borrow to finance the deficit because you failed to put 

these profits to work by paying larger dividends from the 

Crowns. 

 

Will you please explain your logic to the people of 

Saskatchewan before you ask them for one more dime, which 

seems to be the case every two or three months when it comes 

to utilities in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, it's hard to understand 

part of what the member's saying here, but let me take a stab.  

I'm not sure why the people of Saskatchewan would require 

legislation showing them that the deficit surtax is going to the 

deficit, when (a) they can look at the books if they want to and 

see that's where they're going; or more important, they can look 

in their newspapers and say the deficit has gone from 842 

million down to 294 million.  Where did that money come 

from?  I bet it came from the deficit surtax.  How else can you 

reduce the deficit? 

 

I would also say to the member opposite, she has to answer 

some questions herself.  It's fine to say, now those 

megaprojects, let's forget about them; we'll not talk about the 

megaprojects, we'll not talk about the fact that each and every 

year they suck away at tax dollars.  They're there, we didn't 

create them; the members opposite did.  And again she has to 

make choices.  Is she going to default on the deals or is she 

going to pay the required money to stabilize them, to take the 

time to stabilize them? 

 

This government, unlike the Liberal one in Ottawa, has a 

long-term plan for the finances of this province; and we're 

making progress and we can show it to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Payment for Executive Council Contract 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question for the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government has 

roundly criticized the former administration having Crown 

corporations and departments pay for services that cabinet 

ministers and the Executive Council received.  And that's 

rightly so. 

 

However the Provincial Auditor has discovered that you have 

not learned from our mistakes.  He reports that the Crown 

Investments Corporation paid $82,000 for a consulting contract 

but the Executive Council received the services.  That's your 

office, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, very simply, what was the contract for; who 

received the contract; and why was it not paid out of your 

office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be most 

pleased to answer that question, and I think the "oops" is going 

to be on that side of the House.  This particular item, no. .72 in 

the auditor's report, chapter 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

8, was a contract signed by the previous administration before 

we took office. 

 

This particular contract was terminated by this government two 

weeks after taking office, November 14, 1991.  Our 

commitment to open and honest government started very early 

in our term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a 

Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act be now 

introduced and now read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- To ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to revert to statements 

by members. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Well if members would like to 

take a recess for five minutes so they can get this, I think we 

can arrange for that, but you set the rules and I wish you would 

abide by the rules. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In regard to no. 56, I hereby table a 

response. 

 

The Speaker: -- The answer for . . . Will the members please 

come to order.  The answer for question 56 has been tabled. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Protection of Wildlife 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today 

with great pleasure to deal with the motion before the 

Assembly which I will move at the conclusion of my remarks, 

which reads: 

 

 That this Assembly support the work of the Minister of 

Environment and Resource Management, his department, and 

conservation organizations in their efforts to achieve the 

goals of the World Wildlife Fund's action plan for 

endangered spaces and go on record during National Wildlife 

Week as being in favour of protecting our province's natural 

heritage. 

Mr. Speaker, in a span of 150 years we have seen the face of 

southern Saskatchewan go from one of the most productive and 

diverse ecosystems in the world to one of the most modified 

landscapes in North America. 

 

If we go back 150 years to the fur trade days we saw a massive 

assault on our fur-bearing animals, and species like the beaver 

were eliminated from much of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Market hunting brought the 60 million bison in North America 

to the brink of extinction with farmers protecting a handful of 

remnant animals which they were able to corral and capture, 

and thus we still have the plains bison with us. 

 

The passenger pigeon darkened the skies with their large 

flocks.  The last passenger pigeon died in a Cincinnati zoo in 

1914.  And many other species such as the whooping crane 

were brought to the brink of extinction, and others like the 

plains grizzly and buffalo wolf were in fact exterminated. 

 

In 1887 people of the day recognized the importance of 

southern Saskatchewan for wildlife and they created the Last 

Mountain Lake migratory bird sanctuary, the first of its kind in 

North America.  And to this day this area is important to 

wildlife. 

 

Our forefathers in 1916 brought in the Migratory Birds 

Convention Act in conjunction with the Canadian, U.S. (United 

States), and Mexican governments.  And this brought an end to 

the market hunting and provided protection for migratory birds, 

many of which had been reduced to remnant populations.  It 

was certainly a landmark achievement in our conservation 

history here. 

 

Species continued to decline. In 1922 the last whooping crane 

nest in Saskatchewan was located in the Kindersley-Kerrobert 

area.  In 1941 the whooping crane population reached an 

all-time low of 21 birds, and, however, through decades of 

work and conservation and public support, we now have 270 

whooping cranes in the world. 

 

In 1929 hunters and sportsmen got together to form the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation with their main interest in 

preserving species, putting on seasons and bag limits because 

they too realized that our wildlife could not sustain unlimited 

hunting. 

 

Ducks Unlimited was formed in 1937 in response to the 

drought which hit North America, and with the production of 

wetlands, this was the first real habitat conservation in North 

America. 

 

The Saskatchewan Natural History Society, consisting of 

naturalists, outdoorsmen, formed in the early 1940s.  And they 

focused on all species of life including non-game and plants. 

 

At the same time unfortunately the governments of the day 

decided to cancel thousands of acres of migratory bird 

sanctuaries throughout different parts of 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

Saskatchewan, including Redberry Lake, Old Wives Lake and 

other areas.  As we look back today it would have been great if 

these areas could have been maintained. 

 

By the mid-1950s our duck population had reached a high of 20 

million birds returning to Saskatchewan in the spring.  Our 

white-tailed deer population peaked around 1960 at 500,000 

animals. 

 

However the 1960s and '70s saw an assault on our remaining 

wildlife habitat unmatched prior to that time.  For an example, 

in the five-year period from 1976 to '81, we lost 2 million acres 

of habitat, which works out to over a thousand acres a day or 

44 acres an hour, day and night.  And as a result, many of the 

species were on the decline. 

 

Knowing this, various groups as well as government focused 

on habitat protection programs.  The wildlife development fund 

was created at the request of the Wildlife Federation.  It meant 

that a portion of hunters' licence fees were used by government 

to purchase prime habitat.  And as a result of this program, first 

implemented in 1970, we now have a 135,000 acres of land 

protected throughout the province through the wildlife 

development fund. 

 

The Saskatchewan habitat program, Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation habitat programs, have been equally successful.  

The federation holds title to 67,000 acres of prime habitat, and 

through cooperation with landowners, recognizing landowners 

who protect habitat on their private land and through 

gentlemen's agreements, another 340,000 acres are temporarily 

secured, as the landowners do appreciate the wildlife as well. 

 

Ducks Unlimited has secured hundreds of thousands of acres of 

water areas as well as important upland nesting cover 

surrounding these wetlands.  So their achievements are 

commendable. 

 

In 1980 the various NGOs (non-governmental organizations) 

along with government entered an agreement to form the 

heritage marsh program to protect significant wetlands in the 

province such as Foam Lake, Ponass Lake, and Chaplin Lake.  

These areas are not only important to waterfowl but endangered 

species such as piping plovers and whooping cranes as well. 

 

(1415) 

 

In 1986 Saskatchewan played a very key role in the North 

American waterfowl management plan, which was an 11th 

hour effort to reverse the continual decline of our migratory 

waterfowl between the U.S. and Canada, and Saskatchewan, as 

I mentioned, played a key role.  In fact the program was 

launched right here in Saskatchewan.  Billions of dollars are 

being spent through the North American waterfowl plan 

throughout North America over the next 10 to 15 years. 

 

One of the key programs implemented by the 

previous government which we certainly want to recognize is 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, which is basically 

preventing the sale or breaking and clearing of Crown land 

used for grazing.  Grazing can continue on these lands and 

wildlife can coexist with the grazing as long as a habitat is 

there.  This administration has added another million or so 

acres to the Act and we now have three and a half million acres 

protected under this program, and the nice thing about it, it did 

not cost taxpayers any money. 

 

As we come to the 1990s, Mr. Speaker, instead of 20 million 

ducks returning to the province each year, we have between 

three and four million -- an 80 per cent decline.  Our 

white-tailed deer population is about half of what it was 30 

years ago.  Many experts list as many as 20 per cent of our 

native plants as rare and endangered and disappearing at an 

ever-increasing rate. 

 

Our wetlands, very important to wildlife.  In Saskatchewan, 

we've lost over 40 per cent . . . close to 50 per cent of our 

original wetlands have been lost through drainage and filling.  

Our Grasslands and Aspen Parkland ecoregions in the province, 

we've lost 80 per cent -- 20 per cent remains. 

 

In a nutshell, Saskatchewan and the prairie provinces are home 

to more rare and endangered species in Canada than any other 

region of the country, which is not a very proud fact. 

 

Conservation efforts were originally focused on specific 

species such as the whooping crane.  Now as we become more 

informed ourselves, we realize we must focus on ecosystems 

and habitat.  For an example, without wetlands we will not 

have whooping cranes or piping plovers.  Without old-growth 

forest we will not have cape may warblers, white-wing cross 

bills and woodland caribou.  It is imperative that we protect 

ecosystems.  And in Saskatchewan, right here at home, there 

are hundreds, perhaps thousands, of species of life which we 

have not even identified yet.  And by protecting the 

ecosystems, we are able to ensure that these species, even 

though we don't know what they are or what good they are, that 

they will still survive. 

 

With ecoregions and habitat deemed essential for species 

survival, Saskatchewan has identified 11 ecoregions, along 

with a number of subregions within the region.  And I would 

like to provide a list of the regions and the percentage of the 

regions that we have succeeded in protecting today. 

 

Starting at the northern end of the province:  Tazin Lake 

Upland, a very large area, over a million hectares -- we have 

not protected a single acre; the Selwyn Lake Upland, also in the 

far north -- no protection at all; the Athabasca Plain, 2.6 per 

cent protected; Churchill River Upland, 3.01 per cent; the Mid 

Boreal Uplands, which has a number of subregions, we have 

protected about 10 per cent; the Mid Boreal Lowland, we've 

protected one-half of a per cent; the Boreal Transition zone, 

we've protected 9 per cent; the Aspen Parkland region, four and 

a half per cent; Moist 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

Mixed Grassland, just over 5 per cent; Mixed Grassland, 15 per 

cent; and the Cypress Hills Upland, 19 per cent. 

 

In total, we've protected six and a half per cent of our 

ecological regions, and many of these are as very marginal 

protection, such as PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) community pastures. 

 

Our record of achievements is commendable, but much remains 

to be done in identifying and protecting natural habitat in 

Saskatchewan.  It is universally accepted that we need a 

minimum of 12 per cent of an ecological area preserved in 

order to ensure a species diversity and survival.  We have 

achieved the 12 per cent goal in 2 of our 11 ecoregions. 

 

Steps should be taken immediately to identify and secure key 

natural regions in the northern part of the province for 

protection.  In the southern part of the province, it is more 

difficult and costly to secure natural areas, as 85 per cent of the 

land is privately owned.  However, the success of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation's volunteer programs 

indicates that farmers and landowners are concerned about 

wildlife and will do whatever they can to protect natural areas 

on their land. 

 

What we need to do is redirect agriculture policies such as 

quotas and assistance based on cultivated acres, to reverse 

them, to reward instead of penalize landowners who protect 

habitat on their land.  Landowners are key to the survival of 

wildlife and habitat in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

In some areas of the southern part of the province, such as the 

Regina Plains, over 99 per cent of the habitat is gone.  No one 

saw fit to protect one quarter section of land on the Regina 

Plains. 

 

We tend to focus our attentions on far-away places and it's 

easier to point a finger.  We all have heard about the rain 

forests in South America.  Well we continue to lose the rain 

forests at a rate the size of a football field every second, but 

still over half of the rain forests do survive.  And yet only 20 

per cent of southern Saskatchewan remains in a natural state. 

 

Costa Rica, a small country in Central America the size of 

Saskatchewan south of the Trans-Canada Highway, saw fit to 

protect 25 per cent of its area, which really puts us to shame. 

 

Some people question the need to preserve species.  We 

continue to lose dozens of species every day, and it's a rate 

faster than at any time since the extinction of the dinosaurs. 

 

Perhaps only 25 to 50 per cent of the species on the earth have 

been identified.  Fifty per cent of human drugs come from 

plants, so it's essential that we do protect our species for our 

survival depends upon it.  An example is the rosy periwinkle, a 

rare plant in the island of Madagascar, that has properties 

capable of curing leukemia in people. 

In closing, Saskatchewan has been a leader in wildlife and 

habitat conservation efforts.  We must continue to work 

together in a cooperative spirit with industry, NGOs, and 

government pooling their resources and expertise to secure 

adequate, representative samples of our great natural heritage 

for the benefit of ourselves as well as our children and future 

generations. 

 

For in the end, Mr. Speaker, the survival of mankind depends 

upon the survival of other life-forms on this fragile planet.  And 

I think that Saskatchewan and the people here can do a lot more 

and are looking forward to doing a lot more in protecting 

natural ecoregions in our province.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That this Assembly support the work of the Minister of the 

Environment and Resource Management, his department, and 

conservation organizations in their efforts to achieve the 

goals of The World Wildlife Fund's action plan for 

endangered spaces and go on record during National Wildlife 

Week as being in favour of protecting our province's natural 

heritage. 

 

And this is seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland-University.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure to 

speak to this motion today, all the more so since I believe it 

was in 1989 that I had the opportunity as a member of this 

legislature to sign the charter of the world wildlife federation, 

the Canadian Wilderness Charter, with the goal to protecting 12 

per cent of our land here in Saskatchewan by the year 2000.  

And in fact I was presented by Monte Hummel at the time with 

copy no. 2,587 of their endangered species book for Canada. 

 

What this endangered spaces campaign is all about is protecting 

wilderness in order to enhance the protection of individual 

species.  The old way of doing things was to protect an 

endangered species of plant or an endangered species of 

animal. 

 

In the last number of years though it's become increasingly 

clearer to scientists and the public at large that this is really an 

impossible task: to protect one simple species.  As important as 

that may be, the costs are just prohibitive.  And so the way of 

the future, nature's way incidentally, has been to emphasize the 

protection of spaces, to look at ecosystems rather than 

individual species.  And here in Saskatchewan we have 

ecosystems that are comprised of the specific relationships of 

climate and soil and vegetation that then determine what kinds 

of animal activity are in these areas. 

 

So it's in preserving these unique areas of the province 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

and representative areas of the province, given the 

combinations of climate, soil, and vegetation, that we can begin 

to protect individual species. 

 

Now I was at a forestry conference last month in Saskatoon, 

sponsored by SOS Elms organization.  And in that presentation 

a speaker from British Columbia, Herb Hammond, the forestry 

expert, estimated that there are now 10 to 80 million species of 

life on this planet earth -- 10 to 80 million.  That's quite a range 

of species, and scientists aren't sure precisely how many there 

are, because so far they've only identified about a million or so 

of the species on earth. 

 

The real, hidden dimension to all of this is in much of the insect 

species and microbial species of life in the soil.  And these are 

vital links to larger life-forms, as Mr. Hammond explained, 

particularly in the forest, but also in the prairie grasslands.  So 

it's only in preserving spaces and these very, very diverse and 

even microbial species forms that we can really realistically 

preserve species themselves, larger species. 

 

And so part of the world wildlife campaign is to focus on the 

preservation of land and endangered spaces before they are lost 

for ever.  We in Canada have a wonderful opportunity . . . in 

Saskatchewan we have a wonderful opportunity to complete 

this work. 

 

In 1992 we introduced the first wilderness park into our 

province, the Athabasca Sand Dunes Park.  Last year we did 

the Clearwater River wilderness park and the Wildcat Hill 

wilderness park.  This very session of the legislature we're 

adding a fourth wilderness park to our system, the 

Clarence-Steepbank wilderness area. 

 

And this is all part of a commitment to the preservation of 

wilderness.  There is no doubt that the public is behind this 

preservation of endangered spaces.  We don't have to bring Joe 

and Mary Average onside.  The real problem in all of this is the 

problem of a resolution or resolve on the part of government to 

take action and to actually preserve or protect these endangered 

spaces. 

 

And there are two very important points that we should keep in 

mind when it comes to the preservation of these spaces.  First, 

we don't have for ever to preserve these areas.  Increasingly, 

these lands or these spaces are being developed, threatened, 

polluted.  We need to take steps now to protect them.  We don't 

have the luxury of waiting for another 10, 15, or 20 years.  As 

the previous speaker indicated, we've already lost the better 

part of our native grasslands; we only have very small areas of 

them.  Even the water . . . the wetlands in Saskatchewan are 

being threatened.  And yet we come to think of ourselves as 

having the luxury of dawdling in their preservation or 

protection.  We don't have that luxury. 

 

(1430) 

 

A second point that needs to be kept in mind is that we don't 

make these choices just for ourselves.  We make 

these choices for future generations -- for our children and for 

their children.  And that's why we can't allow ourselves to 

exploit these areas. 

 

And the World Wildlife Fund has done all of Saskatchewan 

people a favour in pressing for government protection of these 

areas.  One of the problems in protection is the time cycles we 

deal with.  Forests, for example, will have a 200-year life cycle.  

Most of us as human beings, if we're lucky, will have a 60- or a 

70- or an 80-year life cycle.  Governments, if they're lucky, will 

have a four- or five- or maybe an eight-year life cycle and 

budgets have a one-year life cycle.  If we're to protect 

ecosystems rather than species, if we're to recognize the 

importance of biological diversity and the stability and strength 

that can bring to our province, we need to start protecting these 

spaces now. 

 

We need to start protecting them from development and from 

pollution, which really means we need to change our way of 

thinking from consumption to conversion.  We need to learn 

. . . it's not . . . we can't just take, but we have to leave some 

things behind as well. 

 

And I would point to three components of an ecosystem ethic 

that Mr. Hammond pointed out in this forest conference.  The 

first is ecological responsibility, that we keep all the parts of an 

ecosystem in place over space and time.  That means protecting 

endangered spaces. 

 

Secondly, that we achieve a balance between the human and 

non-human use of lands.  And there is a balance to be achieved 

there.  It's something we have to work on and something we 

have to learn. 

 

And a fourth point he made was that in terms of an ecological 

ethic, an ecosystem ethic, we need to get back to the idea of 

community control for landscapes and for places.  Too often 

control has been delegated by long distance.   And certainly we 

need government, here and now, to protect these spaces; but in 

terms of the development and control and protection of them, 

we have to rely also on individual communities who have a 

vested interest in these areas to ensure that they are protected. 

 

And so today I want to commend all those organizations in 

Saskatchewan, all those men and women and children who are 

working to protect our endangered species, and to thank them 

for giving us the opportunity to achieve the goals of the World 

Wildlife Fund, and to encourage the Minister of the 

Environment to keep up his good work in protecting 

Saskatchewan spaces.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter the debate this afternoon.  

And I would at the outset like to give you notice that I will be 

making an amendment to this main motion at the conclusion of 

my remarks. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

And I want to begin, first of all, Mr. Speaker, by indicating to 

the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, who is the sponsor of 

this motion, that I think it's a pretty good motion.  And I think 

it's a motion that there are going to be some aspects to it that 

I'm going to criticize, but other than that, I think it's something, 

Mr. Speaker, that we can kind of all put our shoulders to the 

wheel because it is an important aspect of our ecological 

systems that we live in and the climate, quite frankly, that we 

are going to have to put up with in the future, and certainly our 

children will as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as the member for Indian Head-Wolseley 

has pointed out, it is the World Wildlife Fund Canada 

endangered species campaign that is an important organization 

in achieving the goal that we want to achieve.  This 

organization, Mr. Speaker, is the largest private conservation 

organization that we have in the world.  I'm told that it's got 

over 5 million members around the globe. 

 

The endangered spaces campaign is a cooperative effort to 

establish protected areas representing all of Canada's natural 

regions by the year 2000, so we have a long way to go, a lot of 

goals to accomplish over a relatively short period of time. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, achieving this goal involves setting 

aside at least 12 per cent of Canada's land and waters which is, 

by the way, also a target of the federal green plan.  Now since 

its inception and its beginning in 1989, the World Wildlife 

Fund's endangered spaces campaign has been so far endorsed 

by 11 of Canada's 13 senior governments.  In fact, one of the 

first public discussions of endangered spaces was held right 

here in the city of Regina in 1989 at the federal-provincial 

parks conference. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are over a half a million Canadians 

who have signed this organization's charter, and it's also 

supported by a wide range of organizations and individuals in 

this country of ours, for example such organizations as the 

Canadian Chamber of Commerce, the United Church of 

Canada, the Girl Guides and also hundreds of environmental 

and conservation organizations. 

 

Now the goal that we're talking about for the endangered 

spaces campaign is simple, straightforward, and it's 

measurable.  And I know that the previous two speakers and 

myself have repeatedly been speaking about the endangered 

spaces.  And some people must be wondering by now, why are 

we not saying endangered species, because that's the coined 

word that we're always talking about.  We are not necessarily 

directly talking about endangered species, although they are 

impacted if we do not conserve the endangered spaces, the 

regions, the environmental, the ecological environmental 

system other than wildlife and so on. 

 

So this goal then, Mr. Speaker, is to conserve our biological 

diversity by ensuring that in these spaces that are going to be 

preserved, that a representative 

sample of each of Canada's 340 natural regions is saved -- a 

representative portion of each of those is saved as a park or 

another protected area by the year 2000. 

 

Well the obvious question I think that comes to our mind, and 

I'm sure that the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, had he 

had time, would have recognized this and said, well really how 

good are we doing?  How good are we doing? 

 

He said that according to his statistics, six and a half per cent 

has been accomplished.  My statistics tell me, Mr. Speaker, that 

presently less than 5 per cent of the land area in Saskatchewan 

is protected.  But be that as it may, I think we both recognize 

that we have a way to go to assure a 12 per cent goal.  More 

importantly, there are only 3 of our 36 natural regions in 

Saskatchewan that are fully represented by protected areas. 

 

So in addition, Mr. Speaker, the organization states that in our 

province -- and this is where there is a dramatic shortfall -- this 

organization says that in our province there is no long-term 

plan in place to ensure the completion of the task. 

 

Now unfortunately I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that that perhaps 

sounds kind of familiar in Saskatchewan about the NDP 

government with no long-term plan.  And this may be 

construed as being another example of that.  Because 

unfortunately, and this is where I have to become a little bit 

negative, unfortunately the long-term plans that we seem to be 

experiencing here is one of mixed messages -- mixed messages. 

 

Evidence of these mixed messages, Mr. Speaker, appeared 

about a month ago on March 17 when a Canadian Press story 

says that Saskatchewan's provincial government, quote:  wants 

to ease its park system into one that emphasizes wilderness 

protection over recreation.  Unquote. 

 

And to me, Mr. Speaker, that's an admirable goal. Yet five days 

later we learn that the provincial government is negotiating to 

sell large tracts of the Bronson Forest Recreation Site to the 

Thunderchild Indian Band.  Now how does such a move 

emphasize wilderness protection?  That's a question that I'm 

asking.  How does this fit into the goals of the World Wildlife 

Fund Canada endangered spaces campaign?  How do those two 

fit together? 

 

Now unfortunately the government will not release the details 

of that possible deal.  They don't disclose just what is going to 

happen in that protected area, Mr. Speaker; they won't say 

anything about it.  I've asked in question period, will this now 

become a logging area?  Will there be any natural gas drilling?  

Because that's where that happens in that area.  Just what is the 

government doing to ensure that the Bronson Forest and other 

areas will continue to be protected? 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley who raised this motion is very sincere.  His 

objective is my objective, which is to 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

accomplish that 12 per cent goal.  But the expression of the 

Minister of Environment leaves many, many questions 

unanswered.  The local residents in that area, Mr. Member, I'll 

inform you, are worried that this possible sale will mean that 

the sensitive landscapes and the many lakes in the area may not 

be as well protected as we would like. 

 

Originally that Bronson Lake forest area was considered to be a 

recreation site so that it would be under the umbrella and under 

the protection of the parks system as we know it, and that made 

sense. That made sense.  But now the possible sale of the 

Bronson Forest area goes directly against the goal of keeping 

12 per cent of our surface in its natural state.  Even though the 

minister said on March 22 of this year that his government is, 

and I quote: 

 

 . . . committed . . . with other countries around the world to 

helping to establish that 12 or 13 per cent of the earth's 

surface in its natural state so that our biodiversity on which 

all life is based can be maintained. 

 

And that's from page 1072 in Hansard.  I quote the minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government has on many occasions stated 

that they are out to create wilderness sites and recreation sites 

in Saskatchewan.  We know that some of the parks in southern 

Saskatchewan have been expanded. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, although I'm running out of time, I will 

just summarize by simply saying that in essence we agree with 

what you are doing, but unfortunately your actions are speaking 

louder than words, so I must at this time indicate to you that I 

am going to make a motion to amend your motion -- that the 

words: 

 

 support the work of the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management, his Department, and 

 

be deleted and substituted with the following: 

 

 encourage the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management, 

 

so that the final motion then would read: 

 

 That this Assembly encourage the Minister of Environment 

and Resource Management to work with conservation 

organizations in their efforts to achieve the goals of The 

World Wildlife Fund's action plan for endangered spaces and 

go on record during National Wildlife Week as being in 

favour of protecting our province's natural heritage. 

 

So instead of support, it's encouraged, because there are 

weaknesses in your motion.  I so move the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, and thank you for the unorthodox way of handling 

this. 

 

(1445) 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

to rise today in the Assembly to second the motion by the 

member from Rosthern. 

 

The original rule 16 moved by the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley asks the Assembly to support the Minister of 

the Environment and Resource Management in achieving the 

goals of the World Wildlife Fund's action plan for endangered 

spaces -- spaces not species -- spaces.  The minister does not 

need anyone's support.  What he desperately needs is some 

help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal of the endangered spaces campaign is to 

establish protected areas representing all of Canada's natural 

regions by the year 2000.  This campaign is supported by over 

500,000 Canadians.  These are supporters who have signed the 

Canadian Wilderness Charter.  I have been informed by the 

World Wildlife Fund Saskatchewan representative that its 

supporters include the Premier and most of his caucus.  It's 

unfortunate, however, that the government who supports the 

worthwhile endeavours of the World Wildlife Fund would do 

so little to assist in achieving its goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year the World Wildlife Fund, in 

cooperation with its partners, assesses progress in each 

jurisdiction across Canada.  They prepare a report card.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, the World Wildlife Fund opens a public 

discussion of the result today. 

 

I'm told by the World Wildlife Fund that less than 5 per cent of 

the land area in Saskatchewan and Canada is protected.  

Saskatchewan's grade has improved, but only slightly, going 

from a C to a B minus.  It's important, but it's not worthy of too 

much recognition. 

 

If Saskatchewan does not pick up its feet, the World Wildlife 

Fund will not reach its target.  In Saskatchewan only 3 of 36 

natural regions are fully represented by protected areas, and 

this government has no plan in place to move ahead in this 

regard. 

 

The Minister of the Environment is slowing the progress of the 

World Wildlife Fund and has no plan in place to improve our 

province's standing.  And I would say this minister and this 

government are failing the grade and they had better pick up 

the slack. 

 

On March 22, the minister stated in this House that: 

 

 . . . we are committed in cooperation with other countries 

around the world to helping to establish that 12 or 13 per cent 

of the earth's surface in its natural state so that our 

biodiversity on which all life is based can be maintained. 

 

It's a nice quote, Mr. Minister.  It sounds good, but what does it 

mean?  What have you done to establish a natural state of parks 

in our province?  Saskatchewan can benefit by turning more 

areas, more parks, into remaining in their natural state. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

Mr. Speaker, the previous government supported the 

environment.  They acted to correct carelessness in the areas of 

hazardous waste management, water resource management, air 

pollution, agriculture chemicals, forest management, soil 

conservation, and wildlife protection.  And the member from 

Indian Head-Wolseley commented on one of the plans brought 

forward by the previous administration to protect Crown areas 

from being broken up into farm land. 

 

The previous government acted to put in place a plan dealing 

with the World Wildlife Fund's goals to build a park system 

and to move to meet the goals of the World Wildlife Fund.  To 

this date the current government has not implemented this plan 

or provided a plan of their own, if they found they couldn't 

accept the plan of the previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Grasslands National Park came about because 

of cooperation between all levels of government: provincial, 

federal, and municipal.  Mr. Speaker, projects like the 

Grasslands Park attract tourists.  And, Mr. Speaker, tourists 

spend money and create jobs. 

 

Perhaps the members opposite should look into the potential of 

creating sites in Saskatchewan.  Are there economic benefits 

associated with these sites?  Will natural sites attract a whole 

new sector of tourists to our province?  These are questions that 

must be asked and answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has committed to work with the 

World Wildlife Fund in reaching its target, yet to date the 

progress has been slow.  And that is why this amendment is 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to be able to second the motion by the 

member from Rosthern that the words: 

 

 support the work of the Minister of the Environment and 

Natural Resources, his department 

 

be deleted and substituted with: 

 

 encourage the Minister of the Environment and Natural 

Resources to work with groups. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased and honoured to be able to take my place in the 

Legislative Assembly today and indicate right at the outset that 

of course I will not be supporting the amendment which is, in 

my opinion, largely frivolous.  And I am proud to support the 

main motion moved by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley 

and seconded by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

The reason that, in my opinion, the minister deserves all of the 

support and indeed credit for some of the things he's been able 

to accomplish in a relatively short period of time, the reason 

that's so terribly important, Mr. Speaker, is that if you just take 

a brief 

look back in history, just some 90, 95 years ago, around the 

turn of the century, anywhere in Saskatchewan that there was 

moving water -- a creek, a river, any moving water at all -- was 

potable; that is you could drink, you could dip a cup in, if you 

happened to be carrying a cup, or you could use your hands to 

drink the water straight from that river and it was safe to do so, 

uncontaminated. 

 

That is clearly not the record after some 90, 95 years of 

increasing settlement, of increasing turning forest into grass 

and grass into farm land and the multitude of other things that 

we all do, for which I'm not pretending not to share some of the 

responsibility for that having happened.  But as we do this, we 

ought to understand we are changing the environment, the 

world in which we find ourselves bound.  And this is in fact a 

world that we're bound to; there is no escaping earth. 

 

We either are going to respect what we have or we will pay the 

price.  And indeed there are some people that will speculate 

that human beings are going to go the way of the dinosaur; that 

is, we will become extinct.  And I don't share that pessimistic a 

view, but I think that the work that is done by the World 

Wildlife Fund's endangered spaces plan and by the Minister of 

Environment and this government are all very important. 

 

Not to say it's only important what we do in Saskatchewan.  

What happens right across Canada and indeed throughout the 

world is important to us all.  We are affected by the destruction 

of the Brazilian rain forest which is, as I understand it, the 

largest rain forest in the world.  At one time it was viewed as 

being so huge that you couldn't possibly destroy it.  And now, 

as I understand it, it's going to be all but gone within 20 or 25 

years, at its current rate of destruction. 

 

Just to put a little bit of context into how fragile our 

environment is, I'm reminded of listening to Father Bob Ogle 

as he was speaking in Regina about a year and a half, maybe a 

little better than that, ago.  And Father Ogle was explaining that 

if it rained in Thunder Bay as I speak, and if the Great Lakes 

systems followed where the first drop in at Thunder Bay is the 

first drop out -- that is, you get a complete flush of the five 

Great Lakes -- before that drop of rain that's falling in Thunder 

Bay as I speak went over Niagara Falls, some 300-plus years 

would pass by. 

 

And that's really an incredible sort of a thing to think about, 

when you realize just how important and how fragile our earth 

is.  The signs are all around us.  Look at old pictures of natural 

surroundings.  I think to my childhood of growing up on a 

farm, and I think of the several thousand acres of prairie grass 

that we broke while I was yet a young boy.  Not too terribly 

many people can say that at my age.  Most were a little bit 

older as the grasslands was ploughed.  But ploughed it was. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, of the remnants of Indian artefacts, were 

about 150 yards from our houses.  I think of the buffalo rubbing 

stone that was a mile and a 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

half away and it was just a nice, pleasant bicycle ride for us as 

kids.  All of these things, Mr. Speaker, are very important. 

 

I look at what the minister has done, I look at what . . . Let me 

not focus so much on the government, but let me give an 

accolade to the bird sanctuary that is near Govan.  Near Govan, 

in Saskatchewan, in our province, is the oldest bird sanctuary in 

all of North America; not more than an hour away from where 

I'm standing and speaking right now -- the oldest bird sanctuary 

in North America.  And that really, I believe, pays tribute to our 

predecessors for their wisdom in setting aside that. 

 

Building on that, I know there's a park, well many, many parks, 

but some that come to mind of course are the Cypress Hills 

Park -- Cypress Hills being very interesting, Mr. Speaker, in 

that it was the only area in Saskatchewan to have been 

completely missed by the last ice age.  And that's part of why 

you can drive south from Maple Creek and through some pretty 

dry country and some sagebrush, and then in the space of about 

two miles, it seems like you go back several millions of years. 

 

I look at the Grasslands Park that we've helped to set up.  And 

I'm also, Mr. Speaker, I'm also very much aware of the 

Clarence-Steepbank Bill that was introduced and passed last 

year, setting aside a wilderness park.  I think that that is a very 

important step, it's a very small step, and I'd be one of the very 

first to acknowledge that, probably second behind the minister 

himself.  It is not enough yet; there is a great distance to go. 

 

But clearly at a time when what we're dealing with as a 

government was, if I may describe it, some priorities, first, we 

had to step our province back from the very edge of 

bankruptcy.  We had to make sure we maintained the legal 

ability to govern the province in order for us to do some of the 

good works and work on the endangered spaces program, and 

of course many other things. 

 

We have been struggling with not only the fiscal situation for 

the first couple of years, but we're also struggling with the 

remnants of some of the environmental devastation and some 

of the traps laid by the former government. 

 

Now there, Mr. Speaker, I'm referring to this year, in its fourth 

or fifth year of operation, the Alameda dam, or pardon me, the 

Rafferty dam is actually, I'm told, going to have something like 

7 metres of water in it at its deepest part.  Now this from a 

substantially deeper dam than that, but that's what's going to be 

there.  I predict that later in the year there will be many 

hundreds and probably thousands of acres of mud-flats left as a 

result of this. 

 

The other trap that was laid was that of underground storage 

tanks where the former government passed legislation, but to 

come into effect after we formed government.  But that's a side 

order. 

Mr. Speaker, for the reasons that I have stated, I am very proud 

today to report to you that I will be voting against the 

amendment and in favour of the motion from the member,, my 

good friend and colleague from Indian Head-Wolseley, 

seconded by the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, also my 

good friend and colleague, and that main motion being: 

 

 That this Assembly support the work of the Minister of the 

Environment and Resource Management, his department and 

conservation organizations in their efforts to achieve the goal 

of the World Wildlife Fund's action plan for endangered 

spaces and go on record during National Wildlife Week as 

being in favour of protecting our province's natural heritage. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, I didn't intend to rise and 

speak to this motion but I got interested in it and I'm a little 

unhappy at this petty amendment that the opposition have 

introduced.  It's a mean-spirited attempt, sir, to belittle what the 

Minister of the Environment is doing.  What he may be doing 

may not be very much and we have to encourage him perhaps 

to do more. But can those members opposite really tell us that 

the ministers of the environment in our sister provinces, in 

Alberta and Manitoba that belong to their political persuasion, 

are really doing any better than we are. 

 

If they are, let them stand in their places and tell us what is 

being done.  And I'm sure that our minister and we ourselves 

will be very pleased to emulate them. 

 

Now perhaps as private members and on our day here, we 

should try maybe and eschew such silliness.  If they had made 

an amendment to support and encourage the minister, then fine, 

that would have been acceptable.  We all need encouragement 

but we also, all of us, need support.  But there is something that 

we as private members and as private citizens can do to protect 

the endangered spaces and the endangered species that live 

therein. 

 

In 1976, Mr. Speaker, sir, my wife and I bought a quarter 

section of land 30 miles west of here.  What we actually bought 

was a hole in the ground.  This hole was 80 acres of ravine with 

a trapped-out beaver stream in the bottom.  We found out later, 

after we'd bought it, that by accident we had an arable field of 

80 acres in the back which was just a bonus and pays us a little 

bit of income.  But what we were interested in was this hole in 

the ground.  Now 80 acres of ravine, about 25 acres of it is 

mixed deciduous forest and about 50, 55, 60 acres of sloping, 

natural wild grass. 

 

So we have done absolutely nothing with it apart from building 

a cottage on it, sir.  We spent $2,500 in the first place to put up 

fencing to keep the neighbour's 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

cows out.  Not because we object to the cows eating any of the 

grass, but we didn't want the cows to interfere with the wildlife. 

 

The beaver since then have gradually filtered back.  And they 

started off a few years ago with one dam and that kept some 

water in because in the summer the stream simply dried up and 

withered away to absolutely nothing.  And after a series of 

years, the beaver have produced a series of litters of kits, which 

is what the young are called, and those kits have come back the 

following year and built their own dams.  I think at the last 

count last year we had 10 dams. 

 

And this has raised the amount of water in the valley there and 

it has increased the water table.  Now we have lots of water, 

lush grass, and a lush undergrowth which is an ideal habitat for 

so many species of birds and animals.  We now, because of the 

open water, we have wildfowl, shovellers and mallards, that 

come there.  And last year I saw the footprints of what I believe 

were a crane, although I didn't see the actual animal, and we 

have hawks flying overhead. 

 

There's been a considerable loss of trees, of course, to the 

beavers.  They cut them down and they simply strip off the 

bark.  If only we could get them to eat the rest of it, it would be 

a lot cheaper and a lot more efficient.  But there is always a 

price we have to pay for anything and the price that I am 

paying for the beaver is that I lose some trees.  I minimize that 

price by collecting the skeletons, cutting them up with a 

circular saw and using them for fuel on the wood stove which 

the Amish of Ontario built for me.  So there's always a spin-off 

somewhere. 

 

This morning, I was able to visit with my mountain bluebird.  

I've started a bluebird trail, and he watched me very closely, 

examining to see if he got a housekeeper in session but he 

hasn't as yet.  But he will do. 

 

We've deliberately not planted any garden flowers, sir, so as 

not to confuse the issue and I can boast that ours is the only 

garden of eighty acres that, as far as I can see, has not a single 

dandelion in it. 

 

Of course we have crocuses in the spring, scarlet mallow, and 

we have a small bunch of Saskatchewan wild lilies on a little 

slope there.  We have chokecherries and saskatoons, which 

produce usually in alternate years, wild gooseberries, and 

hazelnuts.  There are poplar trees, Manitoba maples, silver 

birch and so many plants and animals that I just don't know 

what the names are. 

 

And I hope to spend the next summer months finding out more 

about these and I hope to spend my retirement there enjoying 

my wildlife preserve.  There's nothing official about it.  I did 

contact Ducks Unlimited and they said they would come and 

have a look at it and give me a report on it.  They didn't even 

bother to come.  So I don't think that Ducks Unlimited are 

maybe as good as they're cracked up to be. 

 

I think that we should give the minister every support 

and every encouragement in this endeavour. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

know there's just a short while here, and I've listened with 

interest to the points made by members of the government and 

my own members here this afternoon.  And there's one thing 

that hasn't been talked about, and I think the member from 

Indian Head-Wolseley is aware of this, and I think it needs to 

enter into this debate. 

 

We can talk all we want about the great aspirations of 

government and who is right in selecting numbers and figures 

about how we protect the area and the space that's necessary for 

the various species on this planet to survive.  But in our 

province there's something that is very crucial that we must 

understand, and that is that most of the land outside of that held 

by the Crown is in the hands of private individuals.  It's in the 

hands of people involved in agriculture. 

 

And whether we like it or not, some of the policies that have 

taken place in this province up till now haven't exactly been 

terribly successful to doing what everyone's talked about today.  

And I think one of the reasons that they haven't been 

successful, Mr. Speaker, is that the kind of cooperation that's 

necessary between those in society that wish to preserve and 

the agricultural sector, haven't been there. 

 

And we've had the case in point this last winter, Mr. Speaker, 

in the province of Saskatchewan, a tough winter, the first one 

that we've had in 20 years where we have had a lot of 

depredation take place, primarily by deer, elk, some of the 

bigger ungulates that inhabit the province of Saskatchewan 

with populations that are very high in certain areas.  And 

they're very high because of the current practices that are 

involved with conservation and licensing and that type of thing. 

 

So you have the case that takes place and it's very hard to go 

out and explain to a farmer or rancher who this past winter had 

several thousand dollars of his feed eaten or damaged, has had 

a major economic displacement happen, and then he hears 

members of the Legislative Assembly talking about grandiose 

plans to set aside so much land and how we've got to do better.  

And we hear all kinds of urban members talking about how we 

should do these things when there is nothing in place to 

compensate the individual. 

 

I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that some of the best 

conservationists in this province, and it's been mentioned in the 

speeches, are the people who actually work the land.  My own 

particular farm, I have a strip of land, about 30 acres altogether 

along a water course, natural prairie on both sides of it, that's 

been set aside.  And that was a family decision that's been in 

place for a couple of generations and I hope that the following 

generations follow through.  Because that to me is important to 

rural life. 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if we don't as a society and 

this government clean up our act here, that if we go through 

another tough winter or we go through another wet fall and we 

see all sorts of wildlife depredation taking place with no 

recognition by government on either the conservation side and 

the people that set licence fees and the people that determine 

seasons and the people in the bureaucracy of the various 

departments who, in effect, manage my life as a landowner and 

a person who has to feed the animals and the birds and the 

insects and the micro-organisms through their lifespan, then 

there is going to be trouble, Mr. Speaker, because people are 

getting sick and tired of hearing speeches in the legislature and 

the parliament, and then turning around and saying no, there's 

not a darn thing we can do for you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the two solitudes have got to come together, 

and it was good today to hear, I believe, the amendment by the 

member from Rosthern because I think Saskatchewan should 

take itself up another plane.  That we need to recognize 

long-term planning.  And I haven't seen the current NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker, since October '91 really have any 

plan in place at all.  And I know I've had the occasion to visit 

with some of the members of that government, and they realize 

that there is a problem. 

 

And I think maybe it would have been more appropriate today 

rather than . . . and I understand the timing and the significance 

of the motion today because of what's going on around us.  But 

the simple fact is that there's some issues that have to be dealt 

with.  The seasons for this coming fall's hunting season are 

going to be set.  Quotas, bag limits, access to Crown land, and 

how it is accessed are going to be set.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

there's an awful lot of people in agriculture today that aren't 

happy with what is being done. 

 

And you can talk about setting aside so much of this province 

to make sure that the species of this province and western 

Canada survive for a few more generations, but I'll tell you if 

everyone isn't involved in both a social and economic side of 

that argument, they aren't going to buy it.  They aren't going to 

buy it all. 

 

And there better start to be some dialogue, Mr. Speaker, 

between the powers.  In this case currently it is the NDP 

government who control those agencies.  It is the king's deer 

this winter, this past winter, that ate my hay and my 

neighbour's hay, and hay all over and grain all over this 

province, and yet the king is not responsible ultimately for the 

damage that his deer do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's a lot of people who enjoy nature and 

enjoy the fact that our province is blessed with a lot of pristine 

wilderness, with a lot of areas that we can say are a great 

heritage for us.  But unless there are some solutions offered . . . 

and I don't have them all, Mr. Speaker, but the only way that 

they will be achieved is to have some dialogue -- not 

highfalutin, fancy speeches in this Legislative Assembly -- 

that's 

what's going to solve the problem. 

 

Because I can tell you, the majority of my constituents can 

listen to the members -- particularly the government members 

in their speeches today -- and say, come walk a mile in my 

shoes first, my friend, before you stand and make those 

speeches; and after you've walked in my shoes and you've had 

your haystack ruined and your grain pile ruined and your trees 

eaten, you've got a little bit different opinion of what is reality, 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about preserving our heritage in this 

province. 

 

And there's an awful lot of people out there that want to be part 

of the solution rather than constantly having to fight the 

problem.  And I would really enjoy hearing perhaps one of the 

ministers responsible or someone in the know over there to get 

on their feet in this debate and say that besides the higher plane 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The agreed-upon time of 65 

minutes of debate has elapsed.  As we have agreed under rule 

16, there shall now be up to 10 minutes of question and answer.  

If the members do not take the total 10 minutes for question 

and answer, we will then put the vote on the amendment and on 

the main question.  So the floor is open now for questions to 

members who participated. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have some comments 

I would like to make at this time.  First of all, I certainly 

appreciate the general thrust or overall support from the 

members opposite on this motion.  And in response to a 

long-term plan, in fact there is a long-term plan, Mr. Speaker, 

titled "Protected Areas in Saskatchewan". 

 

It has an inventory; it shows where we're at and where we need 

to go.  This was just released in December of '93.  So we do 

have a long-term plan and it's up to all of us in government and 

outside of government to work on this plan and implement it. 

 

There was mention of the Grasslands National Park, and that's 

a prime example of how long it takes to achieve some of our 

goals.  This park was first proposed in 1957, which is about 27 

years ago.  Even though over 90 per cent of the land was 

Crown land and there was widespread support, public support, 

for the park, and governments from all stripes held office 

during that time, both federally and provincially, we have a 

park reserve but we still do not have a full-fledged grasslands 

park.  So it does give you some indication of how complex 

some of these things are.  But we do need to work faster than 

that. 

 

And one more step to completing the Grasslands Park is in Bill 

38, which is in this session, is dealing with protecting the water 

courses in the park.  Hopefully to see through everyone's 

cooperation . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I do want to make a correction.  

I may have misled the members.  We have agreed that it doesn't 

have to be just a question; it can 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

be a comment made by a member.  He or she does not have to 

ask a question.  Simply a comment, but the comment made by 

the members will also be limited to the time that I would allow 

for questions.  So I think the member's had sufficient time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would direct 

my question to the member from Regina Albert North who 

commented on Rafferty dam and that, in his view, it would 

simply be a mud-flat in a short period of time. 

 

I'm wondering what is the member basing that on.  Is it on the 

fact that the government has opened the gates at Rafferty and 

allowing the water out? 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank my friend, 

the member from Souris-Cannington, for that question, though 

I'm a little surprised that you would be asking it being that 

Rafferty is just a skip out of the way for you on the way home. 

 

The Rafferty dam gate, to the best of my knowledge, has been 

closed.  In fact we diverted . . . there was water diverted from 

Boundary dam to Rafferty dam to try and get what water we 

could in the Rafferty so that we could collect some for use at 

the Shand power station throughout the summer and as long as 

that water lasts. 

 

Now to the extent that a gate may be opened, there is, as you 

would know, an international agreement that says that water 

course flows into the United States.  We have to meet the water 

proportionment according to the international convention. 

 

Most of the water, since water from the Alameda and the 

Souris converge, we were letting most of the water out through 

the Alameda dam and trying to maximize the water that is 

stored behind the Alameda. 

 

I thank you for the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

make two very brief observations.  The first is that the Liberals 

have not even participated in this debate and indicated 

absolutely no commitment to the World Wildlife Fund's goal 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  What's the member's point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It would seem to 

me that the member has been here long enough to know the 

rules of this Assembly.  You're not sitting in your seat, Mr. 

Member, so please follow the rules of this legislature. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the Speaker recognized a member 

and is wrong, it was the Speaker's mistake. 

The Speaker should not have recognized him and I apologize to 

the House for that.  I thought the member was in his desk; he 

was not.  The Speaker should not have recognized him. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From my seat I do 

want to reiterate that I'm really disappointed the member from 

Shaunavon or the member from Regina North West wasn't able 

to support this resolution and the World Wildlife Fund. 

 

The other point I would make very, very briefly with respect to 

the Bronson forest is that Chief Weekusk of the Thunderchild 

Band has indicated in public news releases that the band has no 

intentions to make changes to the traditional use of that land. 

 

And what's the traditional use of that land but to stay as forest.  

In fact I quote him in his news release of March 30, 1994:  We 

choose this land because it has historic, traditional, and spiritual 

significance for us.  Words from Chief Weekusk. 

 

So the band is willing to work with interested parties to ensure 

that the land is preserved and protected, which is fully 

consistent with what the World Wildlife Fund wants to do with 

the endangered spaces campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  First of 

all, let me say that I thoroughly enjoyed putting the member 

from Sutherland in his place. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, to pick up actually on a point that he 

raised, and I want to ask the member from . . . the one that was 

most explicable in his comments, the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley. I want to ask you, sir, do you agree with your 

Minister of Environment, first of all, buying land in southern 

parts of Saskatchewan in an attempt to augment the wild spaces 

in the wilderness aspect of some of our parks in the South, and 

then turning around, selling Crown land in a wilderness setting 

that is a wilderness setting, letting go of government control of 

that land and relying entirely on individuals, private 

individuals, to say, we will not do anything to this land for ever 

more, that it will remain in the pristine situation in which we 

found it. 

 

Are you, sir, comfortable with your Minister of Environment 

allowing this Crown land to be sold, wilderness land, to private 

individuals and therefore by giving up government control on 

that land to ensure that it will continue to meet the needs of the 

future generations? 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the hon. 

member for the question.  First of all, I do support the 

government purchasing wildlife lands throughout the province 

for meeting habitat requirements. 

 

Secondly, the government, Canada has a commitment to our 

native people to provide or sell or acquire land, either through 

Crown land or public, for native land claims.  And certainly if 

we look around 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

the province, some of the best remaining habitat that remains in 

the southern part of the province is in fact on Indian 

reservations. 

 

Now as the member from Saskatoon Sutherland-University 

indicated, if the chief and the band are prepared to enter into an 

agreement whereby the land will remain in its relatively natural 

state -- which does, I might add, now include grazing and oil 

and gas exploration -- I certainly can support that because 

there's a large number of players involved here. And by 

working cooperatively together, hopefully we can achieve 

everyone's interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'd like to pick up on a comment made by the 

member from Thunder Creek, the anachronistic member for 

Thunder Creek.  He referred to the king's deer, and I would like 

to point out to the member for Thunder Creek and his 

colleagues there that we've had a queen on the throne since 

1952, so the term would have to be the Queen's deer. 

 

But even allowing for his ignorance, if we go back to the time 

when there was such a thing as the king's deer -- and there 

certainly was in Europe although maybe there maybe wasn't 

here in North America -- it was a capital offence for anybody to 

hunt the king's deer. And if the king's deer did any damage and 

if the king did any damage himself when he hunted his own 

deer, then it was up to the landlord himself and the farmer to 

make good the damage himself without recourse to the king. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg when he 

mentioned that the king was responsible to rectify any damage 

caused by his deer.  When we look at SGI across this province, 

we see a large number of animal impact, where vehicles and 

individuals are injured by encountering deer on our highways, 

on the Queen's highway. 

 

Mr. Member, would you support financial aid for those people 

who suffer a financial loss because of encountering wildlife on 

the roads? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'm interested in answering that question 

because last year I had precisely that problem.  I ran into a deer, 

or a deer ran into me -- the deer wasn't there to argue his point 

of view -- and did $4,500 worth of damage on my Topaz; 

fortunately, not my Sunday car.  And I was of course 

compensated very adequately by SGI.  I simply paid a $50 

deductible.  And I'm very happy with the status of SGI and the 

compensation offered.  Thank you for the opportunity to say 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

Resolution No. 59 -- Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 

Amendments 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 

remarks I'll move the motion before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason for bringing forward this private 

member motion on the same day as I brought forward first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Security 

Act, was as a result of last Friday's ruling in which you, Mr. 

Speaker, ruled that the emergency did not exist and that in fact 

I would have other avenues available in which to have this 

matter dealt with.  And I guess today, Mr. Speaker, I'm 

bringing forward a couple of those avenues. 

 

In fact the government has an option with what's happened 

today.  They can either vote in favour of the motion and bring 

forward a Bill or amendments of their own, or else they can 

actually move second reading of the Bill that we brought 

forward today, the Liberal caucus brought forward today.  

Either way, I guess what we're asking is that they just please do 

something, take some action before it's too late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have grave concerns about the lack of action this 

government has taken to address the farm debt situation in 

Saskatchewan.  In the 1991 election campaign there were 

commitments made to farmers.  The first was a commitment to 

negotiate improvements to GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and NISA (net income stabilization account).  The 

actions taken by this government with respect to those 

programs are a matter of record. 

 

Negotiations is hardly the word I would use to describe the 

unilateral action of the New Democrat government to cancel 

the GRIP contracts with farmers and to pass legislation 

revoking their rights to challenge the government decision in 

courts. 

 

The second promise made was that the government would, and 

I quote: work with the farmers in their organizations to design a 

debt restructuring program to keep farm families on the land. 

 

That is the promise I wish to debate today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government received majority support from 

Saskatchewan people who fully expected the government to 

keep its promises and carry through on its word.  Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that farm families in Saskatchewan 

should expect an immediate and unanimous response from all 

members of this House to support any action which would help 

keep farm families on the land, particularly when there is no 

cost involved to the public purse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue seems a bit complex at first glance, but I 

can assure you it all boils down to a deficiency in the farm 

securities Act which leaves farmers in a very, very vulnerable 

position. 

 

Recently a court decision was made in the case of 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

Mulatz v. the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank in which the court 

decided that the leaseback rights of a farmer have value, and 

therefore in bankruptcy proceedings passed to the bankruptcy 

trustee. 

 

What this means essentially is that a farmer who is petitioned 

into bankruptcy by his lender calling in his loans, or who 

voluntarily declares bankruptcy because of unmanageable debt, 

is then put in a position where that farmer no longer has the 

rights to lease back his land and could lose the right of first 

refusal to buy the land back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I contend that such action by the lending 

institutions is not in keeping with the spirit of The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act or the commitment the 

government made in the last election. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of farm families who've been 

through at least one of the federal or provincial farm credit 

processes, through ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) or Farm Debt Review, Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board. And of course almost every farmer in Saskatchewan has 

very close ties to a major lending institution. 

 

Most importantly, where is the credibility of the six-year 

leaseback program if it's not repaired immediately?  There are 

currently 1,274 farmers in leaseback situations, and they are 

exercising their right, their leaseback rights because they have 

had to turn land back to the bank in order to restructure their 

farm debt. 

 

In spite of that, however, many find that they are still facing 

unmanageable debt loads and that the only option available to 

them is to declare bankruptcy and begin the painful process of 

trying to rebuild their farming operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, besides the 1,274 farmers in leaseback situations, 

I look at some of the numbers that arose in the Agriculture 

estimates of the last evening, where ACS loans in regards to 

spring seeding, production loans, and livestock cash advance 

totalled some 8,306 delinquent loans and 3,684 loans that are in 

recovery.  That tells us that one-quarter of all the farms -- 

one-quarter of all the farms in Saskatchewan -- are going 

through some financial difficulty with ACS alone. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are in emergency.  The farmers are in a 

great deal of difficulty.  Mr. Speaker, people in rural 

Saskatchewan have a deep-rooted sense of pride in being 

independent, and it is extremely difficult for them to come to 

the final realization that there is no other choice but to give up 

the land which has often been in their families for generations, 

to give up on trying to pay interest and creditors and input costs 

and lease payments, when the cash flow is simply not there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the decision to begin again, as painful as it is 

for every single one of the farmers who 

have been forced into bankruptcy or who have concluded 

voluntarily that it was their only option . . . that final blow 

begins with the recovery process.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

where the federal Bankruptcy Act recognizes that a farmer 

should be able to keep his home quarter and his machinery 

because, Mr. Speaker, that is the regermination process, and it 

gives people a chance to start over. 

 

And I believe, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is the intent of the 

farm land securities Act when it addresses bankruptcy, I 

believe that is the intent and was the intent, to offer some 

opportunity within the legislation for people to try again, to 

keep farm families on their land. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, if the ultimate goal of our government 

farm credit agencies is to assist in providing stability to the 

financial distress of Saskatchewan farm families, then the 

legislation which governs their activities and their 

decision-making abilities must support that goal. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we must address the deficiencies in The 

Farm Securities Act.  It is our responsibility to move on this 

immediately, before any farm family becomes victim to a 

loophole which could cost them a chance at a new beginning. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the Lorenz family is living under a cloud 

of uncertainty.  The court decision of TD Bank v. Mulatz, 

brought down in the courts, attaches a value to the Lorenz 

family's leaseback rights and therefore takes those rights away 

from the Lorenz's and places them in the hands of the trustee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bank has chosen to attach to those rights in the 

bankruptcy proceedings and has placed an ad in the Wilkie 

paper advertising the Lorenz family farm for sale; and in fact, it 

may now be sold within the last day or so. 

 

In doing so, the bank contravened an order by the Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board which ordered the bank to relinquish its 

claim to leaseback rights in the lease which it was offering to 

the Lorenz family.  That's right, Mr. Speaker; the bank has 

chosen to ignore the order of the Farm Tenure Arbitration 

Board which by virtue of The Farm Security Act is law.  The 

bank has appealed that order, and without even waiting for the 

decision of the court, the bank has advertised the Lorenz farm 

for sale. 

 

Today or tomorrow or one day very soon this family, who is 

hoping for an opportunity to rebuild their farm, could be forced 

off their land.  In the meantime, they do not have the resources 

to mount a legal battle and their only hope is that the 

lawmakers, the government who enacted The Farm Securities 

Act, will move to protect them by amending the legislation to 

clarify the intent with respect to leaseback rights. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government is fully aware that there is a 

problem with this legislation and I quite honestly cannot 

understand why there has been no commitment to open it up for 

amendment.  That is why 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

we cannot wait any longer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the government does not move on this immediately, there 

could be two disastrous results: a farm family could be forced 

off their land; and, of equal or greater consequence, a precedent 

will be set which allows for open season by banks and lending 

institutions on farmers who declare or are petitioned into 

bankruptcy by their lending institution. 

 

That has tremendous implications, Mr. Speaker.  It means that 

people will no longer be able to consider voluntary bankruptcy 

as an option because it will endanger their leaseback 

opportunity.  We cannot have, on one hand, a commitment such 

as the one made by the government in its platform document 

which states, and I quote: 

 

 We will work with farmers and their organizations to design 

a debt restructuring program to keep farm families on the 

land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot have that commitment in writing from 

the government and then on the other hand a loophole in the 

legislation which expedites kicking farmers off their farms 

once they enter bankruptcy proceedings. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I urge the members of this Assembly 

to give careful consideration to the urgency of the issue at hand 

and to cause the government to amend The Farm Security Act 

to protect the leaseback rights of the Saskatchewan farm 

families according to the amendments set forth in the Bill. 

 

I have laid a Bill before this Assembly for first reading today.  

Each of you has a copy of the amendment which clearly 

outlines the purpose of the legislation.  It is the sole intent to 

exempt leaseback rights from being taken away from the 

farmer during bankruptcy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see this as an opportunity for the government to 

do the right thing, and I hope they'll agree to support the 

request that we amend the farm securities Act.  I sincerely hope 

that we can count on the cooperation from the government to 

bring the Bill to amend the farm securities Act to second 

reading so that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I believe the member is 

on a motion that he has moved and not on a Bill that is before 

the House. And I think the member should direct his comments 

to the motion that is before the House and not the Bill. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

listened to the Premier in his campaign speeches as he faced the 

people of rural Saskatchewan, looked into their eyes and said, 

not one more farmer, when talking about his commitment to 

keep farm families out of the jaws of lending institutions. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, Valentine Lorenz is one more 

farmer.  And on behalf of Valentine and Kim Lorenz, their 

daughter Melanie, three sons, Aaron, 

Adam, and Mark, I would like to thank the members today for 

their anticipated cooperation in defending the rights and 

livelihood of one more farm family. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I'll move the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the government to immediately 

introduce amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm Security 

Act in order to protect the rights of Saskatchewan farm 

families who currently face bankruptcy proceedings, and 

those involved in leasebacks who must consider bankruptcy 

as an option to contend with onerous farm debt. 

 

Seconded by the member from Greystone. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

indeed proud and pleased to second the motion of the member 

from Shaunavon.  Mr. Speaker, the situation in Saskatchewan 

agriculture is still extremely serious when one looks at the 

overall long-term picture, particularly with respect to farm 

debt.  And I recognize that grain prices and cattle prices are 

encouraging at the moment, but that is not a true reflective of 

the situation on most Saskatchewan's family farms -- the kind 

of farms that are the backbone of rural Saskatchewan, the 

backbone of the entire provincial economy. 

 

There's not a person in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, who will 

dispute that if we could somehow magically get the farm debt 

to disappear in Saskatchewan, that we could have a much, 

much better chance for economic survival in rural 

Saskatchewan -- in fact, economic health in rural 

Saskatchewan.  But I think we all know what the reality is; at 

least we should know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I travelled last week to the north-east part of the 

province, and I spoke to the chamber of commerce -- a board of 

trade actually, they call themselves -- in Aylesham, and the 

people have a very good sense of reality out there.  They are 

feeling the optimism of spring and the building of the perennial 

hope that always seems to stay insulated under the winter snow 

from year to year in this province.  But they know what reality 

is for farmers in that part of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Shaunavon spoke in the Assembly just the 

other day about the dire straits around Preeceville and Sturgis, 

just east of where I was last Thursday night.  Farmers in their 

general trading area and people there are very much feeling that 

the pinch has become a squeeze, has become a vice grip 

choking the life out of their local economies.  Because, Mr. 

Speaker, almost a million acres of crop, wheat and tame hay, 

are still laying in their fields waiting to be combined and put up 

since last year.  That's a million acres, Mr. Speaker.  It's an 

astonishing thing to try to comprehend; that's more than the 

entire agricultural land of many countries. 

 

So in speaking to this motion, I'd like to bring attention, to the 

members of the Assembly, the 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

realities facing agriculture in Saskatchewan.  There is a 

perception, and I actually heard this articulated by members of 

the Assembly, members of cabinet, a perception that things are 

really looking up in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well if one doesn't have an understanding of what is really 

going on out there in rural communities, for people who haven't 

been reading their mail or talking to their constituents, maybe 

that is what people would think.  But the seriousness of the 

situation for farm families has not changed.  There are crushing 

levels of farm debt in Saskatchewan.  Right now there are 

almost 200 family farms in bankruptcy proceedings, and there 

could be hundreds, perhaps even thousands to follow, 

depending on many factors. 

 

There is optimism that grain prices have risen for top-quality 

wheat and pulse crops.  But the facts are that cereal grain prices 

are actually below what they were last year at this particular 

time.  The further fact is that many farmers who had some luck 

with pulse crops had actually sold at lower prices under 

contract and did not get for their yields the high prices that 

were being quoted for spot sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a great deal of canola was sold right off the 

combines.  It's gone. And there are very small reserves of the 

precious commodities that would fetch high prices for farmers 

who had canola and other high-end crops in the bins as we 

speak today. 

 

We cannot be lulled into a false sense of security about the 

state of the farm economy by high prices.  Many of us could be 

rich if we had winning lottery tickets too.  But knowing the 

numbers really isn't good enough if you can't cash in. 

 

And for farm families in our province, this spring presents an 

even bigger gamble than last.  Farmers will be at greater risk 

this year because of the implications surrounding the very issue 

that we are discussing today.  The reality is that farm families 

have only so many options available to them  when they find 

the fact that they are simply unable to cope with the onerous 

levels of farm debt which has been piled upon them year after 

year after year. 

 

(1545) 

 

And consider the farmers again in the north-east, about whom I 

spoke a few minutes ago, farmers who have little or no hope of 

getting any value whatsoever out of what started out to be a 

bumper crop.  Many of these farmers had already experienced 

problems over the past few years.  And now, hoping to keep 

their heads above water with last year's receipts, hoping to cash 

in on better yields and slightly improved prices, they met with a 

natural disaster.  Snow and rain pinned their crops to the 

ground just before harvest, dashing their hopes for a financial 

comeback. 

 

And many of those very farmers had already made 

arrangements -- made arrangements, Mr. Speaker, to turn the 

land back to the banks and lending institutions, signed 

leaseback agreements, and set 

about trying to rebuild their farms. 

 

For many farm families across our province the story is the 

same.  Years of struggle, trying to pay down mortgage debt 

accumulated under unmanageable interest rates and inflated 

land prices, years of struggle to stay ahead of the lending 

institutions, borrowing from every single available source, 

hoping for a brighter day, a better yield, more moisture, even 

less moisture, higher prices, always hoping that the future 

would hold a solution to their crisis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are not nameless, faceless people, 

especially to me.  As I stand today before this Assembly, I am 

flooded with the memories of hundreds of farm families with 

whom I have had the privilege to work and with whom I did 

farm stress work.  I see human faces, the victims of this great 

financial tragedy.  I see the images of many farm men and 

women, people of tremendous inner strength who carried their 

burdens within them for as long as they could manage, images 

of robust farmers with hands calloused from years of hard 

work, sobbing under the strain of an unmanageable burden. 

 

I know that members of this Assembly can identify with this 

kind of agony.  Many of them, I believe, truly, truly care.  It is 

one of the great human tragedies of this province -- what has 

happened to the state of mind of so many, many brave people 

who work throughout rural Saskatchewan because of things 

that are completely out of their control.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

travelled thousands of miles.  I've spoken to many ratepayers' 

meetings, teachers' associations, Wheat Pool-sponsored 

workshops on farm stress.  And I can assure you, there are just 

as many people this very day trying to come to understand what 

is happening to them as when I began doing this work in the 

mid-1980s. 

 

And politics is never mentioned in any of these workshops, Mr. 

Speaker -- none.  The only time it comes up is when I ask 

people to talk about the things that they feel are outside of their 

control.  And they talk about the weather.  They talk about 

international trade wars.  They talk about commodity prices.  

They talk about interest rates, and -- yes -- they then mention 

government.  Not in a partisan way, but they always articulate 

that decisions made by government contribute to the 

uncertainty in their lives because they have no control over 

those decisions, and it leaves them feeling increasingly more 

helpless as time goes by. 

 

In any case, Mr. Speaker, there are thousands and thousands of 

men, women, young families, and grandparents who live under 

the cloud of farm debt in our province.  And I have seen the 

pain and the destruction that farm debt has left behind in 

Saskatchewan, as members of this Assembly have.  I have seen 

the depression, the anxiety, the physical ailments, the violence, 

and the substance abuse that has resulted. 

 

I have seen, as all of us have, how the farm debt crisis has 

touched and continues to touch everyone in rural 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

Saskatchewan directly.  There are very few people in 

Saskatchewan cities who cannot identify with family members 

or friends who have been scarred by the farm crisis.  There 

have been very few havens, very few options for people who 

farm the land of Saskatchewan.  There has been little for them 

to turn to. 

 

And yes, the other taxpayers of the province, not the 

governments, but the taxpayers of our province, have been 

generous in their understanding and their efforts to help the 

farm families of Saskatchewan. 

 

Farm families in our province have appreciated having some 

financial assistance from government.  But it must be 

remembered that every dime of that money went directly back 

into the economy that generated it, with the exception of the 

interest payments that went to lending institutions.  And 

therein, Mr. Speaker, lies a huge part of the problem -- the 

amount of money that was simply taken out of the system in 

mortgage interest, never to be seen again in Saskatchewan.  We 

all recognize that none of us want to see that happen again; 

those substantially high levels of interest rates. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the damage of the past lingers on.  Farm 

families have not been able to climb out from under the 

mountain of debt that was built up through the 1980s.  And 

despite off-farm income, farm safety nets, cash grants, and now 

leasebacks, many farmers all over our province are still 

teetering on the precipice of bankruptcy. 

 

Currently close to 200 farm families are in bankruptcy 

proceedings, but that is only the tip of the iceberg.  Huge 

numbers have already declared bankruptcy.  And thousands 

more could be at risk if crops fail, if drought hits, if input costs 

continue to rise, if interest rates keep rising.  Any number of 

variables could tip the scales on this delicate balance. 

 

So what are we to do?  What can we, members of this 

Assembly, do to offer some stability, some balance, some hope 

to the situation at a time when hope should spring eternal in 

Saskatchewan?  Can we prevent crop failure or drought?  Well 

no, we cannot; nor do farmers expect it of us. 

 

But we can work together as three parties, and with our federal 

counterparts and the representatives of the agricultural 

community, we can work together to have plans in place to 

address those emergencies.  We can work to install a crop 

insurance program that works and is affordable for farmers. 

 

We can do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we must undertake to 

do those things because that will improve the stability of the 

economy in rural Saskatchewan.  It will give the lending 

institutions more confidence in lending to farmers, and it will 

give people a much deserved peace of mind in the farmhouses 

in this province. 

 

What about input costs and interest rates?  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we can raise our voices in favour of tax 

reform and stable interest rates.  We can do that, and we can 

put together a plan to keep input costs reasonable to farmers, a 

plan that addresses all of the input costs including taxation.  We 

have the capacity to do that, to come together as three parties in 

this Assembly and attack the problems in those ways. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we can address the issue of farm debt.  

We must do what is within our power to offer people a 

legitimate chance to rebuild their farms, to reposition 

themselves for the agriculture of the next century because that 

is our true guarantee of independence, a true guarantee of 

independence for future generations -- not just for 

Saskatchewan, but for Canada, the security of being able to 

feed our nation, to own and grow our own food, and to have 

this precious commodity to offer the world. 

 

And how can we do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  How can we 

address the issue of farm debt?  Well government has taken 

some steps to offer farmers protection.  The Farm Tenure 

Arbitration Board, the Farm Debt Review Board, ACS and 

FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) have all designed, with the 

basic mandate in mind to offer some flexibility, some options 

to farmers facing unmanageable farm debt. 

 

And I'm not debating whether farmers are satisfied with the 

performance of those agencies because that is another 

discussion entirely.  What we must discuss and decide today, 

however, is a matter of urgency.  The legislation which governs 

the rights of farmers and lenders in the leaseback program 

addresses the issue of bankruptcy, but it does not address the 

issue of whether leaseback rights are of value to anyone but the 

farmer who signed the lease with the bank. 

 

Until the TD Bank v. Mulatz case, there was never any 

question about whether a farmer's leaseback rights had value.  

It wasn't an issue because no one had ever challenged it or 

disputed it.  But then along came a court challenge in which the 

lending institution in effect said the following: we believe that 

the lease contract with the bank does have value because the 

farmer could sell it or assign it to someone else, like a family 

member. 

 

The bank, in the example to which I referred, took that 

argument to court and on February 22, 1994, just seven weeks 

ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the court ruled.  And it ruled that the 

leaseback rights of the farmer were indeed worth something, 

and could therefore become chattel in the bankruptcy process.  

And there it is -- a loophole in the legislation big enough to 

drive a tractor through. 

 

Interestingly the federal Bankruptcy Act actually protects a 

farmer's tractor, his combine, and his home quarter.  And they 

are specifically exempted from bankruptcy proceedings.  Why?  

Because they're deemed necessary to a farmer's farming 

operation.  But what do we have now? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that leaseback rights are not exempted 

from The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act virtually says, as 

upheld by the TD Bank v. Mulatz 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

decision, that a farmer's land is not necessary to his farming 

operation and that the lease can be virtually repossessed with 

other chattels in a bankruptcy proceeding. 

 

Today the member from Shaunavon has put before the 

Assembly a motion that is of paramount importance to the 

agricultural communities of Saskatchewan.  We believe that it 

is crucial for the government to amend The Farm Security Act 

in order to protect hundreds of farm families currently in 

bankruptcy proceedings from losing the right to lease back their 

land from lending institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one farmer has lost a decision to the lenders in 

court.  In TD v. Mulatz, the bank spent a great deal of money to 

go after a relatively small farm but they set a precedent.  As a 

result, leaseback rights were declared to have value. 

 

Before Christmas a farmer and his wife in west central 

Saskatchewan were engaged in negotiations of the lease on 

their farm land with a major bank.  The family had been in a 

leaseback arrangement with the bank for the previous two- to 

three-year period, and the bank made a lease offer which was 

not suitable to the farmer. So the individual in question had 

exercised his legal right to have the lease reviewed by the Farm 

Tenure Arbitration Board. 

 

Contained in the lease, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and one of the 

things to which the farmer objected, was a clause -- a clause 

which forced the farmer to promise that he would never declare 

bankruptcy or be petitioned into bankruptcy by anyone other 

than the bank with whom he and his wife signed the lease. 

 

The Farm Tenure Arbitration Board ordered the bank to 

remove that clause.  That's a very significant point, that they 

required the bank to remove that clause.  And you know what?  

The bank complied with that order, and two weeks later, some 

time in February, offered the family farm a new lease which 

they were prepared to sign. 

 

Now in the interim this family came to the conclusion that in 

spite of the lease arrangement that was being offered to them, 

they were simply unable to manage their remaining debt and to 

continue to operate their farm.  They made an assignment into 

bankruptcy. 

 

At that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the bank withdrew the lease 

which it had been prepared to sign.  At this stage of this 

process, there was still time for the bank to appeal the order by 

the Arbitration Board.  And when the TD Bank v. Mulatz 

decision was rendered on February 22, the bank issued an 

appeal of the order of the Farm Tenure Arbitration Board 

which had ordered the bankruptcy clause withdrawn. 

 

Now at this time the bank issued notice to the farm family that 

it was to vacate its land by the end of March.  Subsequent to 

that, the family farm was advertised for sale in the local paper 

on April 5, this very month. 

Interestingly enough, the trustee in the bankruptcy proceedings 

has said the leaseback rights have no value to him and he's 

turned them back to the farmer.  The bank is proceeding to sell 

that land anyway. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now let's just think about this.  What happens, I wonder, if the 

family has its farm sold out from under them, but they go to the 

Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal rules against the 

bank, but the farm has been sold.  I mean how astonishing is 

this.  What happens to the family then?  Does another bank 

challenge another family on this issue until a precedent is set? 

 

How many people have to endure pain and uncertainty and the 

expense of this process before we take action here as legislators 

to correct the legislation?  Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

fellow members of this Assembly, within the course of 100 

days while most of us enjoyed Christmas, shovelled our way 

through winter, and smiled at the thought of spring, a farm 

family -- one more -- has gone from being under the protection 

of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act to declaring 

bankruptcy to having their lease withdrawn, their leaseback 

rights attached, and being thrown off their farm.  One hundred 

days -- 100 days and counting. 

 

Can any one of us here even begin to imagine the fear and the 

turbulence that this causes for this particular farm family?  For 

any people who in fact are facing similar kinds of 

circumstances in Saskatchewan? 

 

Can any one of us here imagine going through the painful 

process of relinquishing our family farm to a lending 

institution?  Arranging it so that we could lease it back; 

struggling to pay the bills. And then, through an oversight on 

the part of legislators and a piece of legislation -- who in all 

fairness did not anticipate this action being taken by lenders -- 

through an oversight on the part of the democratically elected 

members of this Assembly, that farm family now has been put 

at the mercy of a lending institution; helpless and without the 

necessary resources to defend themselves in a legal battle 

against a financial giant with a very big stick. 

 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, Mr. Speaker, that is 

what it is.  Albeit unwittingly, we have placed a weapon in the 

hands of lending institutions which, if it is used to its fullest 

force, could begin an unstoppable domino effect throughout 

rural Saskatchewan as farmers already in bankruptcy would be 

vulnerable to lose their leaseback rights.  And those 

considering bankruptcy would have to stay out of the leaseback 

program for fear of what could happen, and those petitioned 

into bankruptcy by lenders would have no options whatsoever. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply unacceptable.  It's 

unacceptable to the Liberal caucus, and I know when people in 

this Assembly understand it, it would be completely 

unacceptable to each and every member of this Assembly. 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very proud to lend my support to the 

resolution put forward by the member from Shaunavon, to 

cause our government with our support, and I'm sure the 

support of the official opposition, to amend The Farm Security 

Act through the most expedient means possible. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

grateful for the opportunity to speak to this resolution this 

afternoon.  I recognize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not every one 

of us in this Assembly is an expert on agriculture, but that 

should not preclude any one of us from caring about the 

well-being and security of every individual in our province. 

 

Furthermore, regardless of whether all of us understand what 

can sometimes be confusing terminology surrounding 

leasebacks and IMAPs (indexed moving average pricing) and 

GRIP and all of the other acronyms that roll off farmers' 

tongues like another language, regardless of our level of 

understanding of the science and business that is agriculture, all 

of us can have an understanding of farm families on a different 

level, a human level. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have learned more about the 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act while our caucus prepared for 

this debate.  I have learned a fair amount about the Act which 

governs the financial regulations which control the lives of 

farmers and the rights they have with respect to their land.  And 

I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is one of the things for 

which I am grateful. 

 

I am grateful for the opportunity to increase my understanding 

through this type of debate by listening to other members, by 

researching for speeches, by reading mail and talking with 

constituents, and through the many public and private forums 

to which people are so thoughtful to invite us. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the more I learn of the intricate 

processes that farm families must follow to finance their 

operations, to market and collect for their crops, to insure their 

crops and to participate in government programs, the more my 

respect increases for their abilities and their perseverance. 

 

The more evidence I see of the tenacity of people who must 

fight against such difficult odds just to be able to preserve the 

life they have on the farm, the heritage, and the land which has 

been in so many of their families for generations, the more I am 

reminded of the obligation of all MLAs, no matter where we 

live or what the demographics or geographics of our 

constituencies, the more I am reminded of our obligation to 

fight for the survival of our rural communities and the people 

on the surrounding farms who keep them alive. 

 

I do not believe that it is ever the intention of any government 

to draft legislation that would be harmful to the people it was 

designed to help or protect.  In my research, I revisited some of 

the remarks made in 

Hansard when the Act was amended in 1992 and I reviewed 

some of the debate and other material that was around at the 

time. 

 

It was interesting and enlightening, Mr. Speaker, to see the 

great optimism that was reflected in the remarks made by 

government members at that time about the six-year leaseback 

program and the hope it would provide for farm families. 

 

The government talked about some of the important features of 

the six-year leaseback and the farm debt legislation.  The 

government talked about the importance of the borrower 

having security for up to six years, a reasonable period in 

which to turn the operation around.  Obviously, Mr. Speaker, 

the intent was there to give farmers a chance to get things 

straightened out. 

 

The government said the benefits to the farmers were obvious 

-- tenure on the farm with reduced costs and a reasonable 

period to recover.  The government talked about how the 

leaseback plan would be good for business, for municipal 

governments and rural schools, citing the fact that 30 per cent 

of the endangered farmers are younger and more likely to have 

children.  The Act will help to keep schools viable by keeping 

more young families in rural areas. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this was obviously an Act passed with good 

intentions.  In Hansard on July 16, 1992 the member from 

Rosetown, then minister of Agriculture, said, and I quote: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this is grass roots legislation, and it is 

legislation which will help to preserve our Saskatchewan 

farming industry.  It ensures that farmers may continue to 

farm land which (that) they have turned over to lending 

institutions to settle debt -- debt, Mr. Speaker, which is the 

result of international market conditions beyond our farmers' 

control, debt that is incurred through no error or 

mismanagement on the farmers part. 

 

That was what the minister of Agriculture said in July 1992.  

And he went on to say: 

 

 To (sit idly by) do so would be to abrogate our 

responsibilities and our heritage.  If we make no effort to 

save our agricultural industry, we deny the legacy left to us 

by our pioneers and settlers . . . And, Mr. Speaker, we will do 

everything in our power to ensure that our farmers have the 

opportunity to call that land their own again. 

 

The minister of Agriculture was particularly eloquent that day, 

and he continued to reinforce the intent of The Saskatchewan 

Farm Securities Act with these comments:  And I quote again 

from page 1528 of the July 16, 1992 Hansard: 

 

 (Mr. Speaker) The Government of Saskatchewan must do 

what it can to protect our farmers as they continue to attempt 

to survive these very tough circumstances. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

Security of tenure is the cornerstone of the report by the Farm 

Debt Advisory Committee.  And it is with security of tenure 

that we begin to help our farmers. 

 

So I believe it was the intention to protect farmers and to keep 

farm families on their land when The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act was drafted or when it was amended in 1991, 

those amendments being proclaimed in 1992 by the current 

government.  I believe the Act exists to afford protection to 

people who have already been through a great deal of financial 

and emotional upheaval in giving back land to the banks and 

either declaring or being forced into bankruptcy. 

 

I think the Act recognizes that farm families should be given 

every reasonable opportunity to rebuild their farms.  And farm 

debt legislation that protects leaseback rights, that gives them a 

chance to climb back from bankruptcy with the bare necessities 

of machinery and seed and a lease on a limited amount of land 

they used to farm is certainly not a free ticket to anything.  It is 

a small stake against enormous odds which gives a family some 

glimmer of hope that they can fight to preserve their rural way 

of life. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have a duty to perform 

today.  I believe that each one of us must put ourselves in the 

shoes of the hundreds of farm families who could be staring in 

disbelief at advertisements listing their farms for sale if we do 

not rise to their defence today.  I believe that each one of us, 

regardless of our background, regardless of whether we are 

representatives of urban or rural constituencies, must shoulder 

full responsibility to do the proper thing and amend this Act.  

We must put the minds of hundreds of farm families at rest 

immediately and preserve and protect the future of many farm 

families under the shadow of farm debt today which could 

evolve to bankruptcy tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this resolution deserves our unanimous consent.  

It comes at no cost and is an opportunity for us to save 

countless families from court battles in which there are truly no 

winners.  Mr. Speaker, I urge each member to let their 

conscience be their guide and to join me in supporting the 

resolution presented by the member for Shaunavon today.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

after the Leader of the Liberal Party made her speech, I had a 

heck of a time -- I was looking around for Kleenex and a towel 

to dry my eyes and I wanted to get up and walk out of the 

theatre and get in my car and go home, but then I realized I was 

in the legislature. 

 

What a performance.  You hear the voice raising and lowering 

and quivering.  I'll tell you, I've never seen a phonier, unreal 

performance in my life in this legislature, and that's saying 

something.  That is saying something, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

want the people of Saskatchewan to know how phoney it is and 

in my remarks I'll tell, explain how phoney it is. 

And the member for Shaunavon.  When the member for 

Shaunavon first left this side of the House for the other side, I 

didn't think he was Liberal, but today he's proven he's a Liberal 

-- a phoney Liberal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that shines through in this and 

proves the phoniness of this motion is the fact that they've 

exposed themselves on the knowledge of this subject.  They've 

exposed their knowledge of the subject because the motion that 

the member puts forward and the legislation that the member 

tabled in this House simply does not come anywhere near 

doing what they would like to say it does -- not anywhere near.  

They should have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- So bring in an amendment. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well the member says, well bring in an 

amendment.  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me go through the process, 

let me go through the process. 

 

This problem began when the institutions, the financial 

institutions, started looking for a way out of our six-year 

leaseback program that we put in in this government, our 

Minister of Agriculture put in by this government, for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan.  The institutions started to look for a 

way out of this. 

 

And over a period of time they found a loophole, they found a 

loophole aided by the courts.  But the problem is and since that 

time, Mr. Speaker -- and the members want to know -- this 

government has been working and trying to make sure that 

every little i is dotted and t is crossed to make sure there's no 

other loopholes. 

 

And what does the member for Shaunavon do?  Bring in a 

piece of legislation, aided by this motion, that simply is 

inadequate, malthought and, I must say, phoney. 

 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act meant to include 

bankruptcies; ACS holds 14,500 or so acres of land.  Of that, 

about twelve and a half thousand, Mr. Speaker, are in a 

leaseback situation.  The other two thousand acres, or 

twenty-five hundred acres roughly, is land that was 

pre-leaseback legislation and rented to farmers on an annual 

basis. 

 

Do you know how much land there is in Saskatchewan held by 

companies . . . or by institutions?  One million eight hundred 

. . . approximately, 800,000.  Most of it by Farm Credit 

Corporations; most of that 1.8 million by Farm Credit 

Corporation.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, eight-tenths of 1 per cent is 

held by ACS, eight-tenths of 1 per cent is held by ACS -- of the 

land held in Saskatchewan by institutions. 

 

The first reason I want to put forward as to why this is phoney 

legislation or a phoney motion, Mr. Speaker, is we haven't 

heard boo out of the Liberals.  We haven't heard boo in this 

House. 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

Why didn't they bring a motion forward that said we want the 

federal government to put their 80-some per cent of the land 

that's held by them in Saskatchewan into a leaseback program, 

into our six-year leaseback program run by the rules.  Why 

didn't they bring that into this legislature? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We will. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- The hon. member says he will.  Well I mean 

we haven't seen it yet and we know it's a major problem.  Or 

why didn't he include it in his resolution if he wanted to be all 

encompassing and try to help farmers, really try to help 

farmers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the process of the farm . . . Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act amendment put in the six-year leaseback, the 

process, as we've been working on it in the department, came to 

fruition basically with the TD v. Mulatz case.  This crystallized 

the issue.  But it's an issue that has been burning for a long, 

long time. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How much longer? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Well the member for . . . the Leader of the 

Liberal Party says, well how much longer.  Well I'll tell you 

one thing that we didn't do and won't do, Madam Leader of the 

Liberal Party, is we won't come forward with junk legislation 

that will not solve the problem, like you did. 

 

ACS by the way, Mr. Speaker, ACS will not partake in the 

bankruptcy program that some of the institutions like the TD 

Bank are putting forward.  ACS says it doesn't matter if it's 

voluntary bankruptcy.  Even if it's voluntary bankruptcy, they 

will not use the federal Act, the rules of the federal Act. 

 

Because the federal Bankruptcy Act gives a definition of a 

farmer.  The definition of a farmer is a person who makes his 

sole income from farming.  Well in these days, Mr. Speaker, 

you know and I hope the members opposite will know that 

there are not that many people left in Saskatchewan who are 

making their income solely from farming. 

 

So ACS says -- and just let me explain one more thing -- ACS 

says it will not petition farmers into bankruptcy.  It made that 

very clear.  Some of the banks are, or the TD bank in this case 

is.  Because we have instructed our institution not to do that, to 

help farmers. 

 

The other aspect is if a farmer volunteers himself into 

bankruptcy.  If a farmer volunteers bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker, he 

then is in a situation where the Bankruptcy Act is interpreted 

and he has no protection.  And that's why we need some 

Saskatchewan legislation in that small corner, and I'll get to 

that in a minute. 

 

But do you hear any of the Kingston trio over there in the 

Liberal Party talking about changing the federal Bankruptcy 

Act?  Is there anywhere in the motion that we are discussing 

today that the member says, we 

should not only have some Saskatchewan legislation, we 

should be changing the federal Bankruptcy Act . . . call upon 

his federal Liberal cousins to change the Bankruptcy Act to 

ensure that the definition of farmer is expanded so that farmers 

can't be petitioned into bankruptcy by the institutions. 

 

Right now, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province 

. . . The definition of the Bankruptcy Act is someone who 

makes his income solely from farming. 

 

Well had the eager beavers in the Liberal Party, had they not 

been so eager to -- I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker; I used an animal 

name; I apologize for that -- had the eager Liberals not been so 

in a hurry to put forward inadequate legislation, they may have 

taken time to ask their federal members and Mr. Goodale to 

change the Bankruptcy Act, to expand the Bankruptcy Act to 

allow farmers who are now . . . the norm of farming is farming 

and working off the farm too, but allow them the protection 

they need under the Bankruptcy Act.  Not one word in this 

motion, Mr. Speaker.  And that's another reason this is a 

phoney motion and a phoney piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some of the problems in the 

legislation that has been brought forward.  Now this motion, 

this motion, Mr. Speaker, talks about asking us to bring 

forward the legislation.  But then the member put forward his 

own legislation, and I want to explain the difference and 

another reason of the phoney legislation. 

 

The first thing this legislation that was put forward does, it does 

not refer or . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is referring to the 

Bill that's on the order paper.  He's out of the order.  If the 

member wishes to speak on the motion, he can speak on the 

motion.  But the Bill that was brought in is not under 

discussion at the present time. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Okay, Mr. Speaker, yes.  This is very close to 

the Bill, so it's going to be . . . I'll try to stay . . . Okay. 

 

In the legislation that is needed . . . Let me put it this way.  In 

the legislation that the member is calling us to bring forward, 

there is a need to have the right of first refusal for farmers.  

Anything that I've seen that's been put forward so far has had 

nothing to say about right of first refusal.  Right of first refusal 

on leases and purchases, it's not there -- phoney -- because we 

need the right of first refusal to ensure that the farmers can 

continue their leasing after bankruptcy, that all their 

wherewithal and their leased land can be continued to be 

farmed by them because of their farming unit that they depend 

on and budget on. 

 

The second thing the legislation should have, Mr. Speaker -- 

and to date I have not seen this in this House -- is an 

assignment clause.  That's why I say it's so ill thought out.  I 

mean that's why this government is in the process of bringing 

forward something.  But you don't just bring forward a 

half-remedied solution. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

The assignment clause I have not seen in this House presented 

by any member, and it's important because in order to make 

this legislation effective, you have to be able to have the 

farmer, as in the six-year leaseback legislation, assign his rights 

to a spouse or a child -- anyway the definition is laid out in the 

legislation -- or wife of a child.  Very specific.  Nothing that's 

been presented in this House, Mr. Speaker, has seen that.  And 

we need legislation that includes that.  Phoney. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that when you are 

crafting legislation for this institution that deals directly with or 

indirectly with legislation that is federal legislation, you have to 

be very cautious.  Because if the banks, if the TD Bank -- I 

don't want to single it out -- if a bank has worked for a couple 

of years since our six-year leaseback program has been put in 

place, to find a loophole to try to take away the benefit of the 

six-year leaseback, then I'm sure in any new legislation those in 

that institution would again try to take time to study and study 

and to try to find another way out. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not federal. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 

says it's not federal.  Well the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, 

for the benefit of the member, and I can remember explaining 

some of these things to him in my previous life -- the 

Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act is a federal Act.  It's a federal 

Act.  Do you agree with me?  It's a federal Act.  I think he 

agrees with me now, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry he did not know 

that.  And perhaps had he known that, he wouldn't have put 

forward this motion or anything else similar to it in this House. 

 

But just think of that institution, if that institution started 

looking for loopholes again in any new amendments that might 

come to this House, what their option would be, Mr. Speaker, if 

they couldn't find any loopholes, is because if any provincial 

legislation tries to override federal legislation or affect it in any 

way, they could challenge it constitutionally.  And would that 

solve the problem?  Of course not.  Of course it wouldn't solve 

the problem. 

 

That's why, Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Leader of the Liberal 

Party and her friends behind her to talk to Mr. Goodale and Mr. 

Chrtien in the federal Liberal Party.  Tell them that they made 

a mistake by what they did here; they realize they didn't 

understand what was going on. And if they truly want to 

cooperate . . . I mean I hear all this verbal diarrhea about 

cooperation . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened to the member.  He's used a 

number of words or language which is simply not appropriate 

for this Chamber.  Although some of them have not been 

unparliamentary, in the manner in which he says them they are 

unparliamentary.  And using that last word, certainly I know 

the member has more experience; he knows they're 

unparliamentary and I wish he'd refrain from using that kind of 

language. 

Mr. Upshall: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker, if I was becoming 

unparliamentary.  As you very well know, I would not want to 

do that. 

 

But I want to make a point.  The sob story whine coming from 

the leader of the Liberals is certainly phoney in that the solution 

that they're putting forward is not a solution.  Talk to your 

federal counterparts.  Go back and get some people, some of 

your Liberal lawyers, to explain to you the fact that federal law 

versus provincial law is very, very precarious when it comes to 

one overriding the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constitutional challenge is a problem if you 

don't research and review any legislation that's brought forward 

and make sure that you're not going to shift the object of the 

intent.  The intent is to help farmers, but if we want to shift 

that, there could be a constitutional challenge, and where would 

it get us? 

 

That's why when we talk about cooperation -- and that's what I 

started to say just a few minutes ago -- the cooperation aspect 

that I heard over and over again, well we've got to be pretty 

nice little people and work together and cooperate so we fix 

everything. 

 

Well that doesn't work.  I mean you're saying one thing and 

they're absolutely doing another.  And you know what really 

hurts, Mr. Speaker?  When I hear them talking about farm 

families.  Well I'll tell you, I suffered through many years of 

farm families going through bankruptcies, talking to me on the 

phone and talking to other members of this legislature.  But the 

prima donnas come in here and pretend they're the first ones 

that ever experienced this.  But you know what really hurts, 

Mr. Speaker, is they are using that farm family for their Liberal 

fortunes.  That is disgusting. 

 

Because had they really wanted, had they really wanted to help 

that family, they wouldn't come forward with a motion like this 

or they wouldn't present what was presented to this legislature.  

It would have been something better, if they'd really wanted to 

do it.  And I say that's disgusting and it's phoney. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You have no idea what you're talking 

about there. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Shaunavon 

says I have no idea what I'm talking about.  Well I'll invite him 

to send my remarks out to get analysed, and we'll see who 

knows who's talking about who. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we need in the provincial legislation is an 

exemption from the bankruptcy Act to exempt the six-year 

leaseback land.  We have to talk about changes -- changes, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, section 48, 

which broadens the definition. 

 

In this day and age farmers, let's say the majority of 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

farmers work off the farm.  And I would just ask him or the 

Liberal leader and her cohorts there to just talk to the federal 

people and say, please get up to speed; get modern. 

 

It's a reality that people are working off the farm.  The reason 

that they're working off the farm is because they can't make a 

living on the farm. And yet you leave your legislation in place 

to say that if you're living on the farm and making all your 

income from that, you can be petitioned into bankruptcy, but if 

you're working off the farm and trying to keep the farm alive 

. . . I mean in reverse -- if you're working on the farm you can't 

be petitioned into bankruptcy.  But if you're working off the 

farm trying to keep the farm alive, you can be. 

 

Well the member from Shaunavon's laughing.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that is another little bit of proof.  Just phone up your 

federal counterparts.  Say look, the change to the Bankruptcy 

and Solvency Act is just a little change.  That's all you have to 

do.  Broaden the mandate.  Make sure you research it though.  

Broaden the mandate to get into the modern age, because it 

doesn't make sense. 

 

I ask the members, does it make sense to have a law that says 

that you really can't go out and try to save your farm, or else 

somebody can petition you into bankruptcy for doing it?  It 

doesn't make any sense.  And is that included in the motion?  

Absolutely not.  That's why the motion's phoney, and the 

legislation's phoney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, using farm families for the fortune of the 

Liberal Party is not a very proud thing to do, in my books.  As I 

said, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and the Liberal Party 

either are misinformed or incompetent or trying to use 

somebody else for their gain. 

 

I ask the members, just think about.  This is very common in 

the Liberal Party.  Look at this.  We have here -- and talk about 

bankruptcies -- we have here a headline in The Western 

Producer, March 31: "Goodale says Canada 'won't play dead' 

if U.S. blocks wheat".  Okay?  And in terms of the farming 

situation, it's very important because of the income to farmers. 

 

In the same paper though, proving our accusation that Mr. 

Goodale is more talk than action and the fact that if the 

members opposite here have any influence and want to save 

farms and get the farm economy going, they would be talking 

to him.  But the same copy of The Western Producer, there is 

a Liberal back-bencher, Wayne Easter, condemning Mr. 

Goodale for lack of action. 

 

And this is the same thing here.  We have sweet talk and no 

action. We have the Liberals sweet-talking us in Ottawa, with 

Mr. Chrtien, Mr. Goodale, and Mr. Martin keeping on the 

same Conservative finance program -- phoney.  And the people 

of this province will see that phoniness ever so soon. 

You talk about bankruptcies.  Look at the durum wheat 

situation.  What's happening?  What's happening with the 

durum wheat situation?  Well I'll tell you . . . or the cash 

advance?  Mr. Goodale says we're going to have a cash 

advance.  And all of a sudden after the election, no, I guess 

we're not going to have interest-free cash advance.  I invite the 

Liberal leader to get on the phone again, call Mr. Goodale and 

say, live up to your word.  But why would she when she does 

the same thing in Saskatchewan? 

 

Transportation policy.  If you want to talk about bankruptcies, 

why we have to have legislation in here and in Ottawa and in 

Saskatchewan to fix some of the problems.  I just happened to 

be going through a little document called Facing Choices 

Together.  Maybe the members opposite will have seen this 

document. It's called Facing Choices Together. It's the 

response to pre-budget consultations, tabled by the Hon. Paul 

Martin.  Okay? 

 

I was flipping through it and I came to one section, and this 

section is called . . . and the issue is transportation policy.  And 

the scope of this has objectives, lead roles, the scope, and the 

timetable.  Well I just want to read the scope, part of the scope: 

 

 Service transportation: consultations with stakeholders to 

redirect subsidies into new programs that would improve 

efficiency. 

 

This is the Liberal document -- redirect subsidies into new 

programs that would improve efficiency.  Talking about the 

Crow benefit, obviously. 

 

Four hundred million dollars, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberals are 

trying to take away from Saskatchewan farmers.  Did you hear 

anything about that?  Do you know what that will do for the 

bankruptcies in this province?  In fact did you hear the 

members opposite say one word about the 5 per cent reduction 

in the transportation costs this year? 

 

No, no, they're very responsible to the Saskatchewan farmers, 

bringing forward a motion that condemns the government and 

urges them to bring something forward, then put something 

forward in the legislature that tries to fix a problem that they 

don't know how to fix . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

members say, do something.  Well I guess that shows the 

measure of understanding that they have about this institution, 

and that's a sad statement, a sad problem we have. 

 

But we have a document by the federal Liberals.  Why wouldn't 

you stand up in your place and say, even the 5 per cent that was 

reduced by your federal Liberal counterparts, the 5 per cent 

reduction in the method of payment, Mr. Speaker, is going to 

cause more bankruptcies.  Did we hear one word out of the 

members opposite?  Not one word.  That's why this motion and 

anything they place before this House is phoney. 

 

The same old Conservative policies, but have the sweet-talkers 

out 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

front.  Have the sweet-talkers out front doing the warm fuzzies 

with all the people, but continue in the background running that 

same old right-wing Conservative policy. 

 

And you see it in the transportation.  You see it in finance.  

You see it in the $39 billion debt that they're . . . you see it in 

the interest rates raising because they're not doing anything 

about it.  And the people over . . . the Liberals over on this side 

of the House stand in their place and moan and pretend they're 

concerned about the farm families of Saskatchewan.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that is phoney, absolutely phoney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end my remarks by moving a motion 

because obviously . . . an amendment rather.  I'm sorry, I didn't 

mean motion, I meant amendment --  an amendment that will 

help to try to resolve this problem. 

 

But before I move this amendment, I have just one last request 

of the Liberal Party.  If you want to help farmers in 

Saskatchewan, you'd better be consistent.  Because I saw it in 

eight years, or six . . . ten years of Conservative, five of them 

being in this House opposite, the lack of being consistent. 

 

Because you can't go around and not say a word about pulling 

the skids out of these farmers by reducing the transportation 

payment and eventually trying to eliminate it with your federal 

counterparts, the same time saying you want to stop 

bankruptcies.  That's inconsistent.  You can't go around in this 

legislature not saying a word about the programs of the federal 

government, including an interest-free cash advance that was 

promised and now not delivered, and still say you want to help 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

I'll tell the Liberal party we'll be watching.  And if you don't 

increase your consistency -- and you've been very inconsistent 

on every issue in this House -- your fortunes will be down the 

tubes quicker that you would think.  Oh, you may feel good 

now, but I'll tell you it doesn't take long for the feelings and the 

knowledge inside these walls to spill over.  And inconsistency 

is the one thing that I know people especially in rural 

Saskatchewan and I'm sure in urban Saskatchewan, understand.  

They don't like to be told one thing and have something else 

done to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the member for Biggar, 

that we: 

 

 Remove all words after Assembly and replace with the 

following: 

 

 commend the provincial government for taking a responsible, 

thoughtful approach in developing legislative initiatives 

designed to protect Saskatchewan farm families currently 

facing bankruptcy, which include amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act; and further that this 

Assembly call on the federal government to join in this effort 

to protect Saskatchewan farm families by 

making the appropriate complementary changes to the 

Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

very pleased to enter into this debate today, discussing the 

subject of farm debt and the question of action or inaction by 

governments. 

 

I find it very interesting when I'm lectured by members 

opposite to what it feels like to go through farm debt, what it 

feels like to go through the pain and agony that takes place, and 

told what I'm supposed to feel, what other individuals are 

supposed to feel. 

 

I know the feelings that one goes through by doing it.  I'm not 

afraid to say that I've gone through it personally in terms of 

making those adjustments on my farm.  I am saddened to hear 

though -- I feel for the people today that are faced with the 

problem and the difficulty -- that our Act has not captured all 

those individuals. 

 

But as of yesterday, as mentioned by our Attorney General, 

who mentioned that we are looking at a Saskatchewan solution.  

Since the federal government has failed and continues to fail to 

make their changes to the Bankruptcy Act, we will try to create 

that Saskatchewan solution.  And we hope, as he outlined 

yesterday, it will stand the test of the courts.  It would be far 

better had it not been that case. 

 

And the minister outlined yesterday that the Department of 

Justice and Department of Agriculture had been looking at a 

solution since February, in consultation with the federal 

government in Ottawa.  And the federal government had shown 

inaction in that area.  As he said, Ottawa moves quite slowly. 

 

As the member from Humboldt had mentioned, it is interesting 

though when we talk about farm families and the problem that 

this farm family faced with that judgement, is that the members 

opposite of the third party failed to discuss the million-plus 

acres held by Farm Credit Corporation that does not participate 

in the six-year leaseback.  And the thousands of farmers that 

are affected by that, not a word, not a word, Mr. Speaker, 

nothing.  Where were they? 

 

They are playing politics with one individual case and 

forgetting the other farmers that are out there.  I would like to 

see correspondence from the members opposite to the federal 

Agriculture minister requesting FCC to participate in this 

program.  I would like to see that kind of support. 

 

Let's talk about another problem; we're talking about 

bankruptcy, possible changes to the Income Tax Act.  The 

member from Rosthern, approximately three weeks ago, 

brought up the subject and I commend him for bringing this 

subject to the attention of the government.  Because he showed 

two sections in the Income Tax Act  brought forward in the last 

federal budget by the administration there -- Liberals -- that has 

serious complications for any farmer or farm 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1994 

family that are entering into bankruptcy.  And I'd like to read a 

brief summation of that to let the members opposite know what 

is going on. 

 

(1645) 

 

Buried among pages and pages of technical data to the federal 

Income Tax Act, is something you've probably already heard 

about -- a proposal that amount of indebtedness written off, 

forgiven, or otherwise deemed uncollectible by a lender, to be 

considered ordinary income in the hands of the borrower, 

subject to a tax rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to explain this, particularly to the 

members opposite.  If a farm family declares bankruptcy and 

there is a write-off, let's say, of $120,000, that $120,000 is now 

deemed as income for that year.  Protecting family farms, this 

is what we're hearing from the federal Liberals? 

 

I have heard nothing -- nothing -- from our provincial Liberals.  

Show us correspondence.  Show us something that you've 

talked to the federal minister of Ottawa.  Show a spirit of 

cooperation.  But nothing.  And the implication of this is it's 

hard to imagine. 

 

When a farm family makes a decision that they're going to go 

into bankruptcy and hopefully they'll be able to continue to 

farm, provided financial institutions don't try and upset the 

legislation by some other avenue or means, they are faced with 

a tax bill who is more unforgiving than any financial institution 

-- Revenue Canada -- and they will shut down the farm now.  

These people will be faced with this debt.  And still nothing, 

still nothing.  I can't believe it -- still nothing. 

 

These are issues that must take priority as we are trying to 

develop, as the Minister of Justice said yesterday, a solution to 

this problem so it will withstand any other test.  We are trying 

to work with it. 

 

But what do the members opposite simply do?  Simply 

politically grandstand -- they had the answer yesterday to what 

was being done and what did they provide?  Inadequate 

legislation to deal with the problem, which would make it 

worse rather than better, and leaves out key, significant areas in 

terms of the legislation. 

 

There's no provision in terms of passing a lease on to someone 

else in terms of a spouse or a daughter or a son, which the 

present legislation does.  That amendment does not do that.  

And I realize, Mr. Speaker, I have dwelled a little beyond the 

motion. 

 

Very interesting to hear the member opposite talking, babbling 

on at what's going on and things like this, Mr. Speaker.  But I 

want to go back to the question of this tax problem.  That idea 

doesn't give you nightmares, it will likely give you heartburn. 

 

In plain English, this will mean if the federal government does 

decide to implement this provision, that borrowers with 

unmanageable debt could face 

total ruin because of a tax liability.  They can't manage their 

debts in the first place and it's written off.  How can they find 

funds to pay the taxes?  How can they find the funds?  And 

nothing, still nothing in terms of this . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You know that's not the truth, Grant. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

stated, from Shaunavon, that this is not the truth.  I would ask 

him to check section 88 and section 90 of the proposed changes 

to the Income Tax Act that are in the federal document papers 

that were filed after the Finance minister in Ottawa filed those 

documents.  It is there. 

 

I have also had discussions with those people who deal with 

farmers and farm debt renegotiations, and have highlighted it to 

me in terms of what's going on.  It has been highlighted in also 

The Financial Post in terms of a person that is expert in terms 

of tax, outlining this difficulty.  It has also been in an issue of 

Ag Week magazine highlighting the issue and the difficulty 

with it.  So if I am incorrect in what I am saying, then there are 

a number of other people that are incorrect in what is being 

said. 

 

And also I refer to the questions that were asked by the member 

from Rosthern on this very issue, approximately three weeks 

ago, talking about the same issue, and quoting the same 

individuals in terms of the changes to the tax Act.  And I'm told 

that I'm telling an untruth?  I'm told that I'm being told an 

untruth?  I think the member from Shaunavon had better check 

the facts and better read the documents. 

 

I want to go back to the question of Farm Credit Corporation.  

We had saw the previous administration, federal 

administration, not willing to deal in terms of the six-year 

leaseback proposal.  They were not wanting to participate and 

help family farms.  They simply wanted to play politics.  We 

were hopeful with the change in the federal regime in Ottawa 

that we would see some changes there in terms of FCC.  And I 

certainly hope these changes are coming for those family farms 

that are out there, for the families.  But I am tired of the 

rhetoric. 

 

We take action.  When we bring in six-year leaseback, we are 

criticized for the action that we take as a government.  We are 

criticized that it is not what is needed.  Farmers out say that 

yes, this is what is needed, it does provide protection. 

 

We are also looking to the future, Mr. Speaker.  And I would 

like to refer to the document, the Ag 2000 strategy, that 

outlines a game plan of where we want to be next to deal with 

those farmers in terms that have turned land back voluntarily to 

farm financial institutions; dealing with the question of those 

people that have been bankrupt or foreclosed on; also dealing 

with those people who wish to retire and cannot find people out 

there who wish to purchase their land. 



April 12, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

We're exploring new opportunities, Mr. Speaker.  It is stated in 

Ag 2000 we are exploring the area of community-based land 

trust, Mr. Speaker.  The community-based land trust is a 

vehicle by which communities can look and determine the 

future they want in terms of agriculture, and putting those 

people on the land and allowing them to continue to farm, and 

at the same time allowing those wishing, to retire. 

 

It is an opportunity.  It is an opportunity, and we need to be 

looking into the future too in terms of finding that vehicle that 

will work.  We need to be also providing the breathing space 

that the six-year leaseback does in terms of allowing farmers to 

get ahead of the game if they wish to purchase some of that 

land back.  We need to be providing breathing spaces, and 

that's the action this government has taken, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the members opposite from the third party continue to 

chirp and say it's not.  You know, you need to deal with this, 

you need to deal with that, and things like this.  Little wee 

issues, very specific.  And we try to deal with the general on all 

the farm community out there. 

 

Our Ag 2000 strategy maps the future game plan, or where we 

want to go in terms of value added industry; key roles of the 

livestock industry; key roles in terms of research and 

development in this province, Mr. Speaker.  The area too of 

grain transportation, Mr. Speaker.  The question of trying to 

deal with that subsidy program that we have and how we can 

best manage it and make sure it is maintained so it's a subsidy 

to western Canada and it's not lost in the mix. 

 

If I am fearful of something, Mr. Speaker, this present federal 

government -- that the members opposite of the third party are 

also members of -- that in the area of grain transportation they 

will act too hastily, without consultation, without recognizing 

what we need to do in western Canada.  I am afraid, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to grain transportation, that the subsidy 

will be diluted and become a national subsidy, and we will lose 

again in western Canada.  And this is something we have to be 

aware of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've said, this government has tried to act in 

terms of the areas of farm debt.  We have continued to use 

different vehicles and terms to meet that farm crisis out there -- 

and it continues to be a crisis -- and we welcome all ideas by 

members opposite to deal with those problems. 

 

But we need to do it in a forum that is not political, Mr. 

Speaker.  We need to do it in a forum by which we can find 

solutions.  Bringing it in this forum today is not the way.  We 

are certainly open to anyone coming forward, and the Minister 

of Agriculture I know would welcome any suggestions coming 

forward from the third party and from the official opposition 

that are workable and that will work, and not just politics. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to take part in this 

debate today.  Thank you very much. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn the 

motion being debated. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


