




















































Hansard: February 08, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 

 February 8, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next move first reading of a Bill 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 

the legislative utilities review committee. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that on 

Thursday I shall be asking the government this question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 

being this corporation recorded a loss of $150 million in 1992 

and a profit of $200 million in 1993 and had overestimated the 

final payment in 1991 by $85 million, these questions I will 

be asking: why does the '92-93 summary financial statement 

not reflect an additional 85 million profit to account for the 

previous year's overestimation; (b) when will the 85 million 

correction be recorded in Public Accounts; and (c) where will 

the 85 million correction be recorded in the Public Accounts? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 With regard to the Department of Agriculture's 1992-93 

expenditure for ministers' travel, please provide details and 

trips taken by Minister Cunningham, R.L. Harper, Eric M.T. 

Upshall, Grant D.G. Whitmore, and Minister Bernhard Wiens, 

including the following information:  date of trip, destination, 

purpose of trip, persons accompanying minister or MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), and the cost of each 

trip. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Public Service Commission:  (1) provide the 

number of individuals employed by the PSC that receive 

subsidized parking stalls; (2) the total amount monthly spent 

on providing parking stalls for these individuals. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Saskatchewan Government  

Insurance:  (1) the total amount of additional revenue 

generated by all increases in registration, licence fees, and 

vehicle insurance since November 1, 1991; (2) the percentage 

increase in registration, licence renewal, and vehicle insurance 

since November 1, 1991; (3) the average dollar amount 

increase per individual paid by Saskatchewan vehicle owners 

as a result of all SGI increases combined since November 1, 

1991. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Thursday next ask the government the following questions: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Executive Council's purchasing 

of polling:  the total amount of monies allotted to or spent on 

public opinion surveys between July, 1993, up to the present; 

(2) the individuals or firms hired to conduct the polling; and 

(3) provide a copy of all questions asked in the public opinion 

surveys and the outcome of each question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding the Department of Health: dental health educators, 

classification no. 605210, have recently been reclassified to 

health educator 2, classification no. 108082 positions. 

 

 Please provide details of this reclassification including:  the 

reasons for the reclassification; the qualifications and 

educational requirements for both the dental health educators 

and health educator 2 positions; the pay range for each 

classification; the number of individuals affected by this 

reclassification; the total cost to the taxpayer of this 

reclassification in one fiscal year; the total spent on dental 

health educators for the last fiscal year, itemizing salary and 

expenses; and who authorized these reclassifications. 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery I just noticed 

the chief of the Ahtakakohp First Nation, Chief Barry 

Ahenakew.  And as well, with Chief Ahenakew is his daughters, 

Kishey Ahenakew and Sikwun Ahenakew. 

 

I would have the MLAs please welcome them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

Cigarette Taxes 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Finance.  Madam Minister, the federal government today 

announced that they will be cutting cigarette taxes by $5 a carton 

and providing further incentives for the provincial government 

to match this tax reduction.  What we have here is an issue of 

law enforcement that is particular to Quebec, and the federal 

government is trying to impose a policy on all of the provinces 

to deal with it. 

 

Madam Minister, is it your intention to follow the federal 

government's lead and lower cigarette taxes? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To give a 

brief response to the member opposite -- no, it is not our 

intention to lower the tax on cigarettes here and we have three 

main reasons for not doing that. 

 

One, of course, is the health care considerations.  We believe 

that the high prices have been a preventative measure in terms of 

discouraging people from smoking.  What particularly concerns 

us is evidence that more young people would begin smoking if 

the price were reduced. 

 

The second, of course, is a revenue consideration.  The cost to 

the province would be about $35 million which would mean the 

equivalent of a 3 cent per litre increase in the gas tax. 

 

And finally there's a regional consideration.  We do not have a 

major problem in western Canada and therefore we see no 

reason to lower our taxes here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Madam Minister, as you have stated that the 

health costs associated with smoking far outweigh the tax 

revenue, and even at the current level of taxation, a drop in 

cigarette prices will lead to more young people starting to smoke 

and more people continuing to smoke, my question to you, 

Madam Minister, is how is your government going to respond to 

the initiative of the federal government in dealing with the 

increase that they're prepared to pay; for the fact that if you go 

along with them in dealing with this revenue increase, are you 

going to deal with them in a different way to get an allocation 

that is going to supplement the loss in revenue they have to the 

province of Saskatchewan in that area? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we do not anticipate a 

significant loss of revenue because of their position.  And the 

other side of the coin is that there is much of what they've done 

here that we do support. 

 

Smuggling is a major problem in eastern Canada.  There's a 

psychology there that we regard as very troublesome if people 

can say, you know, why do I have to obey this law?  Then are 

there other laws that they do not perceive to be fair and they do 

not have to 

obey?  If people think it's legitimate to not pay taxes, then where 

will we get the money for our education and health care 

services? 

 

So in terms of the enforcement measures, we support those.  In 

terms of taxing tobacco companies, we support that.  In terms of 

their anti-smoking campaign, we support that.  But I do think it's 

important that all members of this legislature make their 

positions clear with respect to the reduction in the tobacco tax 

because this is a serious health care consideration. 

 

I've made my position clear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Physician Services 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Associate Minister of Health.  Mr. Minister, 

it's no secret that your health care reform has meant a great deal 

of hurt for rural Saskatchewan.  It won't be any surprise to the 

official opposition when you make further cuts to rural hospitals 

this year.  It's obvious to everyone that your government is not 

concerned about the people's need for medical care in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell us how many doctors have left rural 

Saskatchewan since 1991?  Could you provide us with details of 

that information, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, as members know, this 

government has been working very closely and the department 

has worked closely with the district boards across our province 

who are now charged with the delivery of health care in all parts 

of our province except the North. 

 

In terms of physician services, I'm not able to give precise 

numbers to the member today but I can assure him that it is a 

concern of this government and a concern of the districts that 

adequate physician services be provided to every resident of our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, well I have 

spoken to rural doctors in the last number of days and they tell 

me many of their colleagues are leaving or are giving 

consideration to leaving.  They also say that the ones that are left 

are facing an increasing patient load because of your 

government cut-backs. 

 

For instance, one doctor I spoke to had three rural hospitals close 

in his area.  The obvious result is that many people are showing 

up at all hours of the day or night to see him simply because they 

no longer have services available in their area.  That doctor has 

seen an increase of over 25 per cent of his case-loads in the past 

six months -- 25 per cent, Mr. Minister. 

 

Can you tell us if in your extensive preliminary studies 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

you had conducted prior to imposing cut-backs, if you had 

anticipated decreasing number of doctors in rural Saskatchewan 

and the increasing patient load for those that were left in rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member and 

assure members of this House and assure the people of 

Saskatchewan that in many, many, many of our communities 

across Saskatchewan physicians are practising today as they 

practised six months ago, as they practised a year ago.  Indeed, 

in many of our communities we're seeing new interest in taking 

up practice in rural Saskatchewan because of the possibilities 

that are there. 

 

I can say to the member, Mr. Speaker, that I can refer 

to -- indeed -- to some of the weekly press in our province.  I 

have here in my hand a letter from a doctor in rural 

Saskatchewan from the town of Craik who speaks of all of the 

services that are provided in their health centre and of his 

commitment to remain in that community and to continue 

serving the people of his community and the people of our 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, at the same time rural doctors are taking on a much 

heavier patient load, they are not being compensated for the 

work they do.  Doctors are being questioned by your department 

as to why they are seeing so many more patients, even though 

the answer is obvious. 

 

Mr. Minister, doctors are also being asked to return money 

received for the caring of patients.  Mr. Minister, why are you 

penalizing doctors for helping rural people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 

member and other members, he should be aware that in the 

process of health reform and renewal in our province, building a 

better health care for the future, we have worked very closely 

with the physicians and surgeons of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We've had a good working relationship with the 

college and with the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association).  

Mr. Speaker, we're proud of that consultative and cooperative 

relationship that we've had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, the problem isn't that there are too many patients 

coming to see doctors in rural Saskatchewan; it's that there's not 

enough doctors in rural Saskatchewan.  The problem isn't rural 

people abusing the system; it's the government abusing the 

people. 

 

Since your cut-backs, Mr. Minister, this doctor has not 

been compensated for more than 25 per cent of his patients.  

This is not an isolated case, Mr. Minister.  Many doctors are 

already saying goodbye to rural Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Minister, just what are you and your government going to 

do to keep doctors and attract new doctors to rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member has a 

particular physician that has a particular concern, I'd be very 

glad to receive from him the name of that physician and we can 

follow up on that particular concern. 

 

In terms of the physician resource for the province of 

Saskatchewan, the member will know this is not a new problem.  

It's been a perennial problem for our province to attract and keep 

physicians in rural Saskatchewan, to attract and keep specialists 

in our province. 

 

We are working very hard -- I can tell the House 

today -- working very hard with the training at the University of 

Saskatchewan to develop a specialized practice for rural 

Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan.  We are working closely with 

the SMA and the College of Physicians and Surgeons to look at 

a physician resource plan to ensure the kinds of things that the 

member desires. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the district cooperation in this regard, 

we are looking very closely at working with the districts to 

establish concepts like group practice, where doctors may live in 

individual communities but be linked in a group practice so that 

they can begin to support each other and offer the kinds of 

service . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Municipal Infrastructure Program 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Municipal Government.  Madam Minister, can 

you explain precisely what consultation took place and what 

agreement was arrived at between the municipalities and your 

provincial government prior to the signing of the 

Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

that question and I will table for the House, for members of the 

public, a letter that I sent yesterday to the president of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association outlining all of 

the meetings and the position that they took. 

 

We had several meetings.  They're outlined in this letter.  The 

agreement that we've reached is also outlined in this letter and 

I'll table it now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

Minister, what we're concerned about of course is when the 

consultations took place and what time the agreement was 

reached. 

 

Were local governments informed that the province would be 

putting only $10 million from existing budgets into municipal 

projects and that no new money into rural municipal projects 

was going to be there to match federal funding? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, on December 23 we had a 

meeting of the round table in which the president of SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) was in 

attendance, as well as the president of SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities).  At that meeting we 

informed the urban and the rural municipalities associations that 

there would be no contribution from the provincial government 

toward the infrastructure program. 

 

We did work with them over the course of the following month 

to work out an acceptable compromise.  They were aware on 

January 19 that we would be making a contribution of $10 

million.  Before that, they had accepted the position from the 

provincial government that there would be no contribution.  It's 

all in the letters and the details are described in that letter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, the federal 

program clearly requires that you reach agreements with local 

governments to first identify projects; and secondly, direct 

funding.  The province is expected to be putting in one third of 

the money to support local infrastructure projects, but in fact 

your government is keeping control of its entire share plus it is 

taking out $15 million of federal money. 

 

Now are you telling us that local governments supported this 

decision? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I am telling the member 

opposite that they did support the position we put forward and 

that she should perhaps inquire of the federal government about 

their position because this . . . the MIP (municipal infrastructure 

program) program is not the old federation of Canadian 

Municipalities Association; it is quite different.  And there is a 

broad flexibility in the program as how it applies both to projects 

and to funding. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture made that very clear in his 

address to SUMA on the last day of the convention.  And if the 

member opposite would like further detail, we'll provide that for 

her. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, indeed we 

have been in contact with the federal government and there 

seems to be some conflict in terms of your point of view relative 

to the federal government. 

Did the municipalities agree that your government should 

control $77.13 million for these projects?  Projects which will be 

allocated and completed in the two years that are leading up to 

the next provincial election.  I mean are they in agreement with 

that particular decision? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, we have established a 

committee made up of municipal and provincial politicians and 

bureaucrats to look at and review all of the criteria around this 

program, including the funding mechanism, the project 

allocation, and the approval process. 

 

The SUMA as well as SARM are in agreement with the 

committee and what we are proposing.  And that is also outlined 

in the letter that have I tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Health Services 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, . . . the 

Associate Minister of Health, we have some further, subsequent 

questions on health care. 

 

Mr. Minister, last year hospital closures were particularly 

devastating to those people outside of Saskatoon and Regina.  

All 52 hospital closures were in rural Saskatchewan.  Mr. 

Speaker, there's even more discomforting to learn that there are 

more cuts planned for rural Saskatchewan in the upcoming 

budget.  The associate deputy minister, Dan Perrins, 

substantiated that information in Saturday's Leader-Post. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Health.  Mr. Minister, will you 

confirm that your ADM (associate deputy minister) has said that 

further cuts to rural health care are in the offing?  Will you 

confirm that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm anything 

in the Leader-Post. 

 

Let me say to the member, we had this discussion in the last 

session of this legislature.  I think we'll need to have it again.  

He refers to the closure of hospitals.  He is in error, Mr. Speaker.  

Conversion of facilities has occurred.  In 52 of our health care 

facilities in the province that had acute care funding for 10 beds 

or less, the acute care beds are now not available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is available is some brand-new services and 

some pre-existing services.  What is available in each and every 

of those 52 facilities will be emergency care.  What is available 

in many of those facilities, Mr. Speaker, is long-term care.  

There is lab and X-ray facilities available, Mr. Speaker, in those 

facilities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to say that in some of those 

facilities, in some of the now health centres, facilities that were 

not available are now being made 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

available.  And I refer to observation beds, respite care, 

palliative care, foot care programs, and many others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, according 

to your own statistics, urban hospitals have about 3 beds per 

1,000 people.  Provincially your department says that the ratio is 

about 3.3 per 1,000.  You have stated that your target for rural 

Saskatchewan is about 1.5 beds per 1,000.  So clearly there are 

more significant cuts to acute care beds coming for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I ask you again, Mr. Minister: will you confirm that rural 

hospitals are in for additional cuts in acute care beds? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 

member, on the point he makes about beds in urban 

Saskatchewan he may be referring here to hospital beds, acute 

care beds, available in Regina and Saskatoon.  I want, for the 

information of the member, for him to know that beds in the two 

large urban centres, today as we meet and speak, will be 

occupied by about 50 per cent of people whose addresses are not 

Regina and Saskatoon.  The beds in our large base hospitals and 

in the urban hospitals are beds that are available to all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of this year's funding, he will know the 

budget announcements from last year.  This year, by way of 

change, funding will be provided on a global basis to the 

districts who will be making their choices and their budget 

decisions based, for the first time in the province of 

Saskatchewan's history, based on need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, your 

officials are saying that the areas where the ratio is most out of 

whack will suffer the biggest reductions.  By your own numbers, 

Mr. Minister, the area which is out of whack is rural 

Saskatchewan.  I, and the majority of residents outside of 

Saskatoon and Regina, would disagree.  But those are your 

numbers. 

 

Will you at least confirm, Mr. Minister, that the majority of 

funding reductions -- funding reductions -- will take place in 

rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, what I will confirm for the 

member is that a process is going on in our province today that 

has never gone on before, and that is a real assessment of health 

care needs as the basis for future funding.  Mr. Speaker, our 

district boards, people across our province, are working hard 

today in establishing the real needs of the people they wish to 

serve in health care.  Based on those needs, Mr. Speaker, 

funding decisions will be made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well the minister is 

certainly correct that there are things happening in rural 

Saskatchewan with respect to health care that we have never 

seen before.  He is right on that point, Mr. Minister.  Fifty-two 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan closing all over the place and the 

minister stands and says that it's no big deal.  Well the people of 

rural Saskatchewan don't agree with you, Mr. Minister. 

 

I'm simply asking you the question, if we can expect to see more 

of the same in the upcoming budget.  Will we see further 

reductions in acute care bed levels for rural Saskatchewan?  Will 

we, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, what we are going to see in 

the province of Saskatchewan is a health care system which is 

renewed, that will survive not just for this decade but well into 

the 20th and 21st centuries, Mr. Speaker.  That's what we'll see. 

 

And we'll see it because the decision making and the control and 

the delivery of health care for the first time in Saskatchewan's 

history is becoming much more community based and much 

more associated and attached to real need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we are 

merely asking the questions of what people are asking of us as 

MLAs.  How many hospitals are going to close in rural 

Saskatchewan?  What is the acute care bed levels?  It seems 

fairly simple and straightforward to me, Mr. Minister.  Your 

own deputy minister confirms a lot of what we have been saying 

all along: there is going to be further reductions in rural 

Saskatchewan for acute care bed levels. 

 

We simply want you, Mr. Minister, to confirm that so the people 

of rural Saskatchewan know what to expect in the upcoming 

budget.  Will you or will you not confirm that hospital closures, 

acute care bed level reductions, will take place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the member seems to have 

difficulty understanding health care in the 1990s and beyond and 

a new delivery of health care.  Mr. Speaker, the decisions 

regarding acute care beds, long-term care beds, observation, 

palliative, tertiary care beds -- all of the decisions specifically 

related to beds will now be made by the districts on the basis of 

the need of their population. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very confident standing here today that 

over the course of the next six months, the next year, and the 

next few years, we will see in every 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

community of Saskatchewan improvements in health care.  

Services which have not been previously available, we will see 

available in the very near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel Tendering Policy 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is 

to the minister responsible for SaskTel.  Mr. Minister, as you 

know, the opposition and many other people in Saskatchewan 

have been trying to get your government to state its exact policy 

on union preference tendering.  To my knowledge you are the 

first minister to provide an exact written policy on this issue and 

I'm happy that I have a copy of that with me today. 

 

So while I commend you on having the courage to finally put 

this policy in writing, I cannot agree with your government's 

commitment to union preference tendering. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a letter here over your signature which 

states: 

 

 SaskTel's guideline in these situations provides for a union 

preference on Saskatoon and Regina construction projects with 

a value of $150,000 or more. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you confirm that this is indeed SaskTel's 

policy, and is this also the official policy of other Crown 

corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member from Maple Creek, I am pleased to be able to tell him 

that the guidelines which are in place, the intention are of which 

to make sure that there is a good distribution of work available 

among both unionized and non-unionized contractors. 

 

And I want to indicate to him that that objective is working 

fairly well.  Because up until November of 1993 there were a 

large number of contracts that were let out -- 105 to be exact.  

Two went to unionized contractors and 103 went to 

non-unionized contractors.  And $860,000 of that was of the two 

that went to unionized, and 7.5 million of that went to 

contractors who were non-unionized. 

 

So the policy is intended to make sure that all working people in 

Saskatchewan who work in these fields have an opportunity to 

have this kind of work available to them.  And I'm pleased to 

report to the House, Mr. Speaker, that the policy is working very 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have here a tender 

which was recently let on SaskTel's Telmart in Moose Jaw, 

project no. 996080.  Section 2.1 of this tender reads and I quote: 

 Contractors should note that in awarding the work for this 

project SaskTel's preference is to award to Contractors that are 

unionized and who use unionized subcontractors. 

 

Now either Moose Jaw has suddenly become a suburb of Regina 

or else there is some very terrible mistake been made here, Mr. 

Minister.  Because in light of your stated policy that there are 

union preference contracting for Saskatoon and Regina contracts 

only, how can it be both ways? 

 

Will the minister do the right thing and pull the tender that was 

issued for Moose Jaw and rewrite it and take out those offensive 

words that require that union-only contractors can be hired?  

Will you do the right thing in consideration of your letters to the 

contractors' associations in Saskatchewan and rewrite these 

tender calls? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member, let me say that the policy is there; it's under continuous 

review.  It is in the interest of the government, in consultation 

with those people who are affected, to make sure that the 

standards, the high standards which SaskTel has established for 

the work that must be performed for the contracts that it lets out 

. . . and to make sure that the contractors and the working people 

of this province have an opportunity to work on these projects. 

 

And in this particular case there is a requirement that states that 

in the project that is being tendered in Moose Jaw, a union 

contractor will be given some consideration, but the bottom line, 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure that the 

specifications of the tender that has been let can be met and be 

met adequately, and that is the most important part of the policy 

that is going to be applied. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I have a message 

from the Lieutenant Governor: 

 

 Dear Mr. Speaker: Pursuant to section 68.7 of The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, I hereby inform the 

Assembly of the membership of the Board of Internal 

Economy effective November 17, 1993: 

 

 The Hon. Herman Rolfes, Chairman; the Hon. Carol Carson; 

the Hon. Eldon Lautermilch; Mr. Glenn Hagel, MLA; Mr. Eric 

Upshall, MLA; Mr. Rick Swenson, MLA; Ms. Lynda 

Haverstock, MLA. 

 

 Yours sincerely, Sylvia Fedoruk, Lieutenant Governor, 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hereby table her communication. 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of By-laws of Professional Associations to Special 

Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, I have a couple of routine motions that I would move.  First 

of all, I would move, seconded by the member for Regina 

Churchill Downs, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the by-laws of the professional associations and 

amendments thereto be referred as tabled to the Special 

Committee on Regulations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Annual Report and Financial Statements of 

Crown Corporations to Standing Committee on Crown 

Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney that, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the annual reports and financial statements of the various 

Crown corporations and related agencies be referred as tabled 

to the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for The Battlefords, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for 

the fiscal year ended March 31, 1993 be referred as tabled this 

session to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of the Report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Library to the Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Cumberland, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library be 

referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosetown, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year 

ended March 31, 1993 be referred as tabled this session to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, finally I move, 

seconded by the member for Canora, that by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the retention and disposal schedules approved under The 

Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be referred 

as tabled to the Standing Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before we go 

to the special order of the day, I wonder if I would have 

permission of the House -- I'm assuming that I do -- to introduce 

two condolence motions.  And with the leave of the House, I'll 

proceed to saying a few words of . . . 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of 

my remarks I'll be moving a motion of condolence respecting a 

former member of this Assembly, the late Clarence Melvin 

Fines. 

 

C.M., Clarence Fines, Mr. Speaker, was the last remaining 

member of the original 1944 CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) cabinet, and he died at Fort Lauderdale, Florida on 

October 27, 1993. 

 

Clarence Fines was a member of this Legislative Assembly for 

the constituency of Regina City from 1944 to 1960.  Throughout 

that time he was MLA, but he was also the provincial treasurer 

and the deputy premier. 

 

Clarence Fines was born August 16, 1905, at Darlington, 

Manitoba.  After attending school at Darlington and at 

Stonewall, Manitoba, he came to Regina to enrol in the Normal 

School.  Subsequently he attended the universities of Manitoba 

and Saskatchewan, and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts 

degree. 

 

(1445) 

 

Clarence Fines then taught school in Regina and later served as 

principal at Benson and Strathcona public 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

schools.  He also served three years as president of the Regina 

Teachers' Association and two years as president of the Regina 

branch of the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation. 

 

Clarence Fines's outstanding political career spanned both the 

provincial and municipal levels of government.  He was 

involved in the Independent Labour Party and then the 

Farmer-Labour Party, and then in 1932 he helped found the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, the CCF. 

 

From 1934 until 1939, and again from 1942 until 1944 when he 

was elected to this House, he was a member of Regina City 

Council where he served in many capacities including chair of 

the Regina General Hospital, director of the Regina Exhibition 

Board, and a member of the parks board.  He also was a very 

strong supporter of the Regina YMCA (Young Men's Christian 

Association). 

 

In his 16 years as a member of this Assembly, and in addition to 

his responsibilities as provincial treasurer and deputy premier, 

C.M. Fines served as minister responsible for the Bureau of 

Publications, the Government Purchasing Agency, the Liquor 

Board, and Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, as it 

was called then.  He retired from public life in 1960. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my mind the passing of Clarence Fines casts an 

extremely deep and long shadow over this legislature, and in a 

way, over this province.  C.M. Fines was a key part of an 

extremely important era in Saskatchewan -- for that matter, in 

Canadian history -- an era which saw in this province the 

opening of new opportunities, experimentation to benefit people, 

and a part of an era which was an era laced with a vision of 

compassion and community and cooperation.  Opportunities 

which became realities, realities based on the values that 

Saskatchewan people have always held dear -- thrift, 

cooperation, community, economic and social justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, C.M. Fines was a man who, next to Tommy 

Douglas, had perhaps the greatest influence on our province and 

how we overcame the challenges of the post-World War II era 

and how the opportunities during that era were fashioned. 

 

As the Speech from the Throne yesterday remarked, 1994 will 

mark the 50th anniversary of the election of North America's 

first democratic socialist government, right here in 

Saskatchewan, and the government in this Chamber.  Tommy 

Douglas and his government took pride and took a province that 

was on its knees and restored its common purpose, rebuilt and 

restored its pride, and began a long journey towards rebirth and 

renewal. 

 

And Clarence Fines walked arm in arm with Tommy Douglas 

every step of the way, during the good times, and even more 

importantly, during the tough times -- a true comrade.  As one 

writer put it, if Douglas was the designer, Fines was the 

mechanic. 

 

Their first task was to restore Saskatchewan's fiscal 

health.  It required at times bitter medicine, but they knew that 

without this objective, without this sacrifice, they could not 

rebuild, they could not rejuvenate, they could not dream their 

dreams.  So Clarence Fines balanced the books in this province 

so that we could realize the dreams that then brought us, as it 

turns out, the most comprehensive and best social reform 

programs in North America and perhaps anywhere in the 

western world. 

 

One of Clarence Fines's basic and lasting tenets was that it was 

of little value to build or to try to build in the absence of 

financial freedom for a province or for a country.  That's why he 

and Tommy Douglas were always so determined to balance the 

budget.  They wanted our people to have the freedom to make 

our own economic and social policy decisions here at home, 

without having to look over our shoulders all the time to try to 

figure out what the bankers and the bond dealers might think, 

might approve or might not approve. 

 

The Fines era, I submit, Mr. Speaker, has many lessons for us 

today, the legislators of 1994.  The day the Douglas government 

took office first time round in 1944, Saskatchewan's gross public 

debt was $218 million.  To put that into perspective, that's less 

than the projected deficit for the fiscal year ending March 1994, 

the deficit that we project at 294 million.  But the gross public 

debt was $218 million.  It was viewed with gravity and it was 38 

per cent of Saskatchewan's gross domestic product. 

 

In 1944, Clarence Fines did not run from this crisis nor did he 

pretend that it did not exist.  Rather, he set about in an astute and 

methodical manner to eliminate the deficit and the debt.  Year 

after year he brought forward responsible budgets designed to 

underpin an economy which was fragile but growing, and an 

economy which would be able to support the social and 

economic programs that he and Douglas and all the other men 

and women of that party dreamed about and envisioned. 

 

By 1949, Fines had reduced the province's debt by almost $70 

million.  A reduction, as he then noted in his budget speech, 

quote: was unparalleled in the history of any Canadian province 

since Confederation, end quote.  And that was true, when one 

compared the desperate fiscal picture of that time to other 

provinces of that time. 

 

And by 1951 the province was, for the first time in its history, 

seven years after the election of Douglas and Mr. Fines, it was 

free of debt owing to the banks.  And in 1953 Saskatchewan 

earned its first recorded A credit rating in the international 

investment markets. 

 

Today when one thinks back about this history and this 

contribution, one sees a similar objective and difficult road 

ahead for us, but we're inspired by the success of Mr. Fines and 

Mr. Douglas. 

 

Today our gross provincial debt is not 38 per cent of GDP (gross 

domestic product), as it was in 1944, but it's 70 per cent of GDP.  

And today, unlike the 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

post-war period, we can't count on Ottawa to relieve our 

situation.  Back in 1947 the federal government cancelled 

one-half of the $61 million of relief treasury bills owed to 

Ottawa by the province, as well as an outstanding interest of 

$5.7 million.  We do not have that option. 

 

Our future is not indebted to Ottawa, but to bankers elsewhere in 

the world.  But like C.M. Fines and T.C. Douglas, we must 

follow the path to financial freedom.  Difficult as it is, we must 

continue to fight to reclaim our future.  Because as historian 

Desmond Morton put it: there is nothing the money lenders love 

more than a socialist government at their mercy.  End quote. 

 

So, like Clarence Fines, we understand that financial freedom is 

the only way to achieve our fundamental objective, a better 

quality of life for all of our citizens. 

 

And we realize something else -- that budgeting is not an end in 

itself; it is a means.  In his 1945 budget speech, C.M. Fines said 

this: 

 

 I agree that a balanced budget is desirable and I'm presenting 

such a one tonight.  But the real task is to assure the security of 

people.  A budget may be balanced on their poverty or their 

misery.  As long as I occupy the important position of 

provincial treasurer, it shall be my aim to balance the budget, 

keeping in mind the people of the province. 

 

The budget, C.M. Fines said, rather than being a monetary 

budget alone, must also become a human budget which will 

guarantee a minimum of social security to all. 

 

Those, I think, are wise words to which political parties of all 

ideologies and all stripes would subscribe.  A budget is a means 

to an end; it is not the end of which he and Mr. Douglas 

dreamed. 

 

They moved on to build, to build rural electrification, 

hospitalization, medicare in 1962, progressive labour legislation, 

Canada's first trade union Act, Canada's first Bill of Rights, 

Canada's first public insurance company, SGI; public telephone 

company, SaskTel; public power company, SaskPower, and the 

list goes on. 

 

These were all born -- or many of them -- out of controversy.  

Some of these still engender controversy.  But the point is from 

this tradition and this determination, successive governments 

over years have built on the fundamentals of thrift, community, 

economic and social justice, and cooperation to succeed in their 

goals. 

 

In his unpublished memoirs, C.M. Fines wrote this about his last 

budget in 1960: 

 

 For the sixteenth consecutive year I would present a surplus 

budget, a feat never before accomplished and which has 

become one of the greatest milestones in the history of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I say it was a great milestone. 

 

Nor need we speculate whether Mr. Fines would agree with the 

directions that we're taking today.  Star-Phoenix columnist 

Randy Burton, speaking to Mr. Fines, wrote this in December of 

1992: 

 

 His (Fines') advice to Romanow would be "to continue the 

course that he's been following and get rid of the debt as 

quickly as he can." 

 

 To loosen the purse strings "would completely break the 

province and there would be no hope for the economy to build 

up," Fines said. 

 

 What's more, Fines is sure that Douglas would have backed 

him on this score.  "On fiscal matters we were usually in 

complete agreement." 

 

And so they were, Mr. Speaker, the dreamer and the mechanic; 

they were in complete agreement and they built. 

 

Clarence Fines was a giant.  He was a giant in Saskatchewan and 

in Canada.  He was a giant whose shadow still lingers; his 

legacy still lingers.  And while it is difficult for any political 

party of any stripe to follow in his footsteps, it should be, in my 

judgement, our goal as legislators to continue that obligation and 

that legacy and to continue our dreams, to dream our dreams, to 

rebuild, to renew, and to restore our pride. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family -- his widow, Lilian; his 

sons, Murray and Howard; his five grandchildren; and the many 

more who knew him, worked with him, and loved him. 

 

(1500) 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Leader 

of the Opposition: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing 

of a former member of this Assembly and express its grateful 

appreciation of the contribution he made to his community, his 

constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Clarence Melvin Fines, who died at Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 

on October 27, 1993, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly for the constituency of Regina City from 1944 until 

1960.  Mr. Fines was born August 16, 1905 at Darlington, 

Manitoba.  He attended school there and at Stonewall, 

Manitoba, before enrolling in the Normal School in Regina.  

Mr. Fines then attended the University of Manitoba and the 

University of Saskatchewan, graduating with a Bachelor of 

Arts degree. 

 

 Mr. Fines taught school in Regina and later 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

 

 became principal of Benson and Strathcona public schools.  

He was president of the Regina Teachers' Association from 

1937 to 1940.  For two years, beginning in 1941, Mr. Fines 

was president of the Regina branch of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation.  Besides his professional interests, Mr. 

Fines was also attracted to municipal and provincial politics.  

From 1934 until 1939 and again from 1942 until 1944, he was 

a member of Regina City Council where he served in many 

capacities including chair of the Regina General Hospital, on 

the Parks Board and as a director of the Regina Exhibition.  He 

was also a supporter of the Regina YMCA. 

 

 Mr. Fines's provincial political career began with his 

involvement in the Independent Labour Party and the 

Farmer-Labour Party.  He helped found the Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation in 1932.  In 1944, C.M. Fines was 

elected to the Legislative Assembly as one of two members to 

represent the constituency of Regina City.  He was re-elected 

in the elections of 1948, 1952, and 1956.  For 16 years, during 

the period 1944 to 1960, Mr. Fines served as provincial 

treasurer.  He also held the post of deputy premier, minister 

responsible for the Bureau of Publications, Queen's Printer 

Office, Government Purchasing Agency, the Liquor Board, 

and Saskatchewan Government Insurance.  Mr. Fines did not 

stand for re-election in the 1960 general election. 

 

 In 1960 Mr. Fines left Regina to begin a career as a corporate 

financial adviser which initially took him to the island of 

Grenada.  Three years later Mr. Fines moved to Fort 

Lauderdale, Florida, where he lived for the next 30 years.  At 

Fort Lauderdale Mr. Fines was active in many community 

organizations, including the Boys Club of America and the 

United Way. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's an 

honour for me to second the motion of the Premier on the 

condolence motion to the Fines family on behalf of the official 

opposition. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when talking about Clarence Fines, we 

are talking about an individual who left an indelible print on the 

face of this province.  We're talking about an individual in our 

society that worked hard, serving his communities for nearly 40 

years.  And that in itself is truly a hallmark because very few 

people in Saskatchewan's history have had that type of 

perseverance in public duty. 

And as the Premier mentioned, that covered local boards, city 

councils, the founding of a political party -- not an easy task.  I 

know something about working for political organizations that 

have very shallow roots.  Mr. Fines, obviously, in his dedication 

and work to develop the CCF Party, knows all about the trials 

and tribulations of making the democratic process in our 

province work in a way which he felt could make a difference 

ultimately to the society we live in. 

 

And I think as an example to any of us, that degree of dedication 

is one that you can only applaud, that a lifelong dream could be 

played out in the council chambers and the Legislative 

Assembly of our province always, I think, with well-intentioned 

results. 

 

I certainly, Mr. Speaker, wouldn't be of an age to have known 

Mr. Fines personally.  I can only vaguely remember his political 

career -- a political career that was fraught with some 

controversy.  Certainly he's an individual that engendered very 

strong feelings in a political sense amongst many of the citizens 

of our province. 

 

I can well remember listening on the radio to the debate in the 

legislature as a young person, my family gathered around.  

Coming from a political family, that was something that you did.  

And I can tell you that the admiration for Mr. Fines amongst 

some was not quite the same degree that the Premier talked 

about here today.  I've had people in the oil industry tell me that 

they wish he had served in another province at the time that he 

did that. 

 

But regardless of those deep feelings that all of us develop when 

we enter public life, I think at the end of the day you have to 

give the man his due when you talk about his dedication to fiscal 

responsibility, the fact that our province had gone through some 

very difficult times, and that it was absolutely necessary for the 

building to begin anew after the 1930s and after the loss that we 

as a province had suffered during the Second World War with so 

many of our young men and women giving their lives for their 

country. 

 

Mr. Fines, working with Mr. Douglas, had an appreciation for 

that Saskatchewan sense of being.  And I think down the road, 

regardless of our political beliefs, we can feel proud that 

individuals such as that, who weren't born native sons to our 

province, would come here and take it upon themselves to build 

and develop. 

 

And certainly I've always wished that perhaps Mr. Fines had 

lived out his last years in our province because people that have 

given that much dedication deserve to be a part of the mix that 

we see here. 

 

I think it was one of the reasons that Mr. Diefenbaker ultimately 

wanted to be buried on the banks of the Saskatchewan River, 

because as a native son you feel appreciation for the things that 

your province has given you.  And I think the Fines family can 

rest assured that all of us in this province feel the deep-felt 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

condolences that the Premier has talked about and that we do 

revere people that have made such a strong contribution to us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I join with the Premier in officially recording a 

deep sense of loss and bereavement and would like to second the 

motion and express our most sincere sympathy to the members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to, Mr. Speaker, add a few 

comments of my own to those of the Premier and the Leader of 

the Opposition.  In each session we pay tribute to deceased 

members, most of whom have sought conscientiously to serve 

their constituents, to leave the world a little better than what they 

found it.  Inevitably though, time dims the memory of many. 

 

One exception is Clarence Fines whose career and whose 

importance to us transcends the ages, for Clarence Fines is one 

of the more extraordinary public figures in Saskatchewan's 

history.  Historians, in focusing on the Douglas government, 

tended to focus almost exclusively on Tommy Douglas.  One 

takes nothing away from Douglas's unmatched oratorical skills 

or his courageous vision to suggest that he could not, nor did he, 

do it alone.  He had a partner in Clarence Fines. 

 

Both Clarence Fines and Tommy Douglas had been born in 

Manitoba, both were almost the same age, both came to 

Saskatchewan within a year of each other.  They probably met in 

1938 when the provincial CCF sought to persuade Mr. Douglas 

to leave politics and come to the province to lead them. 

 

If Douglas was the courageous visionary who defined a new 

future for Saskatchewan, Fines was the practical administrator 

who actually made it happen.  If Douglas was an orator with 

very few equals, Fines was an administrator of extraordinary 

competence. 

 

What was accomplished by the CCF in Saskatchewan is nothing 

short of a miracle.  What the CCF inherited in 1944 was 

probably one of the most backward jurisdictions in North 

America.  One would be hard put to find a jurisdiction which 

was as backward: 50 miles of paved road, a provincial public 

service renowned for its incompetence and corruptness, and a 

bankrupt treasury. 

 

When the CCF left office some 20 years later, they left a 

province that was a model of what a modern welfare state ought 

to be.  Such a miracle could not have occurred without Douglas's 

genius that inspired a generation of Saskatchewan people to 

dream and strive and build a new and more compassionate 

society. 

 

Nor could it have happened without Clarence Fines's genius for 

administration.  It was Fines who took a corrupt, 

patronage-ridden public service and built the finest civil service 

in Canada.  And it was Fines whose practical ability as an 

administrator took a bankrupt treasury and turned it into a 

debt-free province.  Under that administration, the government 

of the day, the 

CCF government, was successful in attracting an extraordinary 

number of very talented people to this province to work in the 

public service. 

 

One was a young man whose father was in the wholesale 

grocery business, whose father had gone bankrupt.  As a 

teenager this young man took over the business, got the business 

back up on its feet, got it soundly financed, found time to get a 

law degree and earn a Rhodes Scholar . . . earn a Rhodes 

Scholarship as well.  On graduating, he came to Saskatchewan to 

work for what was regarded as the most exciting government in 

Canada.  Many will know that I speak of Allan Blakeney.  But 

he was one of a number of very talented people who came. 

 

The CCF inherited a province which was bankrupt.  The CCF 

took the province and almost immediately faced a financial 

crisis.  The financial establishment, misunderstanding the nature 

of these prairie socialists, became alarmed and called in some 

overdue loans almost at the time the government was sworn in.  

The newly elected Douglas government faced a financial crisis 

before they had become installed. 

 

Under the leadership of Clarence Fines, the government of the 

day did the only thing they could do -- established a 

Saskatchewan savings bond program, then a relatively new idea.  

Clarence Fines bought some of the bonds himself, and through 

extraordinary energy and salesmanship, managed to sell enough 

of the bonds to pay off the loan.  It was the first of many such 

triumphs which the CCF of the day enjoyed, facing the hostile 

financial community. 

 

One is oversimplifying the matter to suggest that this policy was 

something that Clarence Fines created.  Indeed, in their fiscal 

orthodoxy the CCF of the day in some ways reflected the 

mentality of the prairie farmer who had come to the West and 

found that, although a rich land, the West could be a capricious 

land and the climate even more capricious.  A debt-free balance 

sheet was one of the best guarantees that one might survive the 

crop failures which, as subsequent generations have found out, 

can pile one on top of the other.  But it was Clarence Fines who 

took this prairie ethic and turned it into an enduring feature of 

the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party) governments. 

 

After the Saskatchewan bond sale, the government -- the CCF 

government of the day in 1944 -- set aside 10 per cent of each 

year's budget to pay off the provincial debt, and paid it off in 16 

years.  They balanced virtually every budget -- a legacy of 

financial prudence and acumen which survived until the 1980s. 

 

I met Clarence Fines only once, when he returned to Regina, 

being honoured by a building named after him.  On that occasion 

I was fascinated by him and he lived up to his reputation, knew 

the people that worked in the government and offered quite an 

insight.  There is little doubt that Clarence Fines had a special 

genius for administration and financial 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

matters, but he was also a great humanitarian in a way that is 

unknown and forgotten today. 

 

The Premier mentioned that Clarence Fines was on the city 

council from '34 to 1939 and from '42 to '44.  While on city 

council, he exhibited his humanitarian side.  He was 

instrumental in providing glasses for relief recipients and having 

relief paid in cash rather than vouchers. 

 

He also sought to introduce to the Regina City Council a degree 

of electoral reform.  He introduced a motion to allow civic 

employees to be politically active, which was carried 

unanimously.  He brought about a change in civic voting from 

Monday -- a day in which women were traditionally busy with 

washday -- to Wednesday, which was a half-holiday, in the 

belief that more would vote on a Wednesday.  He initiated the 

enumeration of civic voters, which was previously restricted to 

property owners only. 

 

(1515) 

 

He endeavoured to get the city to avoid long-term loans and 

years of interest payments.  As he did later as a provincial 

treasurer, he advocated a pay-as-you-go policy.  He also helped 

people in an individual way.  Legion are the people to whom he 

provided loans, the students he helped, and the community 

groups which he had loaned money to or helped. 

 

He produced some memoirs which unfortunately have never 

been published.  It is a shame.  The senior public . . . I said 

earlier that they had established a public service which was as 

competent as any in Canada.  After 1964 with the change of 

government, many of the public servants who had been senior 

here went to Ottawa again as senior public servants.  Most of 

them spoke of Clarence Fines, most of the ones I met, spoke of 

Clarence Fines with a kind of reverence. 

 

In his unpublished memoirs he described the difficulty of taking 

a province from near bankruptcy to a province which was able to 

support a comprehensive array of social programs. 

 

He wrote the following words, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 During the period of planning, renovating, remodelling, and 

reconstructing the political framework of our province, there 

was plenty of sweat on the faces of my colleagues and the 

legions of unselfish and devoted workers steadfast in their 

faith and unstinting in their health.  We believed in our cause, 

and our confidence in it was never shaken.  One of the 

fundamental truths I have learned from my father was that one 

must face trouble with courage, disappointment with spirits, 

and triumph with humility. 

 

The legacy of Clarence Fines is not just a fiscal prudence.  More, 

it is that Clarence Fines and others like him enabled 

Saskatchewan to continue as a province of hope, a province 

which could undergo the most acute and difficult challenge and 

rebound 

from these hard times and meet the future with confidence. 

 

I would like to join my colleagues in expressing sympathy to his 

family and to express the thought that it is the province and the 

public of Saskatchewan who have benefited from the life and the 

work of this extraordinary son of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to join in the 

comments regarding the passing of Mr. Clarence Fines.  I'd like 

to join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in 

expressing my sympathy and condolences to the family and 

friends of Clarence Fines.  Mr. Fines's lengthy career in public 

life, including his work as an educator, a municipal politician, 

and provincial representative are a major accomplishment and 

reason for pride. 

 

I have heard that Mr. Fines is the last surviving member of the 

cabinet of Tommy Douglas, which makes Mr. Fines's passing 

even more noteworthy as it marks the end of an era for that 

party. 

 

On behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, I offer my 

condolences to all who knew and loved Mr. Fines. 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to express my 

condolences on behalf of the passing of Clarence Fines.  But 

even more than that, I want to express my appreciation, not for 

his passing, but for his life and the contributions that he made to 

our lives.  I, unlike most of you here, am old enough to have 

actually met him and known him a little bit in person.  That's 

one of the reasons I rise here today. 

 

I'm not going to go into details which have already been 

covered.  I want to tell one little story of how I noticed a 

connection between his day and the days that followed.  I 

happened to get into a law office where I was with a man 

already mentioned, Mr. Blakeney.  I was not involved in politics 

but we were in the same law office, so I was interested in the 

fact that he was running for the first time for government. 

 

He told me -- and this is something that I wouldn't understand 

until I was told -- that if he could get the nomination, the 

election itself was a cinch.  But he was afraid that he couldn't get 

the nomination by the party because he was not well known, and 

everyone wanted a cinch seat. 

 

So we all attended at the Trianon, which was a dance hall, but 

that's where the nomination convention was held, to watch the 

goings-on.  And as my friend or partner -- or both, I hope -- was 

wondering if he could hang in there and get nominated, a 

surprise person got up on the stage.  It was Clarence Fines.  No 

one knew he was going to be there.  He was introduced.  He said 

that since you all know that I'm resigning and so many have 

been kind enough to ask who is going to replace me, he says, 

tonight I take great pleasure in introducing to you not the fellow 

who will replace me, but the fellow who will surpass 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

me -- Allan E. Blakeney. 

 

That kind of brought down the house for about five minutes, and 

also brought down Blakeney's opposition.  He got nominated 

quickly, he got elected, and he did fairly well, as we all know.  I 

am happy that I knew these people.  I want to know more people 

like them.  I appreciate his life more than I worry about the 

passing, because that happens to us all.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed my honour 

today to rise and join with the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition and the many other colleagues in the legislature 

today to honour the memory of Clarence Fines and to express 

our condolences to Mr. Fines's widow, Lilian, their children 

Howard and Murray, and the five grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Fines, in addition to representing the city of Regina from 

1944 to 1960, sat in the first legislature of the Douglas 

government with my grandmother, Beatrice Trew, who had been 

elected from Maple Creek.  And as a result, I got a few of the 

Clarence Fines stories over the years.  I'm not going to bore the 

legislature with any of those particular stories, but I do want to 

pay tribute, as my colleague the member for Regina Albert 

South did, to what Mr. Fines accomplished during his lifetime. 

 

He was the first socialist treasurer to work what seemed like 

magic, but of course we all know it wasn't magic.  Clarence 

Fines was using solid economic principles to lay a solid 

foundation for our Saskatchewan future. 

 

He was instrumental and even an integral part of the great 

socialist experiment that started in the early '40s, one would 

argue, with the election of the Douglas government in June of 

1944.  And as the Premier stated -- we wrote our speeches quite 

separately, I can assure you, but I have in my notes -- Clarence 

Fines was a giant among larger-than-life people.  A giant 

amongst larger-than-life people.  I meant it when I wrote it and I 

certainly mean it as I say it now. 

 

While he was minister responsible for SGI in the '70s, Ed 

Whelan was responsible to name the new SGI head office tower 

the C.M. Fines Building, and indeed there was a name plaque 

put up on the outside of the building to honour Clarence Fines..  

That plaque mysteriously disappeared halfway through the past 

decade and it was to the consternation and annoyance to a great 

many of us. 

 

I was so annoyed that I started sending my driver's licence and 

vehicle registration by mail addressed to SGI, C.M. Fines 

Building, Regina.  End of the address. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to report that I believe the people 

at Canada Post, the working people there and certainly the 

people who worked in that SGI head office building, appreciated 

the sentiment of what I was doing so much that the turnaround 

time for my 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

renewals wasn't the usual seven days but it was a record two 

days, and that happened three years running.  I look forward to 

that problem about a decade ago now being replaced . . . being 

corrected and the C.M. Fines sign going back up on the SGI 

building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by expressing my sincere 

condolences on Clarence Fines's passing, but also my gratitude 

to Clarence Fines's family and many friends for sharing Mr. 

Fines with my province.  Saskatchewan is to this day a kinder, 

gentler, more compassionate place to live because of the 

intelligence and the compassion and the larger-than-life actions 

of Mr. Clarence Fines. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

conclusion of my remarks I will have a motion of regret noting 

the passing of a former member of this Assembly, the late 

Hjalmar Reinhold Dahlman, or Ray Dahlman as those of us who 

knew him called him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hjalmar Reinhold Dahlman, who died at 

Saskatoon, on October 7, 1993, was a member of this 

Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Bengough from 

1960 until 1964. 

 

Mr. Dahlman was born on June 3, 1909 near Estevan at the 

family homestead.  He received his education at local schools 

and worked on the family farm before establishing a farm of his 

own near Readlyn. 

 

Mr. Dahlman ran successfully in 1934 as a member of the 

Hepworth School Board.  He continued as a member of the 

board for the next 11 years, including six terms as chair.  

Between 1945 and 1951, Mr. Dahlman served as a member of 

the Assiniboia School Unit Board.  He became a member of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 1944 and was a regular Pool 

delegate for his district during his farming years. 

 

In 1951 Mr. Dahlman went to Sweden to study the cooperative 

movement.  He had already by that time of course become very 

involved in the principles of the cooperative movement and 

particularly involved in the organization of the Cooperative 

Federation and he had already served at the local co-op board of 

directors and on the board of the directors from 1943 to 1956.  

During that period Mr. Dahlman served four terms as the 

president of his local co-op.  In 1959 he took the position as 

district public relations officer for Federated Co-operatives Ltd. 

 

Now obviously this kind of a background demonstrates traits of 

a person whose commitment to the community and grass roots 

and principles of cooperation were very, very deep.  He was 

imbued with cooperation both as a mechanism but as an 

ideology, a way of life and philosophy.  His leadership at the 

community level, as I have indicated in my opening remarks, 

was also very demonstrable, very proven. 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

(1530) 

 

Because of these principles and his activity, Mr. Dahlman was 

approached personally by Tommy Douglas and asked to run in 

the 1960 provincial election for the CCF.  And he did so and he 

was elected to this Legislative Assembly that year to represent 

the constituency of Bengough.  He also was a candidate in the 

1964 provincial general election, unsuccessfully. 

 

He was later involved in his local credit union and volunteered 

his time to various organizations and to his church, 

demonstrating a lifelong commitment to the province and to the 

community, which preceded his election to this Chamber and 

continued throughout his entire life. 

 

He was, like C.M. Fines, the other person whom we have 

honoured here and remembered today, an original member of the 

CCF and of the co-op movement. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, without belabouring this point, these were a 

collection of men and women in that period, occasioned and 

conditioned by the circumstances of the Great Depression, and 

as the Leader of the Opposition pointed out, occasioned 

subsequently and conditioned by the great Second World War, 

men and women who believed that there was a better way in 

which to organize society, a way in which the guiding tenets and 

principles would be those of cooperation, as opposed to 

confrontation; the pursuit of consensus, the pursuit of building a 

more secure, better province with a stronger quality of life. 

 

And when one sees and notes the passing of people like Mr. 

Dahlman and C.M. Fines, the passing physically of the men and 

women of this era, I personally can't help but marvel at the 

tenacity and the conviction, the beliefs that these people had 

during very difficult times.  And I can't help but marvel as to 

what it was that brought together an almost once-in-a-lifetime 

gathering of men and women who established a political party, 

who developed the cooperative movement, and in doing so, 

transformed this province, mainly for the better. 

 

It should be noted that Mr. Dahlman was elected during the 

medicare debate.  That was in 1960 when Mr. Dahlman ran.  

Like the Leader of the Opposition, I was a little bit too young to 

remember the details of that debate, but I do recall the central 

issue being whether or not there would be something called 

socialized medicine, as it was described. 

 

Medicare had been on the agenda of the CCF since 1944 and 

earlier, but it wasn't until 1960 that the government of the day 

felt that it had the financial capacity and the ability to actually 

deliver on this promise.  And of course that was a heated 

election campaign. 

 

The Douglas government was returned to office; Mr. Dahlman 

was elected to office as part of that team, and as part of that team 

they went through the most tumultuous period probably in our 

history  the 

establishment of medicare in 1962. 

 

This was a period which was occasioned by very passionate 

opinions held on all sides of the fence but basically both sides.  

The doctors' strike in 1962, the Keep Our Doctors committee 

and the rallies -- these cleaved, these polarized our society.  

These debates spilled over to the Chamber, where they were 

conducted with high intellectual content and high passion, as we 

in the province of Saskatchewan were fashioning something 

which turned out to be initially a Saskatchewan experiment, but 

has turned out to be now something which defines us as 

Canadians.  And it was right here in this Chamber, by the CCF 

and by people like Mr. Dahlman and others. 

 

He continued to be a fervent supporter of medicare and health 

care, also carrying his views forward on larger school units and 

the organization of education, in order to provide the best quality 

of education for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Dahlman remained very involved in the politics of the 

province throughout his entire life, whether in this Chamber or 

outside the Chamber, but he often lightened the halls of the 

Legislative Building with a wonderful sense of humour and an 

infectious laugh -- something which I think we all miss and need 

a little bit, not only in this Chamber but in our day-to-day lives. 

 

In 1992 he attended his last political function, the Saskatchewan 

NDP provincial convention.  And after that convention he spoke 

with his daughter -- who I happen to know on a basis which is 

political; she serves on my constituency organization in my 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale -- and expressed the belief 

that the province would be on the right track if we maintained 

the principles of community and cooperation and compassion.  

That we'd be on the right track, regardless of ideology and 

political persuasion, if we kept those ideals and those goals at 

the forefront. 

 

Mr. Dahlman will be long remembered for his commitment to 

Saskatchewan and his tireless involvement to the political 

process and to the cooperative movement.  He was supported 

throughout by his wife Myrtle, who shared his lifelong interest 

and activism in politics.  He is survived by seven 

daughters -- including Marlene Watson, a member of my 

executive -- and one son. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded again by the Leader of the 

Official Opposition: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing 

of a former member of this Assembly and expresses its 

grateful appreciation of the contribution that he made to his 

community, his constituency and the province. 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

 Hjalmar Reinhold Dahlman, who died at Saskatoon on 

October 7, 1993 was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

for the constituency of Bengough from 1960 until 1964.  Mr. 

Dahlman was born on June 3, 1909 near Estevan at the family 

homestead.  He received his education at local schools and 

worked on the family farm before establishing a farm of his 

own near Readlyn. 

 

 Mr. Dahlman ran successfully in 1934 as a member of the 

Hepworth School Board.  He continued as a member of the 

board for the next 11 years, including six terms as chair.  

Between 1945 and 1951, Mr. Dahlman served as a member of 

the Assiniboia School Unit Board.  He became a member of 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 1944 and was a regular Pool 

delegate for his district during his farming years. 

 

 In 1951, Mr. Dahlman went to Sweden to study the 

co-operative movement.  He had already been involved in the 

organization of the Co-operative Federation and served as a 

member of the Readlyn co-op board of directors from 1943 

until 1956.  During that period Mr. Dahlman served four terms 

as the co-op's president.  In 1959, he took a position as district 

public relations officer for Federated Co-op.  Mr. Dahlman 

was elected to the Legislative Assembly in 1960 to represent 

the Bengough constituency.  He was a candidate in subsequent 

provincial general elections.  Mr. Dahlman was later involved 

in his local credit union and volunteered his time to various 

community organizations. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members 

of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand today on 

behalf of the official opposition to pay homage to Mr. Hjalmar 

Dahlman.  As the Premier said, an individual who made a 

contribution to our province through his work in the cooperative 

movement; a person who I think probably had a true sense and 

love for the land. 

 

I used to play a good deal of baseball, Mr. Speaker, in the area 

that Mr. Dahlman farmed in, places like Viceroy and Verwood 

and Oro Lake and Crane Valley, which are all around there.  

And I can tell you that some of that isn't the best farm land in the 

world, that you had to be dedicated, you had to love the land in 

order to make it produce and believe in it. 

 

And Mr. Dahlman's career both in agriculture, through things 

like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and the local co-op, tells me 

that he did have a deep sense of land, of making a contribution 

in a very 

difficult place.  And I am sure that if I had had the privilege of 

listening to his speeches in this Legislative Assembly that they 

would have been about many of those fundamentals that so 

many of us have for a background. 

 

It always seemed to be, being a fellow Scandinavian or a person 

of Scandinavian descent, Mr. Speaker, that people from that part 

of Europe always tried to pick the stoniest and hilliest piece of 

land in Saskatchewan upon which to make a living.  And a great 

number of them also had developed the same types of political 

persuasions that Mr. Dahlman had, so I guess I've always 

wondered what happened in my case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway, I can appreciate the endeavour and the effort that 

Mr. Dahlman made to building this province.  And anyone that's 

had the opportunity to serve in this Legislative Assembly and 

contribute as Mr. Dahlman did during, as the Premier said, some 

very controversial years, is someone that we should take the 

time to honour. 

 

And I'd like to officially join with the Premier in seconding the 

motion to express our most sincere sympathy to the members of 

the bereaved family.  And it has been an honour for me, on 

behalf of the official opposition, to take part in paying respect to 

Mr. Hjalmar Dahlman. 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm also honoured to 

rise this afternoon to say a few words to add to the condolence 

motion presented by the Premier and seconded by the Leader of 

the Opposition about the member, Ray Dahlman, who preceded 

me in representing the people I now represent in 

Bengough-Milestone for a party of which I am a member. 

 

I didn't know Ray Dahlman personally but in reading his 

biography feel that I know much about him and the things that 

motivated him because I suspect they are similar to what 

motivates many of us.  I also feel a great deal of admiration and 

respect for a man who clearly defined his goals for creating a 

better tomorrow for his family, his constituents, and the 

province. 

 

As was said, Ray Dahlman was born in 1909, four years after 

Saskatchewan was made a province.  He was born on the family 

homestead near Estevan.  So his story is very much the story of 

pioneer Saskatchewan which he helped create, the foundation on 

which we are still building today.  He was raised on the family 

farm and established a farm of his own at Readlyn after being 

educated at local schools.  He became a family man with eight 

children. 

 

Because of his interest in the province and his family, Mr. 

Dahlman became active in the life of his community, as so many 

of our ancestors did.  Education was a great, dominating factor 

throughout Ray Dahlman's life.  He saw the school unit plan as 

an immense stride forward in rural education.  He served on 

school boards of Hepworth and Assiniboia for 17 years, many of 

them as chairperson, and many of 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

those years coming during the depression and war, a difficult 

time to administer anything. 

 

He was also involved in many of the organizations that have 

shaped the character of Saskatchewan -- Wheat Pool member 

and delegate; student of the cooperative movement.  As was 

said, he went to Sweden in 1951 to study the co-op movement.  

Member of the local co-op board; employee of Federated Co-op; 

member of the local credit union; and an active member of many 

community organizations. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, in many ways his life reflects the life of 

our province.  And from the beginning of our movement he was 

a tireless worker for the CCF.  We should remember that in the 

beginning, identifying yourself with the CCF was often done at 

great risk to one's position in the community.  A great amount of 

courage and commitment were necessary.  Clarence Fines knew 

that; Ray Dahlman undoubtedly knew that. 

 

(1545) 

 

And finally, perhaps most importantly, Ray Dahlman served as 

the member of the Assembly in the legislature that ushered 

medicare into North America.  He was there.  He took part in 

this monumental accomplishment.  And although we can't say 

this for sure, the fact that he served only one term is probably 

attributable to his government's courageous stand in the face of 

incredible resistance. 

 

I feel many of us here today in this Assembly, upon reflection, 

can relate to the challenges Ray Dahlman was facing, whether it 

be fiscal restraints, agriculture, education, or health care, when 

he served the people of Saskatchewan.  His example challenges 

us to meet the tasks ahead with strength, courage, and integrity.  

His was a public life well lived, and I'm sure a private life full of 

satisfaction. 

 

His many family members were with him at the end, and I offer 

them my own condolences and my thanks to Ray Dahlman for a 

well-marked path of public service. 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it is also my honour to join with the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition to pay tribute and bring condolences to 

the family of Ray -- or Bud -- Reinhold Dahlman. 

 

Mr. Dahlman, as you will know, Mr. Speaker, lived on Brown 

Crescent for 10 years before his death and you were his member 

for a number of years and I know had a personal relationship 

with him and had a high regard for him, as I do, as I did. And his 

daughter, Deanna, lives in Eastview now and so I know the 

family quite well. 

 

He and his wife, as the Premier and others have said, they were 

proud to be pioneers for our movement and we were proud that 

Ray continued to have confidence in us and support until the day 

that he died.  As has 

been mentioned -- I'll try not to repeat some of the comments 

that were mentioned -- but as has been mentioned, he was 84, 

predeceased by his wife, married a second time, and also his 

second wife predeceased him. 

 

He was a proud farmer, as has been indicated, born in Estevan, 

which is near my home town of Carnduff and homesteaded in 

Readlyn as was mentioned and, of course, the representative of 

Bengough constituency during the medicare crisis.  And I'm 

advised by his family that he was strongly committed to a 

comprehensive, affordable, accessible health care and that the 

ability to receive health care should not be based on your 

income; it should be accessible to all people.  So he was 

involved with a lot of courage during that period of time and 

worked very hard for the CCF with Tommy Douglas and that 

team. 

 

As has been mentioned by other speakers, he worked very hard 

in the co-op movement, the Wheat Pool, of course elected a 

number of times to the school board, and was an active member 

of the United Church.  Myrtle also ran for us, I understand, and 

was not successful, but this demonstrated that the entire family 

was committed to their philosophy and lived in that way. 

 

Ray did mention to me that at the 1992 convention that the 

Premier spoke of, that he was very impressed with the Premier's 

speech and felt that the province was, as he said, in good hands.  

All in all the Dahlmans raised eight children and the family farm 

is still farmed by one of Ray's sons.  In fact Ray farmed 

alongside of him to some degree until 1992.  So he was active 

until the end. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleagues and friends here to 

thank the family for their contribution, because in public life all 

family members make a significant sacrifice, certainly the 

Dahlmans, and Mr. Dahlman lived a good life.  Those who knew 

him, like yourself and myself and others, are proud of that 

association.  We certainly are appreciative that our children are 

benefiting from the kind of health care system, education 

system, and other community initiatives that he was involved in 

to make this a better place and a better province. 

 

So in closing, I would just say that he made the province a better 

place.  I hope that we could all say that at some point.  And in 

many ways we're at another time of renewal, much like the 

period in which he and the former CCF government were in.  

This is a time for opportunity and reform and we can identify 

with what it must have been like. 

 

So our best to the children and we wish them all the best of 

health and peace for the future. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Morse: 

 

 That Mr. Speaker transmit the transcript of the 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

 condolence debates to the bereaved families. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, I am honoured that the Premier 

has chosen me to move the motion in support of the Speech from 

the Throne.  I share this honour with the members from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, Meadow Lake, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, 

who have led off the debates in the first three sessions of the 

22nd legislature.  They've set the standard and put their marks 

pretty high on the tree, but I hope I can reach them. 

 

I can begin, Mr. Speaker, by affirming what they've each said to 

you at the beginning of their remarks.  Yours is not an easy job 

maintaining order in an inherently disorderly House.  And we 

appreciate it. 

 

And I'm also happy to welcome the new member from Regina 

North West to the Assembly.  It was a hard-fought, cold, but not 

cold-hearted campaign.  And I believe you will find life in these 

halls exciting, challenging, and 

thought-provoking.  And I think you could even consider that an 

understatement. 

 

I want to interrupt my comments at this point, Mr. Speaker, and 

ask leave of the Assembly to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- I'm pretty excited because here I was sitting 

and I looked up and there are two old friends, Mary and Graham 

Riches, formerly of Regina Lake Centre but now living in North 

Queensland, Australia.  Mary is an artist, a painter, and an 

activist; and Graham, who is currently at James Cook 

University, is noted internationally as an authority on social 

policy and is more nationally known for his work in the area of 

child hunger and with the Regina Food Bank. 

 

Graham was my mentor in social policy, so those of you who I 

pursue in caucus with these issues, you'll have to hold Graham 

responsible.  And those of you who enjoy my presence in the 

legislature will have to hold him responsible for that too because 

he nominated me at my nominating convention. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- And I'm going to sit for a moment because I 

know that another member wants to also recognize our guests. 

The Speaker: -- The member should not do that before another 

member does not stand.  Otherwise she may lose her . . . I 

recognize the member for Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that.  I just 

wanted to welcome Graham and Mary as well.  I was quite 

surprised and pleased to see them too.  I have been in the social 

work field, with Graham particularly, for many, many years, and 

we've been on a number of social policy committees together.  

And it's a real thrill to see him back. 

 

He certainly has, as the member said, has certainly distinguished 

himself not only nationally, but now internationally in the social 

policy field.  And many, many times I've called over the years, 

Graham, and always appreciated his sound advice.  And 

certainly in my portfolio now as Minister of Social Services I've 

been rereading his speeches and his books on hunger and 

poverty and food banks and I look forward to having a chat with 

him before they go back.  So thank you very much, and 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- To also welcome guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- Leave granted.  The member may proceed. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I would also like to say a quick welcome to 

Graham and Mary.  During my time on city council it was the 

work of Graham and others who were active in the community 

who highlighted to the members of city council the needs of so 

many children that were living in hunger and poverty in the city.  

And from that followed an inquiry on children's hunger in the 

city and much good work that has followed. 

 

And I really appreciate the work that was done and the many 

lives that Graham has touched during his time in Regina and 

welcome them back to the city and look forward to seeing them 

if I have an opportunity.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also want to say at 

the beginning how proud I am to represent the people of Regina 

Lake Centre.  It straddles the mighty Wascana and it straddles 

the professions in the mosaic of our province. 

 

What I enjoy most about the people in my constituency is that 

they are among the most socially 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

and politically active people in the province.  It's not always 

easy representing activists because they expect with reason and 

passion that their agendas will be accomplished yesterday.  But 

it is even harder I think to represent people who don't care.  So 

like other members who have opened the throne speech debate 

this term I share the honour with my constituents. 

 

Speaking in support of this throne speech is one of the easiest 

things I'll ever have to do.  There is no need for the verbal 

gyrations and linguistic gymnastics the Tories used to have to go 

through to disguise the nature of their agenda. 

 

I don't have to put a good face on GigaText or try to draw a 

picture of what water would look like behind Rafferty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Most of all I don't have to try to explain why 

bankruptcy is bad for an individual but good for a province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I've always believed that simple words 

explaining straight ideas and programs is the best way to go.  

Simple, open words to comment on a clear, profound document 

which reaffirms the direction of this government as it hits the 

mid-point of its first term.  A government committed, as the 

throne speech says, to economic and social justice and an 

abiding faith in the power of community and cooperation to 

achieve them. 

 

I want to frame my remarks within the ongoing public 

discussion about the role and the nature of government in today's 

society.  This throne speech reflects one of the most fundamental 

reasons I ran for election -- to bring government closer to 

people.  It was a very simple cause, and I sometimes remind 

people that that was all I said I was going to do when I got 

elected. 

 

We hear lots of terms being bandied about these days -- old and 

new politics, open and closed government, accountability.  And I 

think it's time we cut through some of the jargon and begin to 

examine exactly what we believe to be our purpose.  What do 

we mean when we talk about renewal?  And when I say we, I 

include us all -- elected officials, journalists, civil servants, 

academics, and all members of the public.  Because to make 

government work we all have to play a part, because together 

we're the government. 

 

First, I think we can agree in the abstract that government is 

neither good nor evil; it's simply a tool, like a hammer.  A 

hammer can be used to tear down a barn or build one, and it's 

what you do with it that matters. 

 

In the 1980s it was fashionable in some quarters to say that 

government was not the solution; government was the problem.  

We had the actor, Ronald Reagan, who believed 

this to be the case, and he had some parrots on both sides of the 

border.  And it always struck me as strange that those who 

believed government is the enemy would want to be in charge of 

it, but that was the case.  And we're still living with the 

consequences on both sides of the border. 

 

I have always believed and my party believes that government is 

the tool of people, that it is used to reach goals an individual 

cannot reach alone -- a useful tool, if used properly; a dangerous 

and even destructive one if used carelessly or maliciously or 

without respect. 

 

It's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that prior to 1991 the public 

perception was that the tool had gone berserk over the past few 

years, and the hammer was indeed swinging the carpenter. 

 

What went wrong?  Basically I think the province changed 

dramatically while the government stood still.  Society moved 

smartly towards the new millennium while those in government 

operated by yesterday's rules.  And I'll look back briefly, just for 

the sake of emphasizing the direction of change that's taking 

place. 

 

People wanted more open government, but they got the reverse.  

Instead of open discussion of budget and legislation, they got 

deficit by special warrant, policy decisions by cabinet decree, 

and investment decisions by secret handshakes. 

 

People wanted smaller, less cumbersome, more efficient, more 

responsive government -- government that reflects the reality of 

the time.  In Saskatchewan they got bloated cabinets, 

unnecessary legislative secretaries, and hidden political 

operatives.  The people asked for fair taxation and got a 

continuation of tax breaks for the well-to-do.  They asked for 

realistic job creation projects, and instead got megaprojects with 

no long-term benefits.  They asked for responsible stewardship 

of the public purse, and instead got programs that bribed them 

with their own money. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan asked for new 

politics and were repeatedly shown the old.  Is it any wonder 

then that the Roy Romanow government has not only had to face 

horrendous financial . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order.  I think the 

member realizes she may not refer to members by their surname 

or Christian names but by their constituency or the position they 

hold in the government. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Is it any wonder then that the Premier has not 

only had to face the horrendous financial situation that we 

inherited, and a good opportunity to repeat that, but it must also 

deal with the real crisis of confidence. 

 

This second problem is in many ways more serious than the 

first -- how to restore confidence in government and how to 

bring about the renewal of Saskatchewan; how to involve people 

in being part of the solution.  These are the questions we are 

trying to 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

answer and these are the questions this throne speech addresses.  

These are the challenges we've struggled with from the 

beginning, and Mr. Speaker, I believe we're coming up with the 

answers. 

 

We're indeed on a journey of renewal.  Let me talk about some 

specific examples.  First, we have made a first step towards 

restoring public confidence in government by restoring financial 

integrity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- We have changed from a time when 

Saskatchewan was burdened with $1 billion of new debt every 

year to being only one budget away from balancing the books, 

which is remarkable in its own right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- We can do little that needs to be done and meet 

few of people's needs if we continue to spend $2 million daily 

on the interest on our debt.  The Premier, the Minister of 

Finance, and Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor have all 

spoken eloquently on the fact that financial integrity is not the 

end but the means to an end. 

 

The Minister of Highways likes to quote Harry Truman who 

said:  "Any fool can kick down a barn, it takes a carpenter to 

build one." 

 

Unlike some other governments who are also dealing with large 

deficits we have made our adjustments carefully, making sure 

that the most vulnerable in the province will not be left with 

nothing but a bus ticket to elsewhere. 

 

Child hunger is a serious enough indictment on all of us.  We 

need not make it worse under the guise of responsibility. 

 

So we are building a smaller, more efficient barn, not kicking 

down the old one, and we're building it with the knowledge and 

cooperation of people, not the reverse.  Alberta's slash and burn 

approach is not ours.  And that, I believe, is a dramatic example 

of new politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech talks about the family.  It 

mentions that 1994 has been declared the International Year of 

the Family and I'm proud to be part of the government that's 

doing its best to put substance behind this declaration. 

 

One of the silliest aspects of the recent U.S. (United States) 

presidential election was the fight to establish who best 

represented family values -- Murphy Brown or Dan Quayle.  

That kind of posturing we can do without.  Families are too 

important. 

 

The throne speech announces the action plan for children and the 

children's advocate in the Ombudsman's office.  Among other 

things, these initiatives will take more control away from central 

government bureaucracy and put it closer to those 

affected -- more openness, more collaboration, new politics, and 

new ways of working together. 

 

But I want to point out one other fact about family and how this 

throne speech reflects this government's determination to better 

the quality of life for family and individuals.  Notice that in the 

speech there's two announcements concerning labour legislation, 

these announcements coming in the family section.  That is not a 

mistake, Mr. Speaker.  The announcements concerning changes 

to The Labour Standards Act and to The Trade Union Act are 

exactly where they should be. 

 

It is the function of government to provide the best possible 

atmosphere in which families can make their own decisions.  

Government should not dictate quality of life; it should nurture 

it.  Quality of life includes the workplace.  Anyone here who has 

ever worked in a less than congenial setting will know exactly 

what I mean.  Anyone who's worked under less than acceptable 

conditions will know that what you do at work follows you 

home.  An unsafe, stressful work environment easily leads to 

stressful home situations or sometimes worse. 

 

Last year we introduced changes to the occupational health and 

safety regulations and The Workers' Compensation Act for 

exactly the same reason.  The members of both parties opposite 

are on public record saying that workers work at the pleasure of 

the employer, that they should have few rights, that occupational 

health and safety are frills, that workers' compensation does not 

belong to the worker.  And they seem to believe that anyone 

should be happy just to have any job, that desiring a safe, 

stress-free environment with adequate wages and hours of work 

is somehow dangerously radical, that how you spend eight hours 

of your day has no effect on the other sixteen, not even 

recognizing what workplace stress does to productivity and 

profits.  I don't believe that and the New Democratic Party does 

not believe that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- And, Mr. Speaker, these changes too are 

coming about as a result of intense public consultation with all 

affected parties.  I acknowledge the sage Eisler's point that the 

Minister of Labour has given himself a near-impossible task, 

that he has tried to mix oil and water in an effort to achieve 

consensus, and that ultimately Marx may be finally proven right 

and labour and management cannot agree. 

 

But which would you have?  The dictatorship of the closet as 

practised by the previous administration, repressive labour 

legislation by fiat, or the painstakingly slow, collaborative, 

consultative process which begins with the belief that those in 

the game should have some say in the rules? 

 

We've chosen the latter course because we don't view 

confrontation as inevitable, only as a last resort. 

 

I grant you, Mr. Speaker, there have been some 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

great labour struggles in the past and there have been some great 

songs -- I still remember quite a few of them -- and stories that 

have come out of those struggles.  But it seems to me very 

Canadian that we sacrifice a little drama for a little peace. 

 

As Her Honour said, we are celebrating two 50th anniversaries.  

In its first throne speech on October 19, 1944, the government of 

Tommy Douglas said the following: 

 

 To enhance the security . . . of the working population, my 

government will bring in legislation designed to afford them 

greater protection against exploitation . . . Acting on the 

principle that workers of this province are entitled to some 

amenities of life . . . these are but the first of a series of Bills to 

be introduced by the government directed towards giving 

Saskatchewan the most advanced labour legislation in the 

Dominion of Canada. 

 

The result of these actions was a high standard of living for all 

our residents, a democratic economy, and a level playing-field 

where big business had to follow the same rules as small 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these Bills are a continuation of that pledge to give 

Saskatchewan the most advanced labour and family legislation 

in the Dominion of Canada.  Talking about family and work as 

one subject is an approach to integrating policy decisions of 

government.  And as we move fully ahead with integrated 

approaches, I wanted to use health reform for an example. 

 

We're coming to recognize in Canada, and certainly in 

Saskatchewan, that there are strong links in relationships 

between economic activities and the multiplicity of social and 

educational activities.  The two sets of activities are so closely 

related in the behaviour of people that they have the possibility 

either of being mutually supportive or they can be mutually 

destructive, leading to ill health for individuals and a poor 

economy for the society. 

 

In order to achieve this integration requires a common and 

accepted set of social and economic goals.  In our reforms in 

Saskatchewan we're anxious to address the determinants of 

health rather than continuing to focus upon the symptoms of ill 

health.  Over time we've allowed the formation of a very huge 

and costly health industry which now making only a marginal 

improvement to the real health status of all of us. 

 

In Saskatchewan our concerns include, but are not limited to, 

poverty, unemployment, environment, housing, and education.  

As you can see, responsibility for these issues does not normally 

rest in a single department or even within the public sector.  

These are the special policy and practice challenges today.  

These are the challenges that require community-based and 

partnership approaches. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the wellness model and the Minister of 

Health are receiving recognition from around the world for the 

freshness and courage of this 

second phase of medicare.  For instance, the Pan American 

Health Organization said, "Saskatchewan's reforms could serve 

as an inspiration and impetus for change."  And the director of 

health promotion for central Western Australia said, 

"Saskatchewan is about a generation ahead in reorienting the 

health system to a more balanced response." 

 

Mr. Speaker, any change is difficult.  Every birth is painful and 

every adjustment causes some anxiety.  But changes are needed 

to keep the system relevant today.  And I will argue that these 

changes are not an idle exercise in democracy.  It places real 

power in the hands of communities.  It's a journey of renewal of 

spirit in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the mid-point of its first term, this government 

has much to be proud of.  But if we had done nothing but move 

ahead on the wellness model, we could hold our heads high. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, there is much more to say about 

the throne speech, but fortunately I'm not going to say all of it.  

And I look forward to hearing what all members have to say.  

But I would like to start to end my comments by returning to 

where I began. 

 

I'm proud to be part of this government for many reasons, but 

primarily because we are facing our responsibilities in both a 

practical and strategic way.  We're playing with the hand we 

were dealt; the hand that says, you begin $15 billion in the hole.  

And we are staying in the game when many would have folded 

long ago. 

 

(1615) 

 

The province is better prepared to meet the millennium than it 

was two years ago.  It is certainly the first province in Canada 

that took the most immediate and positive action on our 

problems.  And we are becoming the first to reap the benefits.  I 

support the way we are changing government and the way 

people look at government. 

 

We have restored responsible government -- not whistles and 

bells, but good government -- an old-fashioned idea and a 

durable idea and, I will note, an idea on which our government 

has historically delivered. 

 

We are responding to people's desire to have more decisions 

rooted in communities.  We're giving more ownership of 

programs and policies back to communities.  We're being more 

flexible in our response to individual community needs. We are, 

in short, steadily increasing the level of democratic participation 

in the affairs of government. 

 

We all have a hand on the hammer.  The government is not 

holding it alone.  And we're returning government to where it 

belongs, and I think this transition is exciting. 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

Things are changing in Saskatchewan and the changes are open, 

family and community centred, decentralized, and radical.  

When I reflect on my roots I remind myself that I'm part of a 

continuum that began 50 years ago with the first Douglas 

government. 

 

I remember the stories of what that government accomplished 

against what odds.  And I recognize those accomplishments 

began to take place at the same time as the final push towards 

the halt of tyranny as we celebrate the 50th anniversary of 

D-Day. 

 

The only thing stronger than our sense of innovation is our 

capacity to be humble about our achievements.  In Saskatchewan 

we are radical in a very polite and unassuming way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this throne speech takes us one more step 

towards a cautious but exciting time in Saskatchewan.  It points 

us toward the millennium, not backwards towards the 19th 

century, and it provides hope and direction. 

 

And the main purpose of course of new politics is to achieve 

some new results.  I want for a moment to blue-sky into 

Saskatchewan's future.  We have a small population, a vast 

province, but lots of assets to build on.  There have been many 

small nations that have competed successfully in world markets 

with less than we have.  However when your resources are 

limited, strategic thinking becomes essential because you don't 

have the luxury of making mistakes.  Therefore government has 

to be more competent and more strategic. 

 

It was not true when the former premier said, Saskatchewan had 

so much going for it we can afford to mismanage it.  Quite the 

opposite is true.  We must carefully manage every resource and 

talent we possess and together apply all of our energies toward 

our collective success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- This province only succeeds if we all 

participate fully.  The Partnership for Renewal identifies our 

key strengths -- value-added agriculture, forestry, minerals, 

energy, tourism, information and communications.  For 

example, through SaskTel and the visionary thinking of over a 

decade ago, the entire province is linked with fibre optics.  In 

this we're miles ahead of places like Palo Alto in the Silicon 

Valley.  And there are many similar examples throughout the 

whole landscape of Saskatchewan. 

 

In order to capitalize on our resources we must have 

coordinated, long-term thinking.  And this is why our 

government has moved quickly in the key areas of health, 

agriculture, economic development and finance to lay out 

documents and strategic action plans outlining a long-term 

vision for the future.  The only way to succeed now is to get 

on-board with these documents, with this vision, and work with 

it -- a basis to implement and innovate on as we move ahead. 

In communities we are moving away from people talking only to 

governments and instead are creating vehicles for communities 

to discuss and build on their own strengths and dialogue with 

neighbouring towns and villages.  Mechanisms such as district 

health boards, regional economic development authorities, child 

action plan, co-management areas, family service agreements 

with tribal councils -- all of these are creating opportunities for 

communities to come together, identify their strengths, 

coordinate their activities, and move ahead with unity and 

confidence and full commitment to their plans. 

 

Sometimes people come to me when they don't like their 

community decision.  They want government to step in and fix 

it.  But those days are passing.  Our government instead wants to 

help communities to mobilize their ideas and energies in a strong 

local effort assisted by government. 

 

And the new politics.  This is the value added approach needed 

by provincial governments.  Provincial governments must take 

broad federal initiatives and bring to them the perspective of 

provincial needs, and then tailor those to provincial 

circumstances which are strongly linked to community 

resources. 

 

The challenge to politicians and civil servants is to get up to 

speed in dealing with these changes.  It's no longer enough to 

plod from A to B and from B to C.  Government must fully act 

as a collective expression of the will of people and this requires 

new attitudes and new skills.  It requires moving beyond 

partnership to true synergy.  It must be skilled in dealing openly, 

inclusively, and in a more participatory way. 

 

And we won't get there overnight because old habits die hard.  

But I believe our government has created the long-term strategic 

plans, some of the community mechanisms, and a framework for 

these changes.  As in any relationship there'll be give and take in 

the process.  Sometime the community will get it right and the 

civil service and the politicians will be off track; some time 

government will get it right and the community will be off track.  

However, in those moments when we both get it right, it'll be a 

wonderful achievement for us all. 

 

In competing in a global economy we must not forget the 

lessons our aboriginal friends have for us, for they have had 

many hard experiences.  I don't know if you're familiar with the 

Cree medicine wheel, but it speaks to the need for balance in our 

lives.  We need to attend to our physical, emotional, intellectual, 

and spiritual needs as individuals and as a society.  

Overdevelopment of any one part unbalances the entire system 

and leads to much of the social and economic illness we see in 

our society, the product of unbalanced distribution of 

opportunities and benefits in the four areas of healing. 

 

So as we work to bring our society into balance, we need to keep 

these thoughts in mind and to bring balance into our own lives as 

legislators so that we can 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

recognize the full range of needs in our communities.  Positive, 

innovative action now will get us ready for the difficult times 

ahead as our federal government struggles with the problems we 

have already tackled. 

 

And we all have a part to play.  The money markets, the 

shareholders, the banks, may have to consider lower profits and 

lower corporate compensation in order to retain jobs and 

consumer demand.  Our universities and educational institutions 

will be called upon to provide leading edge research education 

and training.  Journalists need to make more of an effort to 

provide the facts and not their selective colouration of the facts.  

Our young people are children of the information and computer 

age and they'll have to help us older folks get with it. 

 

When times are difficult, which they may increasingly be, we 

will all have to work together building on our common needs 

and not take the weak road of finding scapegoats and taking 

political advantage of division.  Employers and unions will need 

to work together to increase security while enhancing 

productivity. 

 

As Michael Volpe, columnist for The Globe and Mail recently 

said of Canada'a safety nets: it is easy to be compassionate in the 

midst of plenty; it's more difficult but more important when 

money is scarce. 

 

Our government has recognized this and compassion is a 

constant theme that runs through all our financial and program 

decisions.  But compassion alone isn't enough.  We need to bring 

people back from the sidelines of UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) and welfare to being as far as possible 

welcome, participating, and productive members of our 

communities.  That is our task, that is the community's task, and 

it's the task we embark on together.  And I believe this is the 

direction and foundation laid out in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Biggar: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

 To Her Honour the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk, Lieutenant 

Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 May it please your Honour: 

 

 We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to have the opportunity to second the motion in support 

of the Speech from the Throne.  I wish to congratulate my 

colleague and member from Regina Lake Centre for moving the 

motion, for she has presented a valuable debate and given us all 

much food for thought. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of what political affiliation members 

have, it is appropriate we take time to reflect upon our roles in 

this legislature.  Through election we have been given the 

responsibility and the privilege to uphold and advance 

democracy in the province of Saskatchewan.  We all have 

constituents whose interests we are bound to serve.  We are not 

here for ourselves.  We are here as representatives of the public.  

Our constituents have bestowed a trust upon us we must uphold.  

We are the link with the public and the government.  If we are 

disheartened by distrust and lack of respect for politicians, then 

it is up to us to earn public trust and respect.  What we say and 

how we behave in this Chamber can work to restore public faith 

in the political process, or it can serve to further entrench 

negative views. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this regard your role is certainly paramount.  I 

know you take your responsibility to serve the public interest 

very seriously.  And I would like to take this opportunity to 

commend you on the decorum and competency that you have 

brought to this office thus far in this legislature.  Your job is not 

an easy one.  But your steady hand and sense of fairness has 

always manoeuvred us through those stormy waters.  Thank you 

for your part in restoring responsible government to the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- While I reflect upon the role of elected 

officials, it is impossible not to think of my own constituents in 

the riding of Biggar.  Over the years I have gotten to know a 

great many of these people I serve, and I am pleased to call most 

of them my friends.  Beyond all else, how we treat each other, 

the respect we show to one another is critical. 

 

A model my party looks up to and a legend in his own time once 

said it best:  The measure of a nation's greatness does not lie in 

its conquests or in its gross national product or in the size of its 

gold reserve or the height of its skyscrapers.  The real measure 

of a nation is the quality of its natural life.  What does it do for 

its least fortunate citizens, the opportunity it provides for its 

youth to live useful and meaningful lives.  Equally important, 

what does it do to share its affluence with those people around 

the world who suffer from poverty and disease. 

 

Those words of course are from the wisdom of Tommy Douglas 

when he addressed on May 28, 1976, the convocation of the 

University of Alberta. 

 

They speak of a value that we will do well to keep in front of us 

as we make decisions in this building, but also as we live out the 

story of our daily lives.  I am pleased that the people like 

Tommy Douglas have 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

gone before me in this legislature to set the standard and provide 

such a positive role model for all of us to follow. 

 

Of course coming from the constituency of Biggar, I'm used to 

having representatives of such stature to follow.  Out of the 

Biggar constituency we have been represented by cabinet 

ministers and even a premier.  Woodrow Lloyd represented 

Biggar constituency for several years, including as premier from 

1961 to 1964.  Elwood Cowley, a cabinet minister under 

Blakeney, also came from this area.  I'm both humbled and 

honoured to have the opportunity to follow such influential 

members of this Assembly. 

 

I know I have big shoes to fill, but I appreciate the people of the 

Biggar constituency have given me the opportunity to represent 

them in this House.  I've enjoyed the responsibility entrusted to 

me, and I will continue to do my best to ensure their views are 

heard and that their concerns are addressed. 

 

And I'm also particularly pleased to be seconding the Speech 

from the Throne at this point in our mandate.  I am delighted that 

the speech commits us to continuing the journey of renewal we 

embarked on in October of 1991, proud that that vision we 

announced in the first throne speech of the 22nd legislature is 

being carried on towards its successful completion. 

 

(1630) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I take great pride in being part of a party and 

a government which has a vision, which has a plan to implement 

that vision, and which has the courage to act on that plan.  

Former premier Allan Blakeney used to say that people may not 

always agree with what you do, but they'll never be surprised.  

Our Premier has said much the same thing many times.  We 

have announced what we're doing.  Judge us by whether or not 

we've succeeded, and we'll abide by that judgement. 

 

We said we would first get the province's finances under control.  

And we have done it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- We have not used the slash-and-burn 

approach of other governments to put our house in order.  We 

have not given another kick to those least able to defend 

themselves in order to provide themselves a financial 

responsibility, as the member from Regina Lake Centre pointed 

out. 

 

We have said that health care must be protected and enhanced.  

And in the words of a nameless, faceless politician, we have said 

that medicare is a sacred trust, and unlike him, we have not 

betrayed that trust. 

 

Hard choices, Mr. Speaker, we have made them.  They may not 

be to everyone's liking.  If they were they wouldn't have been 

hard.  But when I hear the lack of alternative choices from the 

benches opposite, I'm more than ever convinced that our journey 

of renewal 

is the right trip to take. 

 

I want to emphasize this.  This government took over this 

province and a government that was as close to collapse as it 

could get.  We inherited a province that was nearly as 

land-locked as Newfoundland.  We have changed that.  We have 

changed the mentality that has allowed us to get into that mess, 

the mentality that says we can control nothing.  We have to 

throw ourselves on the mercy of the big boys from outside the 

province, the ones who will take what they want from us and 

maybe leave a crumb or two. 

 

We are wrenching control of our own destiny away from the 

banks and from the outsiders.  We are putting ourselves in the 

position where we once again sink or swim on our own merits, 

not someone else's.  We are slowly but surely climbing out of 

the sink-hole, one handhold at a time.  It will take time but I 

assure you we will get there. 

 

And what do I hear from the opposition?  What are their 

reasoned alternatives to our policy, their thoughtful criticism of 

our programs?  What is their considered option on changing the 

role of government in society and transition, a role very 

thoughtfully discussed by the member from Regina Lake Centre. 

 

The response is simple.  Our problems will be solved if we pay 

government workers lousy salaries; stiff the people who work 

for us and we will walk into the promised land.  That is not an 

answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government's program is built on four pillars: 

fiscal integrity, health care, agriculture, and economic 

development.  The member from Lake Centre talked about the 

first two.  I would like to take a few minutes to talk about the 

others. 

 

First, agriculture.  As I turn to look to the future, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm encouraged by the changes I see taking place in agriculture.  

I refer to the recent Ag 2000 strategy, a road-map for the 

recovery of our agricultural sector.  I realize change won't 

happen overnight.  All change takes time; but change is still the 

fundamental drive of the positive things I see taking the shape 

for the agricultural sector. 

 

And something else we must acknowledge, the Minister and the 

Department of Agriculture and Food have in the first time in 

several decades, publicly laid out a work plan for the next 

several years.  By doing that they have as much as said to 

Saskatchewan farmers that there's something will be done to 

make a difference.  This is not whistling in the wind, Mr. 

Speaker.  If the department doesn't deliver on its work plan, they 

will catch the fallout. 

 

I see education, Mr. Speaker -- educating farmers and 

organizations about the options facing them for the '90s.  I see 

resource sharing -- sharing with farmers and organizations the 

expertise of our department staff.  I see a new landscape starting 

to take place, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to speak about that 

landscape and how it affects even my own area personally. 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

There's a road between my neighbour and myself that's about 

two and a half miles long.  Ten years ago, every crop on that two 

and a half miles was wheat.  Farmers adjusted to the times and 

saw that they needed to seek other opportunities.  On that two 

and a half miles, Mr. Speaker, there are peas, there are lentils 

grown, there is canary seed, there is a new type of malt barley, 

there are new types of spring wheat being grown, there are 

lentils being grown, there is mustard being grown.  And if you 

travelled another half mile you would find a field of canola. 

 

To me that two and a half miles is an example of how 

agriculture has changed and how producers in this province have 

reacted to change in a positive manner and we see that now, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- And that landscape, whose characteristics 

will be filled from the input of all the participants of re-creation 

. . . And that is the key of succeeding in this rough-and-tumble, 

rapidly changing technological world of today. 

 

Sharing information, looking for alternatives to challenges 

facing us in the global trading market; looking for other 

alternatives at home to create local provincial marketing 

strategies -- one that would allow us to be competitive in a larger 

market-place. 

 

For we would be terribly ill-advised to only concentrate on the 

bigger, global picture and ignoring what we could accomplish at 

home.  That's why the Ag 2000 strategy gives us the opportunity 

to achieve.  The technology that is an example of that, Mr. 

Speaker, is in the area of direct seeding and zero-till. 

 

We are leading North America, we are leading the world, in this 

technology with such industries as Bourgault and Flexi-Coil 

providing the technology for farmers.  And farmers are taking up 

that technology and using it successfully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- And there are no politics involved when it 

comes to the technology.  I know for a fact that the member 

from Kindersley is actively involved in the area of soil 

conservation also, and has been dealing with the area of direct 

seeding and zero till, and understands the importance of these 

issues. 

 

Let us take it back to our destinies, let us make decisions about 

what we can do to turn the industry around.  It gives us the 

control we need to reach out to our goals.  It also, Mr. Speaker, 

allows us to dream again, to hope for the future of agriculture in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key word in everything we're doing is 

cooperation, a word that's very dear to my heart.  We're not 

acting unilaterally, but in concert.  We recognize that no single 

entity has ever . . . or even half the answers.  So we are working 

with communities, 

with individuals, and with businesses to rebuild 

Saskatchewan -- and it's working.  Our Partnership for Renewal 

is giving Saskatchewan a realistic, comprehensive and attainable 

plan for economic growth. 

 

It is realistic because it focuses on home-grown business 

opportunities.  Our emphasis is not megaprojects, but rather on 

community development, small and medium businesses and 

individual enterprise.  We are doing what we can to streamline 

opportunity, to eliminate red tape, to establish a single-window 

approach to government assistance.  This throne speech contains 

those efforts, which it's pledged to increase cooperation with 

federal and municipal governments, to streamline business 

support for services.  We will be promoting future endeavours of 

the regional economic development agencies, a cornerstone of 

economic development, because they know what their regions 

need, and they know how to promote themselves. 

 

We recognize, Mr. Speaker, that small business is the driving 

force in the Saskatchewan economy.  Small business comprises 

93 per cent of the total number of non-agricultural firms and 

provides one-third of Saskatchewan's employed labour force. 

 

And the good news, Mr. Speaker -- our efforts are paying off.  

Drilling activity is on the increase, tourist inquiries have grown 

to record levels, manufacturing shipments are growing, retail 

sales are up, and we still have the lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, our economic development plan 

is working because it's modest, because it's practical, because it's 

built on our strengths and our natural advantages.  Our emphasis 

is biotechnology, food processing, tourism, northern mining and 

development.  We are not depending on outsiders.  We certainly 

had enough of megaprojects.  Slow, sure, cautious, 

unspeculative development. 

 

And as my colleague from Regina Lake Centre said, much of the 

emphasis on economic development is on the quality of that 

development -- not just jobs but fair, decent jobs.  Not just 

progress but progress that enhanced the quality of life, not 

lessens it.  Building, but not building up that tears down the 

environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- We want to leave something to our children 

except debt.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with this throne speech.  

I expect even to be more pleased with the Minister of Finance's 

budget in a few short days. 

 

I want to point out the obvious because it might be so obvious as 

to be missed by our crusading watchdogs of the press.  Both the 

throne speech and the budget are coming long before the 

beginning of the new fiscal year which begins April 1.  We are 

starting early to 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard February 8, 1994 

provide the necessary time for debate, analysis, and we are 

starting prepared.  I can remember June budgets, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No budget, none at all. 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Exactly, even no budgets, Mr. Speaker.  I 

believe our timeliness is one more example of our determination 

to restore integrity in government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, in general I would not call 

myself a wildly optimistic person.  I'm not given to flights of 

fancy.  I'm a farmer with, I think, a farmer's sense of practicality, 

a sense of realism that comes from being a primary producer 

dependent on so much beyond my control.  I hope for the best 

and expect the worst and plan accordingly.  But my constant 

battle with the elements has not erased an idealistic vein that I 

picked up over the years. 

 

I come from Woodrow's place.  I remember once, when he 

retired once from active political life, he went on to work for the 

United Nations rather than rest on his many, well-deserved 

laurels.  Like all of us I've been touched by Tommy, who gave 

probably his most inspired speech of his life in Regina when he 

was far too sick to be anywhere.  Like anyone with deep roots in 

Saskatchewan, I've been touched by the stories of our pioneers 

who endured much and achieved because they have had the 

dream of the better life in the new land.  Like us all who study 

the history of our province, I have been inspired by accounts of 

the great Indian chiefs and their leaderships, the Poundmakers, 

the Big Bears. 

 

Our recorded history may be brief but it's an inspiring story.  

Inspiring because we have had and still have a chance to build a 

society based on the best in our tradition.  We have done much 

but there's much more left to do.  I believe that exercising this 

Saskatchewan mixture of practicality and idealism will create 

not a model society, but something moving close to it.  By a 

slow, sensible, measured, cooperative plan, which this throne 

speech defines, we can inch ourselves a few steps closer to the 

New Jerusalem -- a goal we'll never reach, but we can approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember an old farmer in my neighbourhood, 

the epitome of the practicality I mentioned before.  Successful, 

hard-headed, determined, tireless, but a bit single-minded in his 

approach to business and life I thought.  The bottom line was 

what mattered. 

 

One day I visited him when he was turning over his potato 

patch.  Potatoes were on the ground and he just left calling home 

to have his family come out and sack them up.  I heard him say 

on the phone to his wife before he hung up, bring the camera out 

with you; those potatoes on the ground look so pretty, I want a 

picture of them. 

 

I was not surprised.  I was surprised but I shouldn't 

have been.  That double sense, the growing of food, the 

appreciation of nature, the practical and the idealism, the 

hard-nosed and soft-hearted, that seems to me represents 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I hope I have the same mixture in my own 

soul.  I think I do.  And that's why I'm here, to use whatever 

talent I might have to provide practical means for expression 

about idealistic views.  To encourage the better growing and 

selling of potatoes and other goods so we can all have the means 

and the time to appreciate what commerce can provide. 

 

That's why I'm here.  That's why I'm a member of the New 

Democratic Party.  And that's why I will support the motion that 

will support the throne speech.  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:44 p.m. 

 



February 8, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 4 of Hansard No. 1A Monday, February 7, 1994, 2 

p.m., right-hand column, first paragraph, the name Scott 

Grabarcayk should read Scott Grabarczyk. 


