




















































Hansard: May 26, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2601 

 May 26, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of the citizens of the village of Ebenezer who 

are concerned about the construction of a chemical storage 

facility within the village.  The prayer of the petition reads: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately investigate the situation through an inquiry or 

other appropriate means. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order a petition requesting delay in the 

passage of Bills 32 and 54 presented on May 25 has been 

reviewed, pursuant to rule 11(6) and rule 11(7) and is found to 

be irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, to you and to all members of the Assembly, want to 

introduce five students in your Gallery.  They're ages 13 to 15 

and they're from Dale's House in the constituency of Regina 

Rosemont.  They're accompanied today by Darryl Browne and 

Carol Dawson.  And they'll be touring the building up to 1:45 

and they're going to be meeting in the Speaker's boardroom, 

your boardroom, sir, following question period for a photo and 

drink opportunity.  So I would ask all members to please 

welcome these students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

with great pleasure I wish to introduce to you and through you 

to the members of the Assembly, a group visiting today from 

Gladmar School, a grade 11 class.  And I will be meeting with 

them later today at 2 o'clock, I think, after question period for 

drinks and a picture and a time to discuss. 

 

With the grade 11 class today they have their teachers Ms. Judy 

Bendickson, Mr. Kirby Boychuk, and chaperons Lynne 

Hoffart, and bus driver Janice Muxlow.  I wish everyone to join 

me in a warm welcome to the students from Gladmar School 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and through 

you, I am pleased to introduce a group of grade 12 students -- 

11 students in fact – from 

Wawota accompanied by their principal and teacher, Mr. 

Harold Laich.  I look forward to meeting with the students after 

question period.  I trust they have an informative time here in 

the House and in the city.  I would like to ask the members to 

join me in welcoming the students from Wawota. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Wadena Wildlife Wetlands 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased to 

announce to the Assembly that the Wadena Wildlife Wetlands 

will officially open Friday, May 27.  The Wadena Economic 

Development and Tourism Association is constructing a special 

viewing tower and an exciting interpretative area on what was 

known as the Little Quill Lakes Heritage Marsh.  The name 

change of the area to Wadena Wildlife Wetlands is also part of 

the program. 

 

The official opening of the wetlands will kick off the 

Shorebirds and Friends Festival being held on May 27 and the 

28.  Many dignitaries have been invited to the opening 

including representatives from United States, South America 

and both the federal and provincial governments. 

 

The network of marsh land in the Quill Lake system was 

identified as a ramsar site, which means it is a wetland of 

international importance.  This also means that these wetlands 

will receive official recognition as a western hemisphere shore 

bird reserve network site.  The Wadena Wildlife Wetlands is 

host to thousands of ducks, geese, and migrating shore birds.  

Several of these birds are included on rare, threatened, and 

endangered species lists.  With such a great variety and number 

of birds, both casual tourists and serious bird-watchers alike 

will enjoy visiting the wetlands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge both the members and the public to come 

to this historic event at the Wadena Wildlife Wetlands, and 

enjoy the festivities as well as the wildlife. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prevention and Support Grants for Community Agencies 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Prevention and 

support grants of 1.4 million are now available to community 

agencies under Saskatchewan action plan for children.  

Community groups can use the grants to establish projects that 

focus on prevention programs and support services for children, 

youth, and families. 

 

A key feature of these grants is that they are community driven.  

Communities will have two opportunities to access grant 

funding -- June 24 and then again in the fall.  The grants are 

part of over 4.4 million announced earlier this year under the 

action plan. 



2602 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

A number of projects and services have already been initiated 

to respond to community initiatives.  Some of them include the 

Children's Advocate, the family law court division, expansions 

to legal aid, and support services to poor families, new outreach 

services for victims of family violence, and support for 

pre-school pilot projects in La Loche and Prince Albert. 

 

The grants allow us to allocate funds for preventative service 

and early intervention programs.  By developing services 

earlier or before problems develop, the need for higher-cost, 

more intensive service is reduced.  At the same time support 

grants will enable to ensure that vulnerable families receive the 

support they need to help restore their health and social 

well-being.  The preventative and support grants enable 

communities to work effectively to improve the lives of many 

Saskatchewan children, youth, and families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Broadway Comedy Festival 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to say this 

one with a smile on my face.  Next week is Tourism Week and 

rather than waiting until then to inform the House about an 

important event, I want to tell you today that there will be, for 

the first time ever in Saskatoon in the Broadway shopping 

district, a comedy festival.  They're all set to fill the streets of 

Saskatoon with fun, laughter, and good old-fashioned humour 

from June 17 to 19. 

 

During the last four years, the Broadway shopping district in 

Saskatoon has been the home to the alternative theatre festival 

-- the Fringe.  This year, from July 29 to August 7, the Fringe is 

moving downtown.  But the people at the On Broadway 

Association and all the Broadway merchants decided that 

summer is too good a time to pass without a festival on their 

street.  So they organized the Broadway Comedy Festival. 

 

There will be three very funny headliners at the Broadway 

Theatre and several more roving comedians popping in and out 

of at least six restaurants on Broadway.  And if they don't get 

totally sidetracked with the fun and good food, they'll also go 

along to the outdoor stages to join others there for free 

entertainment.  I've even heard rumours there's a theatre 

company getting into the act and a couple of street dances on 

Friday and Saturday night. 

 

Definitely Broadway in Saskatoon is the place to be from June 

17 to 19.  If the opposition members can tear themselves away 

from the Legislative Assembly, then I invite them to come to 

the Broadway Comedy Festival. 

 

New Transportation Service in Rosetown-Elrose 

Constituency 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased 

today to announce a new transportation 

service in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency.  The communities 

of Wiseton, Dinsmore, Beechy, and Lucky Lake will be served 

by a new bussing arrangement.  This comes about because of a 

concerted effort led by the Coteau Hills Rural Development 

Corporation, and the various municipalities involved, and 

supported by the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company) and the Department of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

With the discontinuance of the rural transportation assistance 

program in 1993, a bus system in the Outlook-Beechy area was 

threatened.  Concerned communities and agencies, which I 

previously named, worked together to sustain bus service in the 

area. 

 

The Saskatchewan Transportation Company, which set up an 

interim bus service in the area until the proposal was in place, 

assisted in many ways.  They helped in obtaining equipment 

and qualified staff; set up guideline figures for the development 

of rates, revenues, operating costs, and schedules; and worked 

with communities in the area in financial development and 

planning. 

 

The Coteau Hills Rural Development Corporation led the 

development of agreements to allow community participation.  

They also acted as a liaison between operator and the 

communities involved.  The Department of Highways and 

Transportation also played a major role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new business service in the Outlook-Beechy 

area went into effect May 2.  I'm happy to say that bus service 

connecting the towns of Saskatoon, Outlook, Wiseton, 

Dinsmore, Beechy, and Lucky Lake is now operating. 

 

I want to congratulate the community leaders and all the 

agencies that supported this new, local initiative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Aliens in the Legislature 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's an old 

command in the writers' profession that says, write about what 

you know.  Murray Mandryk definitely lived up to this 

command yesterday by writing about weirdness and aliens, 

subjects with which he no doubt has great familiarity.  But as 

usual, he was a few light years off the mark when he reported 

that these aliens were actually magpies and foxes. 

 

The real story, right under his nose, was in The Weekly World 

News.  This paper, which can be read while waiting in line at 

any supermarket, reported that at least a dozen U.S. (United 

States) senators have been exposed as space aliens.  Not only 

that, five have come out of the space closet and proudly 

admitted their origin. 

 

Where was Murray?  Murray Mandryk chose not to cover this.  

Is it because he himself is a space alien?  Perhaps a Liberal 

Klingon? 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2603 

Where, for that matter, was the member from Moosomin?  He 

will want to know if the Human Rights Commission has 

jurisdiction over these aliens and will it openly promote the 

alien lifestyle. 

 

So many questions, so few answers.  Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, journalists and opposition critics have failed to boldly 

go where no one has gone before. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Douglas Government Anniversary Celebrations 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question would be directed to the Premier, but failing that, then 

to his designate. 

 

I'd like to read a quote, Mr. Deputy Premier, from someone in 

your own party which provides, in my opinion, one of the most 

telling commentaries on your government that I have seen in a 

long, long time.  And I want you to listen carefully to this 

quote.  And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Losing the farm, well it hurt.  But there's no shame in it now.  

Pretty well everyone around here is behind in their taxes.  

Mostly I'm afraid for the children.  We can barely feed them.  

They stay home from school because they don't have shoes or 

a warm coat.  How can a government watch this happen to us 

and do nothing? 

 

Mr. Minister, my question is about priorities.  Do you think 

your government should be dealing with the serious economic 

problems in this province like those that I have just outlined?  

Or do you think your time would be better spent going around 

the province and throwing a big party for NDP (New 

Democratic Party) members? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. 

Speaker.  I'm pleased to respond to the member opposite and I 

want to say this:  that historical events are something which the 

people of this province, as any people of any society, should 

and want to celebrate.  The 50th anniversary of the election of 

the Tommy Douglas government is, I think, a very historical 

event not only for Saskatchewan but it is a historical event for 

all of Canada because of the things that were initiated because 

of that particular election. 

 

This would be done in the case of any such historical event.  

There is going to be on June 15 an unveiling of a plaque in the 

Legislative Building.  There will be a reception, a very modest 

one, to which all members of this legislature have been invited. 

 

For those kind of events, the government will expend money.  

But any events which may be of a political 

nature are going to be sponsored by the New Democratic Party 

and paid for by the New Democratic Party and not by the 

treasury of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the quote 

my colleague from Rosthern just read, as you probably know, 

is the opening to the NDP's big, multi-image presentation that's 

going to be part of a series of parties the NDP is holding all 

over this province starting June 3. 

 

Our office received a complete package on this province-wide 

party from a disgruntled NDP member, who obviously shares 

our opinion that your government's priorities are badly 

misplaced. 

 

We have 16,000 fewer jobs in this province than when you 

took office; we have 80,000 people on welfare; we have a 

record number of people using food banks; we have the highest 

tax burden in Canada.  So what's the NDP's solution to dealing 

with these problems?  Shut down the legislature and go and 

throw a big party. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you think this is the best signal you could be 

giving Saskatchewan people?  Do you think you ought to be 

throwing a big party at a time when so many people are 

suffering in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I really think these 

questions are out of line because they have nothing to do with 

government policy or with expenditures of money from the 

treasury.  But I will respond to the question anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say very clearly to you and to the 

member from Kindersley and  everyone in this House and 

everybody in Saskatchewan that the people who are members 

of the New Democratic Party, and I think people of 

Saskatchewan, by and large, are proud of the accomplishments 

that were brought about because of the election of the Tommy 

Douglas government in 1944. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think they're proud of that, and I 

think that the people of this province, putting aside all partisan 

affiliations, will want to recognize that event, that 50th 

anniversary, and indeed even celebrate it even though there are 

disagreements on a partisan basis. 

 

And I'm able to say, Mr. Speaker, that all of those events have 

been . . . everybody is invited, including the members opposite, 

and they'll be welcome and treated very well. 

 

And all of those events are being organized by the New 

Democratic Party, they're being funded by the members of the 

New Democratic Party. And the 



2604 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

public is invited and no money from the provincial treasury 

will be expended for them.  I make no apologies for that. 

 

In fact I rise in this House to express my pride in the fact that 

our party is still proud of the fact that it can look at its heritage 

and its accomplishments and say that we think it's worth 

celebrating. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

I understand that the party is to celebrate the 50th anniversary 

of the election of Tommy Douglas and I suppose that's 

reasonable because if I had your government's record I'd want 

to talk about Tommy Douglas too, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now we've seen some pretty good musicals in the province, 

Mr. Minister, lately you know; we've had Cats and Les Miz 

and the Phantom of the Opera.  And now we get the NDP 

production of Tommy.  Only in this version it's the current 

NDP Premier that's deaf and blind to the problems of 

Saskatchewan, although I must admit, Mr. Minister, he plays a 

mean VLT (video lottery terminal). 

 

Now in 1991, Mr. Minister, your Premier had this to say about 

Rally Round Saskatchewan -- remember that, Rally Round 

Saskatchewan? -- and I quote the Premier of the province: 

 

 The PCs are currently sponsoring a series of parties around 

the province hoping that Saskatchewan people will ignore 

their economic record. 

 

Mr. Minister, isn't this exactly what the Tommy tour is 

designed to do, so people will ignore your economic record? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say this to the 

member opposite.  After the election of the Douglas 

government in 1944, the people of this province saw the 

bringing about of medicare, of hospitalization, of balanced 

budgets, of rural electrification, Mr. Speaker, just to mention a 

few because there's only so much time in responding to a 

question. 

 

I think that we are quite prepared to match those 

accomplishments to the $15 billion debt which that party 

opposite chalked up in the 1980s.  And that's a pretty good 

comparison, Mr. Speaker.  And we are proceeding, since 1991, 

to follow up on the heritage of the Douglas administration 

because we are doing something about that deficit. 

 

We are going to have a balanced budget by 1996.  We are 

involving the people in the policy decisions of this government.  

And we are doing the kinds of things that are cleaning up the 

mess which the members opposite created in the 1980s.  And 

we're following in the footsteps and the tradition of the Douglas 

government 

which was elected in 1944, of which, I repeat again, we are 

extremely proud.  Which is something members opposite can't 

say for the period of the 1980s when they were in the 

administration of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, no one in this House is 

attacking Tommy Douglas.  It's just sad that your party hasn't 

had a new idea in the last 50 years.  That's the problem, Mr. 

Minister.  See, there's nothing positive in your current record.  

So I think that's why you're digging up a past premier of this 

province to talk about. 

 

I'm disappointed that this current production of Tommy, Mr. 

Minister, isn't having a showcase in Moose Jaw.  There's plenty 

of space available in Moose Jaw, Mr. Minister. You could hold 

it in the Woolco store that your government refused to help 

keep open.  And you know what, there's a 140 former 

employees there, Mr. Minister, that could be hired to help you 

put on the production of Tommy. 

 

So why don't you get down to dealing with the real problems of 

the province, Mr. Minister?  Instead of holding a party around 

this province, why don't you get on with the agenda that people 

all across the province are telling you about; the 500 in 

Saskatoon and the thousands of others that don't agree with the 

mess you're making in this province.  Why don't you do that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite that this is the 50th anniversary of the 

election of the Douglas administration in 1944.  That's an 

interesting contrast to the fact that the Progressive Conservative 

Party gets elected once every 50 years in Saskatchewan, when 

people have forgotten the kind of legacy that they have left 

behind. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm prepared to talk about the period 

between 1929 and 1944 when there were Conservative and 

Liberal kinds of governments, and what was done between 

1944 and 1962 when all of that had to corrected and cleaned 

up.  And I'm prepared to talk about the record and the legacy 

left behind between 1982 and 1991, and what this government 

is having to clean up, which is a pretty fair comparison to the 

period of time which I talked about earlier. 

 

And I'm prepared to talk about what others are saying of the 

accomplishments of this government, including the investments 

dealers of Saskatchewan; including business people in 

Saskatchewan; including Mr. Gass, who is a prominent analyst 

in the city of Saskatoon -- all of whom say very clearly that this 

province and this government are leading the way in Canada in 

financial management, dealing with the deficit that is there, and 

that it's a model which other jurisdictions in Canada should be 

following. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2605 

That's the accomplishment of this government.  And it's an 

important accomplishment because it's providing hope for the 

future for our investors, for our workers, for our farmers, and 

most importantly for our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Radisson Housing Authority 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

direct my question to the Minister of Municipal Government.  

Madam Minister, this question is in regard to the Radisson 

Housing Authority.  After failed attempts by the Leader of the 

Third Party and the member from Regina North West, the 

federal representative of the housing authority nominating 

committee has come to us and asked you to listen. 

 

Last February the nominating committee composed of local 

representatives from the federal, provincial, and municipal 

governments arrived at a deadlock over new appointments to 

the board of the local housing authority.  The committee is 

expected to act on a consensus basis in selecting its board 

members, Madam Minister. 

 

However, information that we have received from the federal 

representative indicates that your representative on this board 

refused to even discuss names brought forward by the other 

two representatives.  Word around the community is that only 

NDP Party members need apply for these positions. 

 

Madam Minister, the community is in an uproar over this 

heavy-handed interference by your government in local 

matters.  Can you tell us, is it the policy of your government to 

ignore the wishes of the majority, to ignore the input of the 

community, and to turn local volunteer boards into political 

tools? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, I would be 

pleased to answer that question.  The community of Radisson 

for many, many years has had a deep rift within it, and there 

have been factions in that community that have been 

disagreeing with each other for . . . probably since 1975 when 

the first housing authority was established.  Now there's a lot of 

history here, and I don't want to bring it out for everybody, but 

I think there is always two sides to every story and we should 

always be aware of that. 

 

I will say this however: the provincial rep tried to arrive at a 

consensus. She had three names; the other people had three 

names.  She deleted two of her names as a compromise and still 

that was not good enough for the other two committee 

members. 

 

But this is more than just about who sits on the housing 

authority.  This has to do with the management of the housing 

authority.  And the first decision that the new housing authority 

made was to decide to tender out the maintenance contract.  

The maintenance formerly was done by the manager, and he 

was paid for that on 

top of his administrative salary. 

 

Now this of course has blown up into a disagreement between 

different political factions and different groups of the 

community, but there's more to this than meets the eye.  We 

have now sent our officials in to do an audit of that housing 

authority and I just ask all members of the House and of the 

community at Radisson just to let this thing resolve itself.  

Those people who are on the housing authority are competent, 

capable people and they will deliver the best services available 

to those people who live in those social housing units. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm glad 

that you say that these people are competent, but when the 

nomination board presents names and the provincial 

representative on there deletes two of hers and allows one to 

stand, and won't even listen to what the other two 

representatives are presenting, that's hardly a compromise, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan, the people who 

elected you, are demanding that they be listened to, that their 

voices be heard.  Two days ago we saw business people from 

across the province meet in Saskatoon to demand, in vain as it 

turns out, that the Minister of Labour listen to their concerns.  

People are demanding that elections be held for district health 

boards this fall, a demand which your government again 

chooses to ignore.  Here once again we see the citizens of this 

province speaking up against the heavy-handed politics of your 

government. 

 

You have received extensive correspondence from the residents 

of Radisson on this particular issue.  Petitions have been sent to 

you from the town of Radisson and from the seniors' complex.  

Madam Minister, when will you get the message?  When will 

you start to listen to the people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well I thank again the member for that 

question.  And it reminds me back to the time when I was 

mayor and I got a call from the former housing minister, Mr. 

Jack Klein, and when we were making a nomination to the 

Melfort housing board and he said: mind your own business, 

Carol, stay out of it; MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) Hodgins will make the appointment. 

 

So you are very hypocritical over there, preaching to us about 

how we should follow this.  From your past experience, you 

had no idea what the word compromise and consensus was 

whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As the old 

mayor of Melfort, perhaps you had that occur to you.  But as 

you say, that member is no longer here.  Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Will the 



2606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

members please come . . . Order!  Will the members please 

come to order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, you had one appointment on that board.  I'm not sure 

how many more you wanted to have. 

 

Madam Minister, the federal and municipal representatives to 

the nominating committee are holding a press conference in 

Radisson this afternoon, in one last attempt to get their 

concerns heard.  The situation in Radisson, which you created, 

has become a crisis in that small community.  The mayor 

opposes the board; the town council opposes the board; the 

community opposes the board; the former manager of the 

seniors' complex, who you have forced out of work, opposes 

the board; and now the seniors themselves are refusing to pay 

their rent until you replace the board and your representative to 

the nominating committee.  That's what this has come to -- a 

seniors' revolt. 

 

Madam Minister, local people in this province have lost 

confidence in your government.  They have learned that you do 

not listen.  Will you give us your commitment today that you 

will meet with the nominating committee and with the town 

council of the town of Radisson, to sort out this mess that your 

government has created? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I will say this: the local housing authority 

is comprised of competent and dedicated people that will 

deliver a very high quality service to the people who live in 

those socialized housing units.  Those people are there because 

they are the community's choice.  I have told you before, there 

is a rift within this community that is long-standing and has not 

been healed for a number of years.  There is always two sides 

to this story. 

 

We are leaving the housing authority in place.  I have met with 

the mayor.  Those people will solve their own problems as long 

as other people stay out of the way.  And that's the best thing 

that we can do for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Retraining for Older Unemployed Workers 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Minister of Education, Training and Employment. 

 

Economic conditions in Saskatchewan have resulted in older, 

more experienced workers suffering unemployment problems.  

Of the 39,000 people in Saskatchewan who are unemployed 

today, 20 per cent are over the age of 45. 

 

Minister, do you consider this problem to be a serious one, and 

what are you doing to correct it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, over the years 

we've developed institutions in this province with different 

policies.  I remember the universities who had open admissions 

policies for people who are older and I remember different 

policies that have been developed through SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and the colleges. 

 

I feel that the system has been strained over the past couple of 

years because of the Tory policies of the $15 billion debt and 

so on.  But I think that the systems that are out there, with all 

their experience and so on, are providing an excellent education 

for people, for all its citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, these people need jobs.  The 

federal and New Brunswick government recently signed a 

guaranteed income program for unemployed older workers.  

This program will offer a minimum annual income of $12,000 

to individuals to work on municipal improvement projects, 

environmental projects, and other meaningful forms of 

employment. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you met with other levels of government to 

investigate the potential for a program like this for 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, in response to her 

questions, if you look at the Liberal governments right across 

Canada, there's tremendous unemployment:  Newfoundland has 

23.1 per cent; P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island), 22.3 per cent; 15 

per cent in Nova Scotia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to programs in the province, we've 

done extensively well in regards to the New Careers 

Corporation in this province.  But we're trying to get further 

cooperation from the federal Liberal government, and I 

certainly hope that the member across joins us and works with 

us in making sure that the feds live up to their side of the 

bargain and work with the people of the province in providing 

education in these areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Are you saying, Mr. Minister, then, that you 

are consulting with the federal government on this type of 

program?  The $12,000 these people earn under this program is 

over and above what they get on welfare.  It will provide work 

and a life of dignity for many citizens who at this stage of their 

lives have great difficulty finding jobs.  It would also help 

communities carry out projects they might not otherwise afford. 

 

Mr. Minister, other governments recognize the problem and are 

taking action.  If your government does care and does wish to 

provide hope, how does this group of unemployed, older 

workers fit into your education, training, and employment 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, here we have a member 

from Regina North West.  She's busy 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2607 

protecting the Liberal government at the federal level.  She 

should be fighting for her constituents.  She should be fighting 

against the offloading of the federal government.  She should 

be doing many things in regards to supporting us in making 

sure that the New Careers program is up to par.  I think that's 

what she should be doing rather than sitting here and protecting 

the Liberal government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I'm asking you about a 

specific group of people who are hard to re-employ.  People in 

their middle years often have dependants and debt.  They count 

on this time to earn their living not only for their families in the 

present, but also for their future security.  Their need is urgent. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you outline your plans today that will help 

these people in need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- People in need -- I think that we've seen 

the changes in policies in regards to UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) and many others in regards to 

offloading by the federal government.  You should be standing 

up for, again, the people -- your constituents are the people that 

you mention -- to make sure that the federal government quits 

the offloading and works with us to make sure that indeed we 

have the programs that you suggested be the ones that are 

beneficial for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Arts Board Grant 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Municipal Government minister.  Madam 

Minister, on May 19 I asked a number of questions regarding 

your review of the $9,500 grant awarded to Christopher Lefler 

for his clearly defamatory artwork.  The minister of gambling 

took notice on your behalf.  I was pleased, Madam Minister, to 

read in today's newspaper that you've taken some action in this 

matter, although I'm not sure that the action goes far enough. 

 

Madam Minister, have you received any response to your letter 

to Mr. Schmalz?  Will the Arts Board be withdrawing this 

grant, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I thank you for that question.  I have not 

received a response to my letter to Mr. Schmalz.  The Arts 

Board is reviewing the matter and at this point in time that's all 

I can say. 

 

I think it's important to understand that under the legislation 

that sets up the Arts Board as an arm's-length agency, the Arts 

Board has the autonomy to make these decisions and the 

minister cannot overrule those decisions, and I cannot dictate to 

them what they should do; so we have to wait for their reply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, you 

shouldn't be asking the Arts Board to withdraw this grant; you 

should be telling the Arts Board to withdraw this grant.  Your 

government has no business giving taxpayers' money to 

someone whose work clearly defames or hurts another person. 

 

Madam Minister, the other day on CBC Radio (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation), the executive director of the Arts 

Board defended this grant, saying the community's standards 

and defamatory nature of the project were not even things 

which the Arts Board should consider. 

 

Madam Minister, in Alberta the minister for arts funding has 

just announced that artwork which offends community 

standards should not receive public funding, and if the Alberta 

arts foundation continues to award grants to those types of 

projects, they'll have their funding cut off. 

 

Madam Minister, will you follow that example and send a clear 

message to the Arts Board in Saskatchewan that taxpayer 

funding of defamatory or offensive work will not be funded in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that would be a very, 

very dangerous course to follow.  We have for many years 

deliberately set up the Arts Board at arm's length so that there 

would not be political interference into the definition and 

meaning of art; and I think it should remain that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Announcement of Major Motion Picture Project 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'm pleased to be able to inform this House, as a minister 

responsible for SaskFILM, that Minds Eye Pictures, one of 

Saskatchewan's leading film companies, is making the final 

arrangements in securing a $2.9 motion picture deal.  The 

Hunted, which is the film's title, will commence shooting in 

Regina and northern Saskatchewan on July 18 of this year. 

 

I am equally happy to announce that Kevin DeWalt of Minds 

Eye Pictures has been able to demonstrate to his Los Angeles 

associates that Saskatchewan is an excellent place to do 

business.  And it is my understanding that two more films will 

follow within the next few years.  This province was chosen 

over Mexico as a site location for the film called The Hunted. 

 

Negotiations are currently concluding with ACTRA, the 

Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists.  

I'm pleased to say that a very positive working relationship 

exists within these groups. 

 

The use of Saskatchewan unionized labour through 



2608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

ACTRA proves that we have the expertise to compete at the 

international level and attract new and important levels of 

investment to this province. 

 

It is my understanding that the Saskatchewan and Los Angeles 

companies are already in production and will soon be in the La 

Ronge area shooting the action-adventure film.  I want to 

congratulate all those people who have worked so tirelessly to 

make this project a reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

congratulate the minister today on being part . . . and I'm not 

sure exactly what part she's played in this particular movie, but 

I tell the government that they should keep promoting our fine 

province because this is an excellent place to do movies.  

They've been done in the past and I think that Saskatchewan 

people, on the artistic level, can certainly contribute to things 

like this. 

 

And that's all the most reason, Madam Minister, that we should 

have a very clear understanding in our arts community about 

what is good and what is not good.  So congratulations once 

again on bringing this forward. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Investment Corporation and to enact certain consequential 

amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation 

and to enact certain consequential amendments arising from the 

enactment of this Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to question 

no. 61, I move they be converted to motion for returns 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Question 61 motion for returns debate. 

 

(1415) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance to please 

introduce the officials who've joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I have with me here Bill Heidt, the 

president of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance); and 

also, behind me I also have Jon Schubert, the AVP (assistant 

vice-president) for claims; and Doug Moore, the manager of 

litigation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome 

today, Mr. Minister, and your officials.  We've had some 

discussion in the past in second reading about this Bill.  We 

haven't had the opportunity to really ask you any questions 

about it, but there has been a lot of questions asked in question 

period; there's been a lot of questions asked by the public, in 

public forum nature of the newspaper; but there has been no 

public debate in the essence of you going out and meeting the 

public.  You had one debate with some people in Prince Albert 

but you refused to participate in any debates any place else in 

the province. 

 

When you were called upon to debate the president of the 

Saskatchewan bar association, you refused to do so.  When we 

called upon you to hold consultations throughout the province, 

with the public, to allow the public to have the opportunity to 

gain some more information as to what no-fault was all about, 

how it would impact on their current protection by insurance 

when it comes to injury claims, you refused to do that.  Your 

response was, oh well we have a 1-800 number and that's what 

we're using to consult with. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, when we phoned the 1-800 number there 

was no consultation process available.  They expected you to 

ask them questions and when we did ask questions they didn't 

have the answers.  They simply said, we'll have to get back to 

you later. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I'd like to ask: why did you refuse to debate 

in the public to provide the public with information, other than 

simple television, radio, and newspaper ads outlining your 

proposals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, the premiss of the argument is 

based on a faulty perspective.  I will start out by reminding the 

member about a short historical overview on it.  When we had 

Sobeco Ernst & Young report in December of '92, there had 

already been consultations taking place, and people that were in 

the committee were a group of very distinguished people from 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We had, for example, Rodger Carter chairing the committee, 

and we know that he was a dean of the College of Law in the 

province, in Saskatoon, and he'd been there for many years.  As 

a matter of fact, he also helped set up the native law program 

which graduates 80 per cent of the Indian, Metis, and Innuit 

lawyers right across Canada.  So he's been well renowned in 

regards to his knowledge of law and his knowledge about the 

history of Saskatchewan, and his concern, 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2609 

you know, of the social and economic conditions of this 

province.  And I do not need to say, you know, much more than 

that.  But he is well known by many people in the legal 

community. 

 

The other person that was in the committee was Pat Harrison, 

from the Canadian Paraplegic Association, Saskatchewan 

branch.  Again she has done a lot of work in this area, being an 

injured person herself.  And she had inquired into other 

jurisdictions besides Quebec, you know, where there was an 

insurance program that was similar in nature.  And she has 

done a lot of work. 

 

As a matter of fact, she had made statements wherein the 

present system, for every 10 people injured in the condition that 

she was in, only two were handled by the system right now.  

The system presently knocked out 80 per cent of the people, 

and that was her position.  And she felt that this new system, 

you know, would provide the benefits for it. 

 

We also had Merv Eisler, who was a person that was 

experienced in the area of insurance; Karen Rutherford, was 

also the past president of the Insurance Brokers Association of 

Saskatchewan; and we also had John Green, who was also 

experienced in the area of insurance.  Dr. Ann Dzus, a surgeon 

from the department of orthopedic surgery who has handled 

many cases, you know, that has come through from a medical 

viewpoint; we've had Arnold Nelson, was many, many years 

experience in SGI board itself and also has worked in the 

system.  We had Craig Vickaryous from the Consumer's 

Association of Canada who was part of that committee.  So 

here we had a committee that was well represented by all 

groups that would be impacted by insurance. 

 

And for the member across to dispute that these people did not 

consult is bordering on insult to such a distinguished group of 

people.  I think that they have done a tremendous job in regards 

to the proposal on the Sobeco Ernst & Young report.  They've 

provided very important information to the board.  And when 

they presented that to us, you know, last year, we did not have 

time, because of the time it was presented, to look forward in 

legislation.  So over the years we've done some consultation. 

 

Between January 20 and May 9 -- January 20, 1993 and May 9, 

1994 -- we had six meetings with the Saskatchewan Trial 

Lawyers Association.  Between January 20, '93 to May 9, 1994, 

we had five meetings with the Law Society.  Between January 

20, '93 and May 4, '94, we had nine meetings with the 

Canadian Bar Association.  We also had a separate meeting 

with another lawyers' group on March 10.  We also had another 

lawyer group which we met four times. 

 

We've met with workers in the province -- three meetings 

between April 2, '93 to April 3, '94.  We met with IBAS 

(Insurance Brokers Association of Saskatchewan) on May 13, 

'93 to May 5, '94, four meetings.  The Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce we met with a couple of times; the Regina Chamber 

a 

couple of times, in again '93 and '94, in both years; the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce on April 14, 1994. 

 

We also, on the health side, we have met with the 

Saskatchewan Chiropractors Association, February 16, '93, 

March 13, '93, April 13,'94.  We met with the Regina Health 

Board in '93 and also in '94; the Saskatoon Health Board in '93 

and '94; the medical staff at the Royal University in May 6, '93; 

we have met with doctors and therapists at the Wascana 

Rehabilitation Centre, you know, three times, twice in '93 and 

also in '94; doctors at the Saskatoon City Hospital in February 

19, '93; the Saskatoon medical association, April 22, '93, April 

13, '94; the Parkridge rehabilitation centre, '93 and '94; the 

Saskatoon branch of the Canadian Physiotherapy Association, 

April 13, '94. 

 

And we've also met with the Saskatchewan insurance 

associations four times in 1993 to May 16, '94.  We met with 

the Canadian consumers association three times; the Provincial 

Council of Women, Senior Power, Women's Secretariat, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Canadian 

Paraplegic Association, and of course they had a member on 

the advisory board. 

 

We also met with the Workers' Compensation Board.  We also 

met with editorial boards of the two papers.  We met with 

Saskatchewan Safety Council and the Canadian Automobile 

Association. 

 

So you can see that indeed we have consulted with a broad 

range of groups in meetings.  We've also had the 1-800 

number. 

 

Of course you may want to shoot down the idea of a 1-800 

number.  But you've got to respect the people of the province 

when they phone in.  You've got to have respect.  I can say no 

wonder your government was removed out of office.  You have 

to respect individuals when they phone you.  You have to 

respect individuals when they write letters to you.  You have to 

respect them when they form committees.  You have to respect 

their organizations.  You have to show a certain amount of 

respect. 

 

You cannot simply say that you want a televised type of debate 

for 20 minutes which will resolve all the issues of 

communications.  Communications is a continuous process 

which we have been involved in over the past two years.  And 

this is the basis of the decision. 

 

You know yourself; you've been quoted in the paper.  

Consultation on the 1-800 number.  We've made amendments 

in regards to impaired driving.  And you yourself have said, 

look, we have listened to the consultation process of people and 

we have made changes in that regard.  So that is basically my 

answer in regards to your question on consultation. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's very 

well on you . . . I agree with you that we need to respect the 

public.  But consultation goes beyond 



2610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

respect.  There's another word involved in consultation and 

that's listening and acting upon the concerns. 

 

You acted upon the concern we brought forward about drinking 

and driving and I thank you for that.  But there are a good many 

other concerns and the public never -- the public was never 

given the opportunity to go to some location and hear a 

meeting, to hear a presentation that dealt with the benefits of 

no-fault and the cons of no-fault, the things that are wrong with 

no-fault. 

 

You went through quite a list of people that you claim to have 

met with.  If indeed you have met with all of those people, and 

in meeting with them you would seem to suggest that all of 

these people agreed with you, then why are there ads appearing 

in the newspapers opposing no-fault? 

 

Why are there people writing letters to the editor opposing 

no-fault?  Why on the open-line shows do people oppose 

no-fault?  If you've consulted with all of these people, and as 

you seem to suggest, they agree with you, then why is this 

happening?  Why did the consumers' association come out in 

opposition to no-fault? 

 

Why did the head injury association provide opposition to 

no-fault?  They agreed with some parts of it but they're also 

still very concerned about the fact that people do not have 

recourse to a third-party arbitration, namely the courts, under 

no-fault insurance.  If you met with all of these people and 

they're all so happy about having met with you, why is there 

still this opposition in the public? 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, I think what I will do is provide the 

member with the people who have provided tremendous 

support.  Not only have we got tremendous support, you know, 

from the people in regards to the seniors because for the first 

time seniors are properly respected in regards to the situation. 

 

We've also made some changes in regards to home-makers and 

a lot of them are very happy, you know, with $400 a week in 

regards to child care benefits that were not there before as well 

as the 550 a week on personal care; and the students for the 

first time recognized in legislation, you know, up to $13,000 

for the students. 

 

And I think that when we're looking at 90 per cent, you know, 

of the income of a person being paid up to $550 a week when 

presently all we have is 150 or $200 a week, I think those are 

tremendous improvements that people have talked to us about. 

 

And I might remind the member that he's very selective in 

regards to reading comments.  He does pay no respect to the 

Canadian Physiotherapy Association of applauding the 

decision.  And we have looked at the fact that the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, you know, have agreed 

with our 

decision. 

 

When you look at the interconnections from a long-term, 

between business and the corporation, the insurance brokers, 

you know, have supported the Bill. 

 

We've had members of the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, the 

largest band in the province of Saskatchewan, has written a 

letter to me, congratulating me, saying: look, this is about time; 

this is a Bill that will be very important for a lot of people, 

especially in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We've have had the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

supporting the Bill.  We've had all kinds of people supporting 

the Bill and I think that the member pays little attention to 

those people that have said so. 

 

And I've also looked at this headline, even in the Star-Phoenix, 

that was on May 25, you know, of '94. 

 

And we had a meeting with the consumer's association of 

Saskatchewan, of Canada, and we had a special meeting with 

them recently.  And they went through a lot of questions in 

regards to the system.  And basically it's a major change, they 

said.  And their basic view is that they wanted to . . . they were 

very happy to see a switch from an adversarial system into a 

system that is more of a mediation type of viewpoint. 

 

So I think that they also really like the appeal that we had, 

because contrary to what you've been saying, the old system 

was such that you could appeal only internally.  Now we can 

appeal outside SGI to an independent mediator.  I think that's 

extremely important.  That is one thing that you have not read 

in regards to the Act.  We have an independent mediator 

outside the SGI process.  Also, over on top of that, even if you 

disagree at that point in time, you could always go to the Court 

of Queen's Bench where you could have a fair hearing. 

 

And I think that's very important so that there is two 

independent steps of appeal in that regard.  The other major 

point that you forget to mention is that the right to sue -- which 

was an important argumentation not only from the legal 

profession but from others -- we have kept the right to sue and 

the principle of the right to sue intact in the system.  We have 

moved from the area of the right to sue on the area of pain and 

suffering to now we have moved it to the right to sue in terms 

of economic loss.  So the idea and the principle of law in 

regards to the right to sue still remains intact. 

 

So I think that, you know, the member from across is very 

selective in regards to his hearing.  And I know that other 

groups may have different concerns; and there is no legislation 

that you can pass without people voicing this and that concern 

about it.  There is no perfect legislation that exists in the world. 

 

And there will always be people who will be opposed to certain 

types of legislation and I accept that.  I mean that's a 

democratic part of our system and it's an important part of the 

system.  To be able to freely oppose in this system is an 

important part of a 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2611 

Canadian and Saskatchewan democracy.  And I accept that. 

 

Look, there could be improvements on the Bill in the future.  I 

said to you, there may even be amendments in this legislation.  

Now you know I have listened.  You know that the people, 

what they told me in the 800 number, they know I have 

listened.  They know that what they said counts.  They know 

that I have respected their opinion and that's why we had the 

amendment in regards to impaired driving.  And also to the 

head injuries association on acquired brain injuries.  So they 

know that I have responded.  And that is the basis of fact in this 

province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you covered quite a 

large area of territory there and we will come back and go over 

it. 

 

You mentioned that the dean of law from the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan), I believe it was, was part of your 

committee.  Can you tell us who that was, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Rodger Carter is the dean of law. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Rodger Carter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Rodger Carter, yes, was the dean of law.  

And he was also, as I said, instrumental in having the first 

native law program across Canada.  And he was well known in 

regards to, you know, development in regards to the legal 

community and he's a highly respected academic.  I mean he's a 

professor emeritus, you know, from the University of 

Saskatchewan.  So that is the basic background of Rodger 

Carter. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When the 

committee did its studies and its report, was the report 

unanimous? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, it was unanimous. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Did this 

committee have any public hearings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- They did special consultation meetings 

with the people that were directly affected by the proposed 

changes in regards to the report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So the only 

hearings they held were with people that they specifically 

invited to come before them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- If you look back at it, on the names that I 

gave, they looked at their respected organizations and met and 

consulted with those respected organizations.  And that was, 

you know, the basis of the consultation meetings that they had. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, there was no 

opportunity for anyone who wished to present an opinion on 

this particular issue, who was not part of that selected group, to 

make a presentation then to the committee? 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The committee operated on the same 

fashion that most committees operate.  I mean anybody was 

welcome to do presentations and so on.  And we know that 

most organizations work through their organization . . . 

(inaudible) . . . because they have staff who can do reports, etc., 

and make presentations on behalf of their memberships.  But it 

was open in the sense that people could make representations. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, did the committee 

solicit any opinions through the public?  Did they advertise that 

they were prepared to accept submissions?  How was the public 

to know that this committee was indeed taking place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- There was no official public hearing in the 

way that you state. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's difficult for 

someone to make a presentation to the committee if they don't 

know the committee is sitting.  If the committee did not inform 

the public that they were actually holding committee hearings, 

how was someone supposed to know that it's taking place? 

 

Mr. Minister, what did the committee study?  Did they study 

the Sobeco Ernst report?  Is that what report they were studying 

or were they gathering information from at large? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Basically they consulted, not only within 

the province, but they have consulted widely internationally.  

I've looked at statements in there of tremendous overview on 

the length of consultation.  And they've gone through and 

consulted and looked at the debates and the statements and the 

research that was done in United States, right through Canada 

and then, as I mentioned, internationally.  So they've done an 

extensive amount . . . there was an extensive amount of 

knowledge base that was acquired through that process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Was their 

study based on the Sobeco Ernst report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'll read to you the section on the Sobeco 

report itself: 

 

 The role of the advisory board was to provide independent 

and impartial observations and advice with respect to study 

findings, alternatives, conclusions, recommendations, and the 

public hearing strategy. 

 

The members of the advisory committee I've mentioned 

already. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Did the 

committee study the findings and reports of Professor Carter 

dealing with no-fault insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well Mr. Carter was a member of the 

committee back in '76.  I mean he was involved on a no-fault 

insurance program at that time and because 



2612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

the government agenda at that point in time in history was 

fairly full it did not go through. 

 

But I think it's very important to recognize that his expertise in 

regards to law and how it relates to insurance was therefore 

utilized in this future context and we were very, very pleased to 

have a person as knowledgeable as he was in this whole field of 

law and insurance, you know, be able to deal with it back in '92 

when they presented that report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I have a letter 

here and I'm sure you most likely received a copy of it, dealing 

with no-fault insurance, and it comes from Professor Gary 

Tompkins, associate professor and head of department of 

economics from the University of Regina.  And I think the last 

sentence in this letter explains it all.  It says: 

 

 The provincial government will be well advised to not use the 

Sobeco report as a foundation for anything other than 

possibly to demand to renegotiate the fee paid by SGI for the 

report. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do you respond to this professor in his 

evaluation of that report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Not only did I receive a letter from Mr. 

Tompkins, he was also present at a meeting I had with trial 

lawyers and also the Canadian Bar and the Law Society.  He 

was present at that meeting.  In that meeting I threw back a 

question at him. And I asked him, I said: what would you do, if 

indeed you are voicing displeasure on the Bill, what is your 

alternative?  And do you know what he said in regard to his 

alternative was: that the taxpayers pay. 

 

And in my own opinion that simply raising the rates 8 per cent 

a year, and having 24 per cent increase in the next 3 years, was 

simply not on the agenda of this government.  It may be that 

Mr. Tompkins could pay for it, but there's a lot of people in this 

province who simply do not have the extra hundred dollars to 

put out and pay for what he says should be the solution. 

 

And therefore I considered that this solution of a 24 per cent 

increase is the same solution that you and the Liberals 

provided.  I mean you are on the record when we were dealing 

with that judges issue that you wanted a 24 per cent increase 

for them, but when it come down to the people of 

Saskatchewan, you would penalize them 24 per cent, you know 

ordinary people in the province of Saskatchewan. And I've 

always found that amazing in regards to your position.  So I 

feel that the position, the alternative, that Tompkins relayed in 

going for increases, was just not tenable for this government. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you have provided 

no evidence at all that there would be a need for a 24 per cent 

increase.  You've kept stating that, certainly, but you have 

provided absolutely no evidence whatsoever than an 8 per cent 

increase per 

year, or 24 per cent increase over all, is warranted. 

 

If you look at the insurance costs in other jurisdictions that's 

not warranted what you're proposing.  If you're going to save 

$70 million as your proposing to do with no-fault insurance, 

there should be a decrease in rates, and you haven't proposed 

that either.  You said yes, we won't have an increase this year, 

and maybe next year we won't have an increase. 

 

Well maybe isn't good enough, Mr. Minister.  If you're going to 

take $70 million out of the pockets of the victims of accidents 

in this province, you're going to have to come up with 

something better than no rate increase this year and maybe no 

rate increase the year after that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Just in case the member wasn't listening 

properly, there will not be any rate increase for the next three 

years.  There is no word "maybe" in there.  There will not be a 

rate increase. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How about a drop? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- There will not be a rate increase. 

 

Now they're always changing their mind.  Two weeks ago, they 

wanted a 24 per cent increase.  You're sounding like the 

Liberals now.  This week they want it to drop.  Could you make 

up your mind?  Do you want a 24 per cent increase or do you 

want it to drop?  I mean, you know, one week you'll say this 

and the next week you'll be saying that. 

 

I would say this much.  Every year we have audited reports.  I 

mean you've got to respect the auditors and that profession in 

this province.  They make reports, they look at our revenues 

and our expenditures, and they make the decisions in that light, 

according to the laws of the province. 

 

They show that indeed we had a loss and that indeed -- 60 

million in over three years -- and we needed to do something 

about it.  We couldn't continue to go the way we were.  Where 

we were going, without making any changes, we would have a 

24 per cent increase.  And I would trust, you know, the 

auditor's report rather than the expertise that you choose. 

 

For nine years you were in government.  You used to use . . . 

when I was in opposition, you used to quote experts all over the 

place.  Expert this and expert that supports this thing.  And in 

all those years you put this province in the hole by 15, 16 

billion now.  We now, the taxpayers, have to put $850 million 

on interest payment on this thing.  And I think it's very 

important to realize that if people are . . . would have believed 

you at that time, the record shows that they shouldn't have. 

 

You know, one year you were out by $800 million in regards to 

budgeting.  And I think it's very important to recognize that we 

have to pay respects to the audited reports that are there, and 

that's what is there and we will proceed to do that.  Just because 

some expert says that this is not good, well they have no basis 

in fact. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2613 

 They haven't checked the books out; they haven't done this; 

they haven't done that.  So I would say that it is mere 

speculation in that regard. 

 

And I might say again, you have used all kinds of experts 

through your term in office and the end result, they were 

proven dead wrong in regards to how you governed.  It was 

fully mismanaged after nine years of Tory rule. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I find it very 

interesting that you bring up the Provincial Auditor in this 

debate.  The Provincial Auditor's report suggested that the debt 

of this province should be rated at 21 to $22 billion.  That's 

from the auditor's report -- 21 to $22 billion.  In 1991, during 

election time, you were claiming the debt was 14 billion.  After 

the election you were claiming it was 15 billion.  Now in the 

House you claim it's 16 billion. 

 

Well if you look back, Mr. Minister, in the Gass report, you'll 

find that a good portion of that debt came into place prior to 

1982, when you were government.  So, Mr. Minister, a good 

portion of that debt is yours.  And if the debt is, according to 

the auditor, 21 to 22 billion, and the debt was 14 billion in 

1991, where did the extra $7 billion come from, Mr. Minister, 

since you became the government? 

 

Mr. Minister, we also have another report dealing with the 

Sobeco Ernst report, written by Rose Anne Devlin, assistant 

professor of economics, University of Ottawa.  And, Mr. 

Minister, her conclusions corroborate Mr. Tompkins's, that this 

report, the Sobeco Ernst report, is not a valid report.  And her 

report says, this assessment has outlined a number of flaws in 

the Sobeco Ernst report. 

 

She goes on to say that it ignores the deterrence effect of 

liability insurance regime.  She says that the actual causes of 

current . . . it does not analyse the actual causes of current 

insurance difficulties in Saskatchewan.  The report suggests 

some possible candidates, but it does not analyse whether these 

factors, increased damage awards and so on, are short-run or 

long-term phenomena. 

 

Mr. Minister, are they short-term or are they long-term and do 

you have any analysis to prove either way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Of course, it's long-term.  The fact is from 

1946 to the mid-'80s the amount we spent on injuries was about 

10 per cent in total.  And by the mid-'80s it was 30 per cent.  

And it was by the . . . by this date we're over 50 per cent on the 

injury side.  And when you look at the past 10 years, that 

amount was about $40 million on the injury side; it is now 160 

million -- a 400 per cent increase, $160 million. 

 

And I think it's important to recognize that there was a gradual 

increase, you know, over the years.  It took 40 years to rise by 

20 per cent; it took 7 or 8 years to rise another 20.  So the rise 

has been going about 12 per cent a year, and people call it 

either legal tort or social inflation.  And I think that it's 

important to recognize that fact. 

You look at the United States.  A lot of the people in many 

fields are not insuring basically because the litigation costs, you 

know, have sky-rocketed.  And we see that, you know, today in 

this case. 

 

And I think that the other major point is this.  When you look at 

the report, the Sobeco Ernst & Young report, I mean these are 

internationally recognized people.  And it has also been 

reviewed by the insurance advisory organization, another 

international organization.  And I think it's very important to 

recognize that it has been done by reputable firms, and I think 

that it would be hard pressed for the member to deny that.  So I 

feel that, you know, that's the answer to his two questions that 

he raises. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, are then you 

suggesting that Gary Tompkins and Rose Anne Devlin are not 

reputable people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I asked for Mr. Tompkins's advice and he 

said that I should have rate increases.  We've been given advice 

by people from various advices.  He may be able to afford the 

24 per cent increase because that is the only way that we'd be 

able to get away from the situation we're in, a 24 per cent 

increase.  And there is no way that I can agree with that. 

 

And I think that we'll . . . I'm simply saying that in many cases, 

you know, the minister has to agree or disagree.  And in this 

case I will disagree with him in regards to a solution. 

 

And in regards to Devlin and so on, well I will have to agree to 

disagree with her as well.  I mean she wants to keep the tort 

system, you know, that was there.  And she figures that the way 

it's increasing should be the way it goes, and there is no way 

that the people of Saskatchewan, you know, can afford that in 

the long run.  So that's the way it is.  It's not a matter of 

disrespect, it's simply a matter of disagreement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The fact that 

Mr. Tompkins may be able to afford a 24 per cent increase, 

does this somehow negate his criticism of the methodology and 

analysis and conclusions reached by the Sobeco Ernst report? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We've had an international, reputable firm 

having the facts at their disposal within SGI.  And Mr. 

Tompkins does not have at his disposal the factual information 

that was required.  Who would you suggest that we will agree 

with?  I mean in regards to Sobeco and Ernst & Young, the 

only way you could say is that you have chosen not to respect, 

you know, the report by Sobeco Ernst & Young.  What I am 

saying on this side of the House is that we do respect the 

agreement. 

 

Sobeco Ernst & Young report asked for a pure, no-fault 

insurance scheme.  What we have done in this case is have a 

system where the right to sue remains intact.  It's a modified 

version -- it's not the same as in 



2614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

Quebec, or it's not the same as in Manitoba -- it's a modified 

version.  You have the right to mediation.  You could mediate 

after you go to SGI -- if you do not agree you can always to go 

to an independent mediation.  You can then also go to another 

process of independent . . . to the Court of Queen's Bench.  You 

have access to the court.  You also have access to the court on 

the right to sue on loss of income. 

 

So I really feel that overall I think that we have a fairly good 

program and that indeed we've even had suggestions from you 

in regards to change on it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, what was the direction 

giving to Ernst & Young when you asked them to do this 

study? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Basically they were asked to review the 

situation.  When we looked at the sky-rocketing rates, we had 

to look at the question of fiscal integrity which this government 

is well known for.  We also were looking at the fact that people 

in this province cannot afford a 24 per cent increase.  So they 

had to look at that question of affordability basically because 

affordability and that type of thing have always been important 

questions and issues of Saskatchewan, and also in regards to 

this program. 

 

We also wanted to look at the issue of benefits.  Many people 

have said that the benefits were inadequate in this province and 

we had to improve on those benefits.  And when we improved 

on those benefits, we had to say they had to be fair to different 

groups in the province of Saskatchewan, and I think that's what 

we have accomplished in this case. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's very interesting 

that in your direction to SGI, that rates and the fiscal integrity 

of the corporation would be paramount -- that would be the first 

request. 

 

What about the insurance company's duty to the people who are 

buying the insurance, providing them with protection?  Was 

that a consideration in your request for this study to Ernst & 

Young?  After all, the people who are buying the insurance 

expect to receive a certain amount of coverage, and up until 

this date, they have received that. 

 

They don't have an option, Mr. Minister, of saying we don't 

want to buy your insurance.  If you wish to drive a vehicle and 

license a vehicle in Saskatchewan, you're not given an option.  

You will take whatever SGI offers. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, when your study's prime requirement is the 

consideration of the fiscal integrity of the corporation that does 

not take into account the victims of accidents.  That's looking at 

the bottom line of SGI.  And that's all very well -- SGI has to 

be a profitable corporation.  But they don't have to do it at the 

expense of the victims of accidents.  And that's what you're 

proposing to do. 

 

I questioned you earlier about a drop in the rates and you said, 

is that what you want?  Well, Mr. Minister, if 

you're going to provide less coverage for the insurance then a 

drop in the rates is indeed appropriate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think the member might be misreading 

the Bill, and I mentioned that before.  We are going to provide 

legislative coverage; we'll be providing better benefits. 

 

Well I guess it's not surprising that you tend to dismiss fiscal 

integrity as an unimportant issue.  Fiscal integrity became an 

important issue because when your colleagues on the Tory side 

were governing, fiscal integrity just simply did not exist.  And I 

think that we have moved towards this area, to move on fiscal 

integrity, because it's important for us. 

 

But a conjoint question on it is the issue of affordability.  

People cannot afford the 24 per cent increase.  Maybe when 

you were governing you did not care about increases but on this 

side of the House we care about these increases, and I feel that 

that's what we deal with in regards to this Bill. 

 

(1500) 

 

Benefits -- we have the best in regards to seniors, whether in 

law or whether in no-fault systems or threshold systems, in the 

world; seniors are only dealt with about four years after they 

reach 65 or quit working.  In this case, we will help them for 

life in regards to loss of income.  And that's the first of any 

insurance plan anywhere. 

 

And I think that we pay respects to the seniors, you know, for 

their length of service in building this province and we have a 

plan that now supports them, and I think it is the best anywhere 

that exists.  I think that's the type of thing that is very important 

in this regard, because I know that you have never said 

anything about it; you have neglected to mention it, but I know 

you probably support it. 

 

And as well on the aspect of the students, 13,000.  Before, the 

word "student" did not even exist in the legislation.  Now we 

have up to $13,000 for students. 

 

Home-makers, they only existed for two years in the previous 

law, and I think in the legislation basically because they could 

have got $150 for a period of two years.  There was one legal 

decision of $86,000 about a year and a half ago, but other than 

that, I think it's very important that $400 a week in benefits, 

$550 a week on personal care, $400 on child care, are 

important and integral features that are very important and 

beneficial to this province. 

 

So I think we have made . . . not only I think, I know we have 

made important decisions in this regard for the students, the 

seniors, for the income earners of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you talk about fiscal 

integrity, and the fiscal integrity you're concerned about is the 

fiscal integrity of SGI, not on how it will impact on the people 

who are buying the 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2615 

insurance -- who are forced to buy the insurance from SGI. 

 

You talked earlier about the increases, 20 per cent in the first 

30, 40 years of the existence of SGI, and so forth and so on up 

the line.   Well, Mr. Minister, during that period of time there 

was a very low inflation rate.  But perhaps in the next period of 

time that you had mentioned the growth taking place, 

throughout the late '60s and early '70s, you will remember 

something called wage and price controls that was brought in 

by the Liberal government because inflation was running very 

high.  Throughout the '80s inflation was running very high. 

 

Mr. Minister, since the inception of SGI in 1946 or '47, there 

has been very dramatic increases in the capabilities of the 

medical system to deal with injuries.  In 1946, if you suffered a 

major car accident and suffered major physical damage, in 

likelihood you would die from the results of that.  And today 

most injuries can be treated medically. 

 

But what is the result of those kind of treatments?  It's a very 

dramatic increase in the costs.  Now are you suggesting perhaps 

that we should simply let the people die on the street to save 

SGI some money?  I rather suggest not, Mr. Speaker, that that 

is not the proper manner.  So the costs to SGI relate to our 

capabilities to deal with injuries people are suffering.  And it's 

not because people wish to try and rip the system off, but rather 

because we can now treat them. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you're suggesting that SGI's rates . . . 

costs to SGI for injuries have increased dramatically, perhaps 

you need to look at the reasons that's happening, and did the 

Ernst & Young report consider those?  According to Rose 

Anne Devlin, they did not do a proper analysis of what the 

reasons were that the rate that the insurance industry costs were 

increasing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- When I gave you the facts before, that 

when you attempt to try and look at the thing simply in terms 

of inflation, well on the collision side, on the car side, of our 

costs, that has been very stable and it has gone up according to 

inflation, you know, over the years.  But inflation hasn't gone 

up only by 400 per cent.  I mean inflation did not rise by 400 

per cent in the last 10 years.  The costs went up from 40 million 

to $160 million on the injury side.  It was around 110 million in 

regards to the claim costs on vehicle damage and it remains 

about 115 today. 

 

So when you're looking at the overall costs, you have to 

understand that that has happened on the injury side.  And a lot 

had to do with the decisions at the court plate.  If you look at it, 

the number of injuries, and the severity of the injuries, has 

remained approximately the same.  And yet the costs have gone 

up from 40 million to 160 million. 

 

Therefore, you recognize that even in one decision back in '91, 

on whiplash, there was a decision that moved overnight from 

25,000 to 50,000.  So it gives you an indicator about how costs 

have risen through 

time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- No, Mr. Minister.  The technology 

involved in fixing a bumper on a car hasn't changed a lot from 

1946 till today.  A bumper is still a bumper, and you either 

chrome it or you pound it out or you get a new one or whatever 

it is.  And sure inflation has provided some increase in that 

cost, but the technology is basically the same. 

 

In 1946 you got your arm cut off or pulled off in an accident, 

they buried the arm and they cauterized the wound and away 

you went again.  Today, you carry the arm into the hospital and 

they attach it back on again, and six months later you're in 

therapy and you're using it.  That costs money.  And those 

kinds of costs have increased. 

 

In 1946 we didn't recognize soft-tissue injuries, but today you 

recognize that fact -- that when people suffer a whiplash injury, 

their neck is very impacted by it, there's an injury there; they 

suffer headaches and migraines and a number of other 

symptoms and we pay compensation for that.  The result you 

talked about going from 25 to $50,000, that decision was made 

by a court.  And the court said yes, we agree that you have 

suffered this injury and deserve -- deserve -- compensation for 

it. 

 

Now SGI is saying, well we don't agree with that court 

decision; we don't think you should have any compensation for 

a whiplash injury, and so we're going to deny you pain and 

suffering.  If you can prove to us you have a permanent injury, 

we will give you some compensation.  We'll give you up to 

$125,000. 

 

And that $125,000, Mr. Minister, I would suggest you have to 

be very permanently injured, because otherwise it's prorated 

down.  If you lose your arm, as in 1946 and they can't sew it 

back on again, you're not given the full $125,000 -- you're 

given a portion of it and a small portion at that.  The suggestion 

has been that for a whiplash injury -- a permanent whiplash 

injury -- you might get $2,500, Mr. Minister, might get $2,500. 

 

If we look at our neighbouring provinces . . . let's go back a 

little further.  A settlement was made that gave for pain and 

suffering hundred thousand dollars . . . is what the Supreme 

Court decided would be a fair amount to pay for pain and 

suffering, and since that time that has increased up to $250,000 

because of inflation.  Our neighbouring provinces provide 

$250,000, but you're going to drop it down to $125,000 for 

permanent injury as a maximum pay-out -- $125,000; half of 

what our neighbouring provinces are providing. 

 

Mr. Minister, it all goes back to the fact that this is a 

dollar-saving measure for SGI without any regard for the 

victims. 

 

You talked about earlier that under the current system you have 

an internal appeal process only.  Well perhaps you do have an 

internal appeal process.  But if you disagree with what SGI 

offers you, you have the 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

ability and the right to go to court and the courts will decide.  

And as you yourself suggested, they awarded from 25,000 up 

to $50,000 for a whiplash injury. 

 

Well under your proposal you say you have external appeal 

processes -- you can go to an external mediation service.  

Under the Bill that's true.  But what is that person who 

mediates limited to?  He's limited to whatever SGI is prepared 

to provide under the Act.  Not in excess, only what's in the Act. 

 

So if you're limited to $550 a week in lost income, that's the 

maximum that person can award you, the mediation services.  

And let's say SGI -- I've received a number of complaints about 

the adjusters and how they make determinations -- so let's say 

they offer you $100 and you disagree with that; you think you 

should be receiving more than that.  You go to mediation.  

Mediation says okay, we'll give you $200, and you disagree 

with that.  Do you have the right to go to the Court of Queen's 

Bench? 

 

What can the Court of Queen's Bench do?  They can't go 

beyond the $550.  They're limited to that by this Act.  They 

could increase it up to 550, but what if you were earning $750 a 

week?  You don't get the extra $200 because you're limited 

under this Act to $550.  And fact is you're limited to 90 per 

cent of whatever your income was. 

 

But you have the right to sue, you say.  Yes, you do, if you earn 

more than $50,000 you have the right to sue.  But if you are 

between 28,000 and $50,000 you don't have the right to sue. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you talk about your appeal process, 

your mediation, and your Court of Queen's Bench, it's a very, 

very limited right.  It's limited to whatever you put in this Bill 

and that's it, Mr. Minister.  And if it isn't, I'd ask you to explain 

exactly how it will work then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well there was quite a series of questions 

in this regard.  I'll start out with the latter ones and I'll work 

backwards. 

 

I would like to explain the aspect of your comments on 550 and 

where they don't have the right to sue.  They have the right to 

sue.  They have the right to sue after the 550 a week.  You can 

buy top-up insurance -- this is an interesting point that you 

probably have not read into the Act yet.  If you're at fault you 

cannot collect; because in the courts, once you get in the court 

system, that's the way it is.  When you have the right to sue, 

providing you're not at fault, and providing you have top-up 

insurance, then you can then be able to sue, and you'll get those 

benefits over 550. 

 

And on anything under 550; say 28,000 to 50,000 -- actually 

28,000 is the net income on that 50,000 gross.  But I think it's 

important to recognize that in regards to that, 90 per cent of a 

person's income, up to 550, is a lot better than the 150 or $200 

that is presently existing.  A lot better.  I think a lot of people 

will be very happy, you know, when they get paid 

over $400 a week, up to $550 a week, in regards to their salary 

and income today, that exists today.  It's very difficult to pay 

mortgage payments, and vehicles, etc., for $200 a week, as it 

exists today.  So I think that's very important for the member to 

recognize. 

 

In regards to your talk on appeal, internal appeal -- well your 

original argument was that there was no such thing as an 

external appeal.  Well we do have an external appeal.  You're 

wrong on it.  We have an external appeal in regards to 

mediation, and in regards to Court of Queen's Bench, and we've 

already mentioned the right to sue. 

 

(1515) 

 

And the important point is this:  right now, as it stands, 

rehabilitation is really not very much.  As it stands now, 70 per 

cent of the costs are paid for pain and suffering, 22 per cent are 

paid for loss of income, and 8 per cent are paid for 

rehabilitation.  I looked at the figures on rehabilitation. 

 

By raising the new program from $10,000 to half a million 

dollars, by having half a million dollars, we will help a lot of 

those people who will be severely hurt, that you talked about.  

Half a million dollars is a lot better than $10,000, according to 

the existing plan.  And I think that a lot of people will be very, 

very happy about that aspect of our plan. 

 

So when they're doing appeals, they don't have to go in the 

present system for seven years in court or four years in court to 

get a decision.  They can get a decision legislated, and 

decisions to be made within 14 days -- every 14 days will be 

made.  And I think that's very important. 

 

And the other thing too is, even in law today, the paraplegic 

association says that only 20 per cent of the people, you know, 

are properly dealt with today.  Eighty per cent of the people are 

left out right now. 

 

And I think that when we go into that type of system, trying to 

defend the fact that we leave out 80 per cent, is that a proper 

defence?  I think in this system . . . and I know in this system 

we'll be taking care of the majority of the people.  And I think 

that in the external appeals, they'll be able to do a lot. 

 

And I think that in regards to the whole idea of pain and 

suffering -- and we're now moving to permanent injury and 

$125,000 for it -- a lot of people will be very pleased that 

indeed it'll be medical practitioners who know the very best 

about injuries all over the world, in Canada, in Saskatchewan; 

it'll be medical people who will set the standards on what a 

person will be getting in regards to the degree of injury.  It will 

not be a judge making that final decision in regards to the 

scheduling of payments.  It has been medical people with 

expertise on injuries that have made that type of decision. 

 

You may disagree with the doctors and their skill and expertise, 

you know, throughout the world, but I don't.  I feel that what 

they have laid down in terms of 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

schedules are important for the people, and I think it is the 

fairest and more objective way of dealing with it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's very interesting 

when you say that medical people will be setting the standards, 

and I don't doubt that they will be.  But once those standards 

are set, Mr. Minister, who determines whether or not an injury 

victim qualifies for that standard? 

 

I received a phone call from a person by the name of Larry 

Trew from Moose Jaw, who was having somewhat of a 

discussion with SGI related to injuries he suffered and how SGI 

is adjusting those injuries.  He has a medical opinion that says 

he needs certain treatment.  The SGI adjuster says no, I don't 

think so; we're not going to pay for it.  So while you set the 

standard, a medical doctor may set the standard, Mr. Minister, 

it's your adjusters who are making the determination whether or 

not a victim qualifies under that standard. 

 

What medical training, Mr. Minister, do your adjusters have in 

making that determination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- First of all, there is a false premiss behind 

how you look upon the present system.  I know of a case -- and 

we can throw around cases back and forth -- I know of a case 

where a person went to court, he won a million dollars, a 

million dollar settlement, he must have been very happy, a 

million dollar settlement.  You know what he finally got?  He 

got 17,500 for himself and 17,500 for his legal counsel. 

 

The reason is, it's the person at fault and their insurance plan 

that determines what you will get.  Because a person only had 

basic insurance, that's all could be covered.  All your own 

insurance, you may have $2 million worth of liabilities, does 

not count.  It depends on the person who hits you that's at fault.  

That determines what you will get. 

 

I think a lot of the people fail to recognize that.  So here was a 

case where a million dollars was awarded in the courts.  The 

person ended up only having 17,500 to himself.  I think that 

there are decisions like that that have been made that a person 

said that just because the court awards it that it's automatic that 

you can get it.  Well it depends on what you have covering you 

on insurance on the person at fault. 

 

And the other thing too is that you say that the people in SGI 

will determine.  Well I would say that I do have respect, you 

know, for civil servants in this province, whether they work in 

the teaching profession or whether they work in this and that 

profession.  I think that it's important to recognize that they 

have gone in all through the years and become skilled at the 

levels that they are working. 

 

Definitely we will be able to look at improvements in regards 

to the new aspect of moving, for example, from 10,000 to half a 

million dollars on rehabilitation and we'll have to be able to 

refocus our people, you know, a bit more in dealing with the 

new, more wellness model approach to insurance. 

And I think that they also know that their decision may not 

necessarily be final.  After you agree . . . or after you disagree 

with the adjuster, you can always appeal.  You can always go 

and appeal to the mediator.  And if you disagree at the point of 

the mediator you can always go to the Court of Queen's Bench 

where they may have a hearing and the final decision will be 

made.  So you have two independent phases of appeal.  I think 

that is very important and I'm glad that you had raised that 

question in regards to the appeal process. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you didn't answer 

the question.  What medical training do your adjusters have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- As I mentioned before on the schedule of 

payments it is the doctors who are skilled in knowing what 

injuries are, and they determine the schedule, and you agreed 

with that. 

 

And in regards to SGI, they will be . . . individuals will be 

having recommendations from their doctors in regards to their 

degree of injury.  It's not the adjuster who knows what the 

medical injury is.  The person will have, you know, a medical 

doctor examine themselves and make that determination. 

 

And I think we will be looking at the schedule that is there and 

dealing with it that way.  So I think it's very important for you 

to recognize that adjusters deal with legal people.  They don't 

need a master's degree in law to do that.  They will deal with 

doctors.  They don't need a Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy) in 

medicine. 

 

They will be able to deal with the doctors in the same way that 

they have dealt with lawyers, in the same way that they have 

dealt with insurance brokers, and in the sense that they have 

met with the public before.  So I have faith in our staff and I 

believe that our educational process will be effective in dealing 

with the new developments that we do have. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I agree that 

your adjusters don't know what the injuries are but I want to 

know what medical training they have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well it's the same way, I mean . . . and I'll 

make it very clear.  The adjusters today deal with lawyers.  

They don't need a master's degree in law to deal with lawyers.  

Adjusters today deal with medical people.  They don't need a 

Ph.D. in medicine to deal with medical people.  They are 

trained as adjusters to work with adjusters. 

 

Definitely this new approach which combines with our 

wellness model on rehabilitation will require some upgrading 

of people in our focus now on wellness rather than legal 

decisions.  We now will be focusing in on the aspect of a 

greater aspect on rehabilitation.  I mean half a million dollars.  

What this means is that right now we spend about $5 million, 

$5.5 million on the area of rehabilitation.  This new plan will 

provide up to $26 million in regards to rehabilitation, a great 

increase. 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

We'll be able to work with medical people.  We'll be able to 

work with the health boards.  We'll be able to work . . . last 

year with the Royal University on whiplash we had a research  

plan of a quarter of a million dollars.  I think that the 

involvement of the medical people and integrating our planning 

strategy with them, from the adjusters through the medical 

people, will be an important developmental phase in the history 

of this province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what medical 

training do your adjusters have to make their evaluations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think the member from across persists in 

regards to asking this question.  Of course they're not Ph.D.s in 

medicine.  It's very clear.  But they were last training to work 

with medical people in much the same way that they've worked 

with lawyers without having a degree in law.  They are 

adjusters.  They're not doctors.  They're not lawyers.  They're 

adjusters. 

 

I think you have to remember that we will have an educational 

process that'll be important in this regard.  And we've been 

doing this whole issue of impairment for 50 years.  When you 

were in government and the Liberals were in government, you 

were doing the same thing.  You had adjusters.  I didn't see you 

hire Ph.D.s in medicine when you had adjusters when you were 

governing, and neither will we. 

 

I think that we will be dealing with effective adjusters that will 

liaise with medical people who make the assessments on 

individuals.  The adjuster doesn't make the medical assessment 

on the individual.  I mean the medical people will make that 

assessment, not the adjuster. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The difference is, Mr. Minister, that 

under the present system and since 1946, people who have 

disagreed with the evaluation of the adjuster had the right to go 

to court and you're taking that away.  Mr. Minister, currently -- 

and it will become even more so under no-fault insurance -- 

when a medical practitioner prescribes a therapy, the adjuster 

determines whether or not that is a valid therapy. 

 

In the case of Mr. Trew that I mentioned, his adjuster 

determined that the therapy prescribed by his doctor was not 

valid, and then SGI would not compensate him for that.  The 

adjuster is making the medical evaluation that the doctor's 

diagnosis is wrong.  Now perhaps the medical profession 

should be sending their doctors to insurance school to learn 

how to make proper diagnosis of injuries, I'm not sure. 

 

But the adjusters are making that evaluation, and Mr. Trew has 

the right to go to court and he's exercising that right. Under the 

current . . . under the no-fault system, he will not have that 

right.  He'll have the right to appeal internally, he'll have a right 

to go to mediation, but at the end of the day his right to go to 

court ends at Court of Queen's Bench for income loss. 

So, Mr. Minister, there is a big difference between no-fault and 

what's happening today, and how adjusters today do their 

evaluations, and how adjusters in the future will be treated.  

Today an adjuster who makes a mistake in an evaluation, SGI 

can be taken to court for a settlement. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you talk about going to court and you 

talk about the Court of Queen's Bench right the victim has to 

sue, he has the right to sue up to the limit set in SGI today.  It 

means he can't sue for pain and suffering; he can sue for loss of 

income up to $550 if he earns less than $50,000.  But I don't 

see a lot of other areas in which a person can sue. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think in many cases you've got to put the 

thing into perspective.  When you look at the paraplegic 

association, and they say that 80 per cent of the people are left 

out by the legal system, you have to look at the accidents in the 

province.  I mean 2 per cent of the people go to court in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we also have to look at the fact that indeed, for the 

member across, I looked at the Conservative government in 

Manitoba, your colleagues in Manitoba.  Now you look at your 

colleagues in Manitoba.  They have a pure no-fault system.  

The Conservative colleagues in Manitoba looked at the rates -- 

they were going up.  Their decision was to go to a pure no-fault 

system. 

 

We didn't quite agree with the Manitoba approach in full 

because the right to sue was not kept in as well as independent 

mediation and so on.  So in this system in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we kept the right to sue intact.  We moved it 

away from the subjective areas of pain and suffering where the 

costs were escalating, to the areas where we could control the 

costs more in the area of economic loss. 

 

It is simply a matter of good management for a person to do 

that.  And I think that as a government, you know, we have 

moved towards doing that.  So I thought it surprising that you 

haven't even consulted with your colleagues in Manitoba who 

had the pure no-fault system.  Here in Saskatchewan we have 

independent mediation processes at two levels.  And I think we 

have a tremendous improvement in the province of 

Saskatchewan in that sense.  But maybe you should give your 

colleagues in Manitoba a call. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we're dealing with 

the people of Saskatchewan and SGI and not whatever is going 

on in Manitoba.  Stating that I should be contacting my 

colleagues or people with the same political name in Manitoba 

is like suggesting maybe you should be talking to your 

colleagues in Ottawa who don't even want to keep the same 

name you have politically, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, when it comes to the right to appeal to the court 

system, exactly what can you sue SGI for if 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

you earn less than $50,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- What you can appeal is any actual 

economic loss.  And this includes not only in the area of 

income, but medical and home-making cost as well.  So it's a 

fairly flexible spectrum in that sense.  So that's basically, you 

know, what it does cover. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's say a woman of 

55 years old, who has no children at home, suffers an injury 

and is not capable of performing her housekeeping duties such 

as cleaning and cooking.  What kind of compensation can she 

receive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- That person will get up to 550 a week for 

personal care benefits.  And if a person has dependants that 

person may also receive up to $400 a week for child care 

benefits. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The lady in question is not employed, 

Mr. Minister; she's a home-maker and receives no economic 

income whatsoever.  Is she still entitled to the $550 economic 

loss? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, she's still entitled to 550 a week on 

personal care as well as the child care expenses of $400 a week 

and also half a million dollars in regards to rehab. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I stated she didn't 

have any children at home, and you said that the $550 was for 

economic loss.  She suffers no economic loss, but she is not 

capable of performing her duties at home. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes.  If she's not capable of taking care of 

the home and so on, that's the general . . . When we talk about 

personal care, that's what it covers -- 550 a week. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  For how long 

a time period would this $550 be in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- It'll be in most cases up to $500,000 

worth.  I mean the rehab benefits have moved from 10,000 to 

500,000.  So in most cases, it'll most likely be for life or the 

length of her injury. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So, Mr. Minister, if the lady in question 

was to hire somebody to come in to care for her home because 

she's unable to, that would be classified as rehabilitation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes.  Those would be the personal care 

expenses.  We will pay that person up to 550 a week in regards 

to personal care at home. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well you stated that would come out of 

the $500,000 that would be available for rehabilitation.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes.  The personal care expenses will 

come out of the half a million dollars expenses.  You've got to 

realize today that there's only $10,000 in it -- $10,000 is not 

going to last too long.  Now 

we've got a new program that's half a million dollars.  It jumps 

from $10,000 to half a million dollars.  I think that's a 

tremendous benefit and gain for the people of the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So the maximum coverage for the whole 

life of the person involved would be $500,000 regardless of 

where that was paid, whether it was paid for economic loss, 

whether it was paid for injuries, whether it was paid for 

permanent injury or rehabilitation; it's a $500,000 cap on what 

a person can receive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Theoretically they can receive up to about 

three and a half million dollars.  The $500,000 there is for the 

rehabilitation costs. 

 

Indeed if the person had been working, you know, previously 

and so on, there is a clause on the loss of income wherein we 

will ascertain what her wage had been before and ascertain the 

level of payments.  We will get 90 per cent of that wage, you 

know, for the length of her injury.  And if it's for life, it'll be for 

life. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, so she can get economic or wage 

loss for life.  But if she has to hire someone to do her work for 

her, that is applied against her rehabilitation costs.  Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- That's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, what happens in the case of the 

individual who's self employed, suffers an injury, and has to 

hire someone to do his job?  Does his payments go against his 

rehabilitation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- They will get up to 550; they will get up 

to half a million dollars.  The 550 a week will be there.  As well 

we will pay for . . . if the person is disabled and cannot work, 

we will pay for replacement labour costs. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the replacement labour costs be 

applied against his rehabilitation costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- That's on the income replacement side.  

That's the side where we say loss of income, 90 per cent of 

your income.  So the costs of replacement labour is on that side 

of the section of the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 

suggest then that every spouse start paying their spouse for 

home-keeping.  Therefore those costs would not be then 

applied against their rehabilitation costs; they would be applied 

against loss of income.  So that's perhaps something the public 

should be aware of, that you should start giving your spouse an 

income a week, and then she can turn around or he can turn 

around and buy the groceries out of it.  And if you ever do get 

involved in an accident with SGI, you'll at least have an income 

there to which SGI would apply their formulas and you could 

still get your half a million dollars in rehabilitation costs. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the Act, I wonder if you'd mind 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

pointing out the section in here to me that does say that you can 

receive compensation for home-making without having any 

employment income. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- If you look at division 7 on page 34, 

section 158(1) it says: 

 

 Subject to the regulations, if the victim is unable because of 

an accident to care for himself or herself or to perform the 

essential activities of everyday life without assistance, the 

insurer may pay a benefit to reimburse the victim for 

expenses related to personal home assistance. 

 

 (2) The maximum amount of a benefit pursuant to this 

section is $550 per week. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Okay, Mr. 

Minister, if the person was also employed and was entitled to 

the $550 wage loss, would they also be entitled to this benefit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, thank you very much for the short 

answer for once, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's your contention that no-fault insurance will 

keep the rates down.  But the experience in Quebec would not 

indicate that on the long term that is the case.  On the short 

term, perhaps it is; but on the long term, it's not.  We've been 

talking about injuries and that a person is entitled up to $550 a 

week or the benefit for home care. 

 

What is the long-term impact of that kind of a payment 

structure where you will continue . . . certainly come January 1, 

you'll start out with a very small base.  Just anyone who 

happens to get injured on January 1.  But that will 

progressively grow larger and larger as time progresses, until 

either these people are rehabilitated and no longer injured, but 

if they're permanently injured and suffered a permanent income 

loss that base is going to continue to grow. 

 

What's the long-term impact for SGI going to be for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I'll give you two examples.  One is 

Quebec because that's the longest-serving example.  The costs 

for the injury side in Quebec, on insurance, was approximately 

$100 in 1978 -- approximately $100 in 1978.  In 1994 the costs 

are approximately $100 and so it's approximately the same 

from 1978 to 1994.  In 16 years there is relatively little change 

in regards to the costs of insurance in Quebec. 

 

Now once in a while, you'll see a report -- and you're probably 

searching for that right now -- that will say and quote an 

example of a particular car in the province of Saskatchewan 

that says $600 insurance for this car and a thousand dollars in 

Montreal.  It's true. 

But what they don't tell you is this: in Saskatchewan our costs 

are half and half on injury and the vehicle, about $300 on the 

injury side and approximately $300 for the car.  On Quebec the 

injury side is this: it's a hundred dollars and $900 for the car.  

The private insurance scheme on the car side in Quebec and a 

number of accidents has escalated their costs.  But the very 

important thing to remember is that it is only a hundred dollars 

on the injury side whereas it is $300 -- 300 per cent more -- in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It is very important to know that in Quebec, and we met with 

the paraplegic association . . . (inaudible) . . . on this, they had 

talked to their colleagues in Quebec and they have said that 

they have increased their benefits in Quebec from 1978 to 

1994.  That increase has been 35 per cent increase in benefits.  

When they had phoned their colleagues and the head injuries 

association and paraplegic association counterparts, they have 

found that indeed that was the case. 

 

And it's also very important, and that's why I suggest that you 

maybe consult your colleagues in Manitoba.  In Manitoba, they 

have come out with a press release -- and I saw it about a 

month ago -- and that press release says that in their first year 

of no-fault insurance in Manitoba, they will have a $48 million 

saving.  Maybe you should take up the question to your 

colleagues in Manitoba and ask them if they're telling the truth.  

Find out what . . . where they got their facts from because they 

seem to be saying, which I tend to agree with, that they'll be 

saving close to $50 million. 

 

So I think that the member should do a little bit of research and 

come out with proper facts.  And so I guess in that regard, I'll 

wait for the next question. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when people in 

Saskatchewan go to pay their licence fees, they look at the total 

number.  And the total number in Quebec has gone up.  Now 

you can claim that it's a hundred dollars for the medical side of 

the insurance and that it's $800 for the vehicle costs, but I 

would find it very surprising that it costs three times as much in 

your numbers to fix an automobile in Quebec as it does in 

Saskatchewan.  Perhaps if you have to put French labels on all 

the fenders, it costs more.  I don't know, but I rather doubt that 

it does.  So, Mr. Minister, when you say that it's $900 for fixing 

the vehicle and $100 for the medical insurance, do you have 

some numbers, some proofs of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we could provide you with that 

information.  And the other thing too is there has been certain 

things that have come out on the news over the years that I've 

seen in documentation where they said that accident rates went 

up in Quebec.  It was a very interesting viewpoint from a 

research perspective because indeed there was in 1978 about 

1,642 accidents -- I mean fatalities -- in Quebec.  And what 

happened is that there was a blip -- in 1979 it went up to about 

close to 1,800.  But what they neglected to do in research -- this 

was very faulty 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

research -- they didn't look at the long term. 

 

By 1991 that had gone under 1,100.  I might say that in 1994 

the degree of fatalities in Quebec are less than a thousand.  In 

other words, there's 600 to 800 less fatalities in Quebec since 

no-fault insurance went in in 1978. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, do you think the fact that 

seat-belts are now used have any impact on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well perhaps maybe it has nothing to do 

with no-fault insurance then, the fact that fatalities are down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Contrary to the other opinion, I've never 

stated that it had anything to do with no-fault insurance.  All I 

was doing was stating the fact.  Because the opposite argument 

was this:  there would seem to be saying that there was more 

accidents, more fatalities, because of no-fault insurance.  And I 

just blew that apart, because there's 600 to 800 less accidents in 

Quebec. 

 

But I don't attribute that to the no-fault insurance plan.  I never 

have and I never will, basically because it has to do with 

education of the drivers in Quebec and the laws and the types 

of lights and everything like that that are important in regards 

to safety for the province of Quebec. 

 

And I think that in regards to their higher insurance rates, on 

the fact that it only cost them $100 for the injury side and $900 

for the car side, is that they still have quite a larger number, 

degree, of accidents which impact on the cars in that regard.  

But overall it's still only $100 on the injury side in Quebec in 

1978 and it still is today in 1994. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while no-fault 

insurance will save SGI some money, it'll cost the victims of 

this province $70 million.  Of that money, using your own 

figures, 10 to $15 million of that would have gone to lawyers.  

So 55 to $60 million of that will come out of the pockets of 

victims.  There's no other way to explain that. 

 

Now if you have some other way perhaps you could do that.  

But I'm not sure how you can explain the fact that $70 million 

is going to be saved by SGI, and the only people that SGI pays 

under personal injuries are the victims.  So therefore the money 

has to come from the victims. 

 

The thing besides money that SGI is taking away from people 

is their democratic right to appeal the decisions of a 

government body, and in some cases a heavy-handed decision 

by government bodies, to the court.  The Supreme Court gives 

us that right.  The charter of rights gives us the right to appeal 

to the courts of this land for restitution and for a decision. 

 

Now I realize that it's the tradition, becoming the 

tradition, of the NDP government to deny people the right to 

have access to the courts.  They did that for civil servants; they 

did that for farmers with GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program).  They tried to do that with co-op members in the 

Co-op upgrader, but the reason they failed there is the Co-op 

decided they had enough money to challenge this government 

in the court system and the government backed off.  And now 

in this session the Minister of Justice himself broke the law and 

denied judges the right to appeal to the court system. 

 

And now you are providing that same removal of rights to the 

court to the people who buy insurance in this province, 

automobile insurance.  And, Mr. Minister, that is wrong. 

 

You can provide other avenues that would save SGI some 

money.  You could provide a deductible in there for personal 

injuries.  I believe that the number . . . the average settlement 

for injuries in this province for pain and suffering is $10,000 -- 

the average across the board.  If you were to put into place a 

$5,000 deductible for pain and suffering, that would make a 

significant saving.  But no, you would prefer to deny people the 

right to go to court.  That's your settlement.  That's how you are 

going to save money for SGI. 

 

Some place in here I have further items that you could do that 

would provide a savings for SGI without denying people the 

right to go to court. 

 

And the second item you're even contemplating, and that's a 

graduated licensing system for people, because it is the young 

people who have newly acquired their licences which suffer a 

larger proportion of accidents.  With a graduated licensing 

system, you could reduce the number of injuries that our youth 

have and you could reduce the amount of claim settlement that 

would be awarded, because with a youth, you're looking at a 

very long, extended period of time, a very long period of 

possible earnings time. 

 

Another suggestion is to amend The Pre-judgment Interest Act 

to 3 per cent.  I'm not sure what it's at right now, but this is 

another manner that has been suggested to me that would save 

a significant amount of money.  And this would bring it into 

line with Manitoba and Alberta, but it would save some money. 

 

I see you recognize some of these suggestions and perhaps you 

have seen them before.  But these are some items that would 

have provided some savings for SGI without denying people 

the right to have a court settlement.  You could have even 

instituted your mediation services in there at some point that 

would have allowed people to have the opportunity to go to a 

person without having to go through the entire legal process. 

 

But at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, what did you choose?  

You chose to deny people the right to go to court.  You chose 

to deny them their democratic right as outlined in our charter of 

rights.  That's what you chose. 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

Now I have expounded on some of the negatives of no-fault 

insurance, but it's not all negative, and I will agree to that.  

There are some good points to it.  And I haven't had the 

opportunity to look over your amendments yet because I just 

received them as this debate started, but from our discussion 

yesterday -- and I thank you for that, where you invited me to 

discuss the amendments, to meet with you -- it is very 

important that more support be given to people who have 

suffered a head injury, a brain injury.  And it's very difficult to 

measure that.  And that again comes back to my argument 

about the SGI adjusters and their medical training, because it's 

going to take some very specialized people to make a 

determination as to the extent of a brain injury. 

 

I mean if the person suffered a massive brain injury, it's going 

to be fairly evident.  But in some cases it's not totally evident.  

It's a reoccurring thing; it's not always there.  And those kinds 

of settlements, a person may not be able to carry on with their 

employment.  They may be able to go down and buy their 

groceries, but nevertheless they should be entitled to some 

compensation and some rehabilitation. 

 

And it's going to take some very specialized training by your 

adjusters and the people that they visit with to make a proper 

settlement.  And if these people don't have the right to go to 

court they may not have the opportunities for a proper 

settlement. 

 

I've received a letter from a lady from my own constituency 

that I have been trying to provide some assistance for, since I 

became elected, and I discussed this case of her son with you 

the last time we met in Crown Corporations.  And there we 

discussed the lack of the amount of support under the current 

system.  And I'm pleased to see that someone in the future who 

will be injured with this kind of injury will receive greater 

support, but the people who are currently under the system, 

under the present system, are still in need of support.  So, Mr. 

Minister, that is one of those areas that you have improved in 

this no-fault insurance. 

 

The issue of the person who, through criminal activity, injures 

themselves and someone else -- because we brought that up, 

because other people contacted you, it was a major concern 

about the person who drinks and drives, is involved in an 

accident and injures somebody else, that they might be 

compensated in a manner greater than a victim that they may 

have injured.  I'm glad that you have changed that.  And again I 

haven't had the opportunity to review those amendments, but I 

thank you for at least bringing in an amendment that does 

change that because a person who does commit a criminal act 

should not benefit from that. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, while there is some good points in this Bill, I 

think the fact that you are taking away the right of people to 

have . . . to exercise their charter of rights is a very big negative 

in this and needs some very, very serious reconsideration on 

your part.  Thank you. 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd appreciate 

the opportunity to preface my questions with a few remarks 

today.  In this legislative session the government has forged 

ahead on a great deal of questionable legislation that will alter 

the landscape of the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

One such Bill is the Act to amend the insurance Act.  To the 

public this Bill seems to come from nowhere.  And the 

questions I am most frequently asked by my constituents and 

others in the province is why.  This is an easy political sell for 

the government because they have put the public in a no-win 

situation on no-fault insurance. 

 

First the policies of the government take more disposable 

income from the public than the peoples' budgets can bear.  

Then when the administration knows that the entire population 

is feeling financially vulnerable, the government chooses to put 

them between a rock and a hard place.  They do not ask the 

public to examine a new system of insurance in comparison to 

the existing one; they do not embark on an unbiased public 

relations campaign to bring people into the decision 

_making process. 

 

What the government does with no-fault is to put peoples' 

wallets against the wall and then say, do you want to pay more 

for what you are getting now or switch to a new system and 

avoid a premium increase?  Unaware of the shortcomings of 

the no-fault system, the financially weary public has little 

defence against the threat of a 24 per cent rate hike, which is a 

questionable threat upon closer examination. 

 

The reality of insurance is that more people pay premiums and 

stay healthy than pay premiums and get injured.  However, the 

unfortunate percentage of people who fall victim to accidents -- 

which by the way is why we buy insurance -- those unfortunate 

few will find the lower premiums they have paid to be small 

consolation when they are undercompensated or not 

compensated at all when tragedy befalls them. 

 

The fact is the government is playing to a very large audience 

of people who cannot afford to pay another dime for anything, 

even if it were medicine that could save their lives. 

 

(1600) 

 

The government is playing to a very small audience of people 

who permit themselves to believe that they could one day be 

the victim of an accident that could render them incapable of 

earning a living or sustaining any quality of life because of the 

ongoing pain and suffering resulting from an accident. 

 

But, respected colleagues, those people do exist.  And when an 

accident happens to them or to one of us, we all give sober 

second thought to what is about to happen in this Assembly 

over the next day or two with respect to our automobile 

insurance plan in Saskatchewan. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

I am gravely concerned that the public is being left out of this 

debate.  Saskatchewan people are highly responsible as a 

society.  They care about their long-term security and their 

families and their dependants.  The government may, in this 

case, be misjudging the priorities of the majority because if 

they understood what these changes could mean to their 

families in the event of an accident, they might choose to make 

sacrifices to pay extra for insurance. 

 

I do not know that to be true but I believe it is very unjust to 

presume what the priorities of people are on such an important 

issue.  The only way to know for certain is to inform the public 

of their options, engage them in debate, and act on the public 

will that emerges. 

 

SGI, however, has learned from the 1970s that public debate 

and full disclosure of their plans in relation to no-fault can be 

hazardous.  They did not intend to make that mistake again and 

have lobbied legislators behind closed doors.  By the time the 

people were brought into the loop on this issue, the legislation 

was drafted, the pamphlets printed, and the government had 

stopped listening.  That, in democratic terms, is a tragedy.  The 

attitude of the minister throughout this debate has been one of 

arrogance and defensiveness. 

 

It is my personal view that no matter what case one might 

make, it would be ignored.  Dozens of people with high levels 

of expertise in this area, professionals who have worked within 

our present tort system for years, who understand that no-fault 

system, have made representations to the minister, written 

letters to the newspapers, and lobbied every individual in this 

Assembly.  They all came away with the feeling that they had 

been listened to but not heard. 

 

It is shocking to me that a government who relies upon the 

expertise of the legal community at every turn has been so deaf 

to the concerns of the trained professionals who advocate for 

the victims of accidents.  It is distressing that a government 

who seeks advice from doctors and nurses on health care, from 

teachers on education, from farmers on agriculture, would 

completely ignore the legitimate concerns of the legal 

community on this critical issue. 

 

Lawyers are an easy political target, and thus the government 

sees no fallout in dismissing their concerns.  Frankly, the most 

important critic of the insurance system are the advocates, the 

lawyers who pursue settlements from the insurance company 

on a daily basis.  Who better knows the strengths and 

weaknesses of the system than people who challenge the 

system on a daily basis? 

 

Mr. Minister, there is a common error committed by people 

elected to this Assembly.  That common error is in making the 

assumption that somehow the day one is elected one inherits a 

certain level of expertise in matters about which one previously 

knew nothing. 

 

How can 53 members opposite have no doubts, no questions, 

about this proposed change to our system when the experts, the 

accident victims, and the 

leading economic authorities at the University of Regina have 

called the alternative system into question on so many levels? 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that the question period is a very bad 

forum in which to get answers to crucial questions.  I have 

observed your responses in question period and I give you full 

marks for politically correct answers but no marks for 

answering the real questions you have fielded on no-fault. 

 

Rather than making a lengthy second reading speech, I have 

chosen to incorporate my remarks into a series of questions 

today in Committee of the Whole.  Mr. Minister, I hope you 

will refrain from political rhetoric and ask your officials to 

provide you with direct and understandable answers to my 

questions for the public record. 

 

Let us begin with your initial premiss that SGI is broke and 

no-fault will fix it.  Mr. Minister, in 1992 SGI increased its 

reserves for future claims by $49 million, resulting in a 

year-end loss of $35 million.  You have used this loss of 35 

million to suggest to the public that the personal injury awards 

are sky-rocketing; and number two, to justify and threaten the 

motoring public with unacceptable and unsupportable premium 

increases of 24 per cent. 

 

As of today, how much does SGI actually owe in unpaid claims 

-- not what has it committed to its reserves -- what is the actual 

indebtedness for unpaid claims as of year end 1993? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think, for the member, I'd like to clarify 

one thing for her.  On the reserves, there is $384 million in 

reserves, and that's to pay for the cost of the existing claims.  I 

mean the claims are going to continue and that's the estimate in 

regards to the cost. 

 

Now on other comments, you seem to imply that in this 

legislation there has been no type of consultation which is 

reflected from the legal profession in regards to the Act.  I think 

that your position there is inaccurate. 

 

Number one point, the most important point that they raised 

with me was the right to sue.  The right to sue is intact in the 

legislation.  And that's the most important point that was ever 

raised with me by the legal profession.  We have moved the 

right to sue from the sky-rocketing area on the pain and 

suffering claims to the area that was more manageable, in the 

area of economic loss.  We felt that putting food on the table 

for your children, in regards to economic loss, needed to be 

improved and made better, and this is what we did.  So that 

indeed the right to sue for economic loss exists.  You can also 

take people to court in regards to medical and personal care 

expenses.  I think that this new Bill keeps intact the right to sue.  

And therefore it's not accurate for you to say that we have not 

listened.  We have indeed listened on that point. 

 

Many legal professionals may say they will still disagree with 

it, but they cannot say that the right to sue has disappeared.  

The right to sue is still intact.  It 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

has been moved from the area of pain and suffering to the right 

to sue for economic loss. 

 

The other thing I think . . . and there wasn't always complete 

agreement among the legal profession either on the idea of 

mediation.  There were some who favoured mediation and 

there were some who did not favour mediation.  I would say 

that on mediation we have an independent process.  They were 

afraid that SGI would be the final arbiter.  They wanted an 

independent process.  We have complied with that request. 

 

And it was not only a request from the legal profession; it was a 

request from the head injuries association as well as the 

paraplegic association and others.  We have complied with the 

idea of an independent process in regards to mediation.  You 

can have your choice in that regard.  The other thing over on 

top of mediation, is the idea of appealing to the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  You have access to the Court of Queen's 

Bench.  And I think in that sense, that is an important addition 

to what has taken place by the Liberal government in Quebec 

and the Conservative government in Manitoba.  I think we have 

made improvements in that regard and I might add as well that 

they asked for the elimination of prejudgement interest and we 

have complied with that -- we have agreed with that.  It is in the 

legislation. 

 

So we have made a lot of decisions that were made to us in 

regards . . . from the legal community and from many others in 

this province.  And I think it's inaccurate for you to say that we 

have not listened.  We have indeed put substantive aspects of 

involvement on recommendations that they have made within 

the Bill. 

 

Now on the question that the legislation is questionable.  Well I 

think your own logic is questionable.  A lot of the people in this 

province don't want a 24 per cent increase.  You may believe, 

as members of the Liberal Party, that people should be given 24 

per cent increase; this NDP government does not feel that a 24 

per cent increase is in the interests of the public. 

 

I think many times as you go about in regards to legislations, 

you have to make that decision.  You have to be either on the 

side of the people or against them; in this case you're against 

the people.  You want to provide them a 24 per cent rise in 

regards to their rates. 

 

We on this side of the House disagree with that approach.  You 

may feel that you could afford it, but there's many people in 

this province that don't want to pay an extra $100 in regards to 

their insurance rates.  So I think that in regards to the idea of 

questionable and in regards to misjudgement I think you are the 

one that is misjudging the situation today. 

 

I think that there are many other important points that you 

neglect to answer -- the fact that seniors, for the first time, are 

recognized across the world in regards to loss of income.  We 

are the first to do that anywhere. 

And you are neglecting to deal . . . and pay respects to the fact 

that seniors are recognized.  Maybe the Liberal Party is against 

the seniors; maybe they don't want to see the rate increase; 

maybe that's what it is. 

 

For the first time, students in this province are recognized in 

legislation.  Part II benefits right now -- nothing for students.  

Up to 13,000 for the students -- maybe the Liberal Party and 

the Conservatives are against the students.  We on this side of 

the government support the students, support the seniors. 

 

Maybe you are against the home-makers; we have $400 for 

child care.  We have 550 for personal care.  For the first time, 

the home-makers are recognized.  We recognize the importance 

of work at home; we recognize the importance of care for 

children. 

 

Maybe the Liberal Party does not like that.  Maybe they'd like 

to keep it that way on injured people; 80 per cent of them are 

not properly addressed in the existing system.  Maybe the 

Liberal government stands only for 20 per cent of the people, 

but I believe that we need to become involved in supporting 

100 per cent of the people in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and that's the statement I'd like to make for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Actually, Mr. Minister, the question I asked 

was: what is the actual indebtedness for unpaid claims at the 

end of the year, in 1993?  Not about the reserves, but what is 

the actual indebtedness? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Again I will provide that information to 

you.  The liability is 384 million. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, how much would rates 

actually have to increase to offset that amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Those are past claims.  I mentioned 

before, at the beginning, that those are for . . . that reserve is 

there for the past claims, and we have to pay for those past 

claims.  There's a legal process, you know, taking place right 

now.  What we are talking about -- and I'd like to make that 

very clear -- when we did the analysis, our own audited 

statements on a year-by-year basis on the Sobeco report, it is 

very clear that it will require 8 per cent rise on the rates in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It is very clear that that's what it is.  

Maybe you want the 24 per cent increase in the next three 

years, but we don't. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you keep referring to the cost 

of insurance, the rates, and the deficit.  You haven't gone on 

about that, but the deficit of SGI.  Michael Rushton of the 

University of Regina economics department and the committee 

to investigate the system of compensating motor vehicle 

accident victims in Saskatchewan, urges the government to 

delay the implementation of no-fault insurance until the policy 

has been assessed with the care it warrants. 

 

(1615) 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

Mr. Minister, if you won't take any more advice from the legal 

community, proven experts in the field of accident injury 

awards, will you listen to some one who has no vested interest 

in the SGI system, no matter what form it takes?  Professor 

Rushton says, "The issue at present is not whether no-fault 

insurance is good or bad policy."  And I agree with my 

colleague; there are some good aspects to what you are 

attempting.  In the final analysis he says, "it may turn out to be 

the best option."  And I couldn't agree more, Mr. Minister.  But 

he goes on to say, "The policy is based on a poorly-done study 

and more investigation is clearly required." 

 

If that study contains any valuable advice it is that it is, to 

quote: 

 

 It is anticipated that additional public review and widespread 

consultation concerning this report and the recommendations 

contained therein will be sought through a public hearing 

process. 

 

Mr. Minister, you did not have a public hearing process.  How 

in good conscience can you proceed to change something as 

fundamental as public motorist insurance without using sound 

research and public hearings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The research is sound.  We've been 

waiting two years.  I received the report in December, '92 and 

we had a careful examination, and we can't afford 24 per cent 

increase. 

 

Improvements for the seniors, they can't wait another year.  

Maybe the Liberals want the seniors to wait, maybe the 

Liberals want the youth to wait, maybe they want the 

home-makers to wait.  On this side of the House, they should 

not wait.  We should provide those benefits as quickly as 

possible to them, which starts in January, '95. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I would like to suggest that we 

not go further with this legislation till there's a full public 

disclosure of all the reports supporting calculations you repeat 

over and over again concerning the financial prospects of SGI 

under the current system. 

 

Would you direct such a disclosure, Mr. Minister, so that your 

calculations and predictions can be verified? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The report is public, it's been public.  And 

we released it some time ago and maybe you should have a 

close examination of the report. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I don't believe the report covers those basic 

financial calculations concerning the financial prospects of SGI 

under the current system. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you feel no onus on the government to let 

independent sources examine the books publicly to bear out or 

disprove your claim? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- We've had an internationally 

recognized firm, Sobeco Ernst & Young, did a report.  We have 

audits on a yearly basis.  What you're saying is that you're 

disagreeing with these audits.  That's exactly what you're 

saying.  We agree with the decisions on the audits.  And for 

you to say that these audits don't count is very problematic. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you have not published 

estimates of the increased overhead or the increased 

bureaucracy to administer no-fault.  Will you open the 

projections for examination?  Will you show, for instance, the 

increased costs for the bureaucracy, the increased overhead?  

Because there will be a lot of bureaucrats trying to administer 

justice so that people will be denied the right to sue.  This will 

be very much like Workers' Compensation and it won't be 

cheap to administer. 

 

Will you show us your numbers and prove that we won't need 

increased premiums to pay for the no-fault bureaucracy after 

two or three years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well I think that, on the one hand, you 

talk about protecting this group and that group, and on the other 

hand you want to beat up on the workers of SGI.  I think that in 

regards to the increase on administration, we have about 7 per 

cent administration rate in regards to the company, which is 

pretty fair in regards to operations of this nature, you know, 

throughout Canada. 

 

And there will not be an increase.  As a matter of fact, my 

prediction is that there will be less.  And I really believe that if 

you look at the press statements in Manitoba, etc., and also in 

Quebec, you will see that admin costs over there are less than 

what you see elsewhere. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So you're saying that administration costs 

will fall, and then you'll reduce the premiums? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- What I'm saying is that there is . . . You're 

implying that there's going to be an increase in administration 

costs.  What I'm letting you know is that there will not be an 

increase in administration costs. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- But you will not guarantee any kind of 

reduction in rates should costs fall? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well you've got to understand that the 

benefits on home-makers are extremely poor right now.  

Benefits to seniors discriminatory, basics on youth.  We are 

increasing benefits to the people of the province.  And what we 

have done is shifted it from the area of pain and suffering to 

this area.  And I think it's very important to recognize that we 

have increased benefits and there are increased costs in that 

sense.  But I think that overall there is fiscal integrity because 

there are savings from shifting the right to sue from the area of 

pain and suffering to the area of loss of income. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, how large will the 

bureaucracy be growing under no-fault, and will you 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

make public the calculations SGI is using to explain how they 

will replace the role of the legal system under no-fault? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I've answered that already.  There'll be no 

increase in the bureaucracy. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, no-fault never ends.  It's like 

Workers' Compensation -- there are no lump sum settlements, 

and victims who have serious injury and long-term disability 

will be forced to go in administration . . . to undergo an 

administrative assessment whereby benefits are paid every two 

weeks, every month.  And how will that work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Just for your information, on the lump 

sum payment idea, if you check in the section on permanent 

injuries, you will see that there are possibilities for a person to 

receive a lump sum payment in regards to a permanent injury . . 

. and on death benefits, I mean.  And I think that's important for 

you to realize. 

 

So on this idea that there's nothing on lump sum payments -- 

there is in fact. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So the lump sum payment would be general, 

or are you saying that . . . What I was asking about is in terms 

of long-term disability and assessment and payment of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- It's on the death benefits.  They could 

have an option.  It's an optional position.  They could either go 

for a lump sum payment, or they can go on weekly benefits.  

It's up to the individual to make that decision. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How will it work on a weekly basis or 

however?  How will that not cause increase in administrative 

costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- The technological administration is 

already set up.  I mean all you're doing is typing figures.  And 

whether you type a cheque on a lump sum payment or whether 

you do it on a weekly basis, on a regular type of system the 

way we have, the costs are pretty virtually minimal.  I mean it's 

done on a regular basis. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If someone has a 

debilitating injury, someone from La Loche for instance, how 

do you propose this individual communicate with SGI and 

what do they do for follow-up on their claims? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Basically the same as they do today; 

they'll be referred to their doctor. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, you know that no-fault will 

not fairly allow for loss of income in kind for aboriginal people 

who contribute to their economic well-being by fishing and 

hunting, something an accident could render them incapable of 

doing.  You also know that many aboriginal people would not 

be in a good position to advocate for themselves due to 

isolation from claim centres, 

unfamiliarity with medical terms and conditions in the white 

man's medical system, and a general intimidation with the 

bureaucracy. 

 

And I'm not trying to be patronizing here; I'm trying to have a 

serious discussion about reality for many, many people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

How do you, as minister of SGI and an aboriginal person 

yourself, intend to address the inequities that no-fault might 

create for your own people?. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- For a lot of people in my constituency the 

access to the courts at the existing time are relatively poor.  

There is a legal aid system and the legal aid system does not 

cover insurance, so that there is really no, you know, benefit.  

There have been . . . (inaudible) . . . made by an aboriginal 

lawyer moving into the North a bit, but the length of coverage 

is not the way it is, let's say, in an urban setting. 

 

Now on aboriginal people, the largest band in the province of 

Saskatchewan with over 5,000 members is the Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band.  Chief Harry Cook sent me a letter of support in 

regards to the personal injury protection plan.  His statement is 

very basic, that many of the people in our area cannot afford 

the existing system the way it is.  Many people cannot afford 

the package policies.  Many people only have the basic 

insurance so that they're only covered for $150 to $200 a week.  

They're only covered 10,000 benefits.  They're only covered 

10,000 rehab.  They are only covered on the most basic, 

minimal sense the way the part II benefits outline. 

 

So the idea that aboriginal people are somehow put in a tougher 

position in regards to personal injury protection plan is 

completely false.  The new plan will provide 90 per cent of 

their income.  And many of our people in the North - 

_ there are 600 of them -- have started to work in the mines.  

You know some of them work for the government services 

areas and many other areas. 

 

And in regards to people who are small business, whether it is 

into wild rice or whether it's the fishing and trapping, we will 

look at what their records are.  If somebody is hurt over the 

years, we will take the average wage of that area that they've 

been in and that's what we will provide payment for.  And in 

that sense it's a lot better for them, basically because on the 

situation right now they'd be out of luck in most cases. 

 

And I think that the new system provides a lot more benefits, 

you know, for them.  And the half million dollars too on the 

rehabilitation will be very important for them.  So overall, 

aboriginal people are a lot better off in this new program than 

what exists today. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister.  

I hope that's in fact how it is in the Act.  Mr. Minister, 

inasmuch as there are many people involved in the rehab 

process for accident victims, there will be also an entire 

bureaucracy of people to supervise payments; supervise 

victims' entire health team, 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

including doctors, therapists, physiotherapists, massage 

therapists -- how many people will be needed to supervise and 

conduct surveillance on all of this?  And how will people who 

live far away have access to their adjusters or case workers, or 

whatever you call them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- You'll have to remember that right now 

with a system of tort there are people who are involved, 

working with the legal side of the question.  Because the right 

to sue has become more manageable there would probably be 

less people in that area, so what we're going to have to do is 

retrain some people to move into the medical areas. 

 

So there will be adjustments on staff from that which exists.  

There'll probably be fewer people that we will require to deal 

with the legal court system. 

 

So what we will have to do is, because we are moving to a 

more wellness rehabilitation system, we will probably have 

those workers, you know, shifted into these areas and that's 

what's probably going to happen.  We will need six new case 

workers that have to be shifted in immediately to deal with the 

new situation. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for clarifying that.  There are an 

estimated 85 per cent of injuries in motor vehicle accidents 

which are whiplash or soft-tissue accidents.  Some of these 

injuries are mild and they make up a large part of the smaller 

claims for pain and suffering. 

 

Can you tell me how many pain and suffering claims were 

made last year and how many of these were settled for less than 

$5,000? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- On the whiplash idea, the percentage are 

83 per cent on whiplash of the claims and they constitute about 

70 per cent of the cost. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'm sorry, I missed part of that, Mr. 

Minister.  Could you repeat that for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- On the claims, 83 per cent of them are on 

whiplash.  They constitute about 70 per cent, you know, of the 

costs, which is approximately $80 million. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How many of them were settled for less 

than 5,000? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- About 70 per cent of them. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Can you tell me, of all the pain 

and suffering awards, how many of those were awarded to 

women? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- About 55 per cent. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, yours is a government that 

claims to care a great deal about women and the family.  Well, 

Mr. Minister, as a woman with a family, 

let me tell you that I have looked at a lot of your policies pretty 

carefully and most of them don't stand the acid tests very well, 

and the NDP no-fault proposal has its problems as well. 

 

Mr. Minister, 85 per cent of the injuries in motor vehicle 

accidents are soft tissue injuries, and 85 per cent of those 

injuries are to women.  That isn't just the luck of the draw or 

lopsided statistical information, Mr. Minister, there's a reason 

for it.  The fact is that women have far less muscle 

development in their necks and are therefore far more 

vulnerable to having their necks injured when hit from behind 

by another vehicle.  Not only did it take years of doing battle 

with SGI and the courts to gain some recognition of the fact 

that women are not only more frequent victims of whiplash, 

which can be extremely debilitating, but women have fought 

many legal battles to establish precedents for pain and suffering 

awards when whiplash renders them incapable of attending to 

the duties they perform in the household. 

 

The move to no-fault will eliminate those claims and turn the 

clock back on the progress that has been made to recognize that 

a woman who suffers from whiplash pain that makes it 

impossible for her to care for her family and tend to her work in 

the home, is deprived of her capacity to contribute to the 

well-being of her family. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you wipe out these decisions with a 

stroke of a pen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In your issue on women, 51 per cent of 

the population are women and 51, 55 per cent are involved in 

the claims, you know, as it exists.  You've got to remember, on 

the new benefits 51 per cent of the . . . it'll be a larger number 

on seniors that will have benefits for life, that do not exist right 

now.  So that the percentage of seniors population that are 

women are greater; therefore they will have better benefits in 

that sense. 

 

For youth, about half and half.  Women that are youth will get 

those benefits of $13,000 that don't exist any more.  The fact 

that 90 per cent of the income and many of the workforce 

include women, they will benefit from moving from $150 to 

$200 to up to $550.  The workforce, which constitutes a lot of 

women, will benefit from that. 

 

Home-makers which were discriminated against in the existing 

system -- the majority of home-makers are women -- we will 

provide up to $400 a week in regards to child care; we will 

provide up to $550 a week in regards to personal care -- $950 

in regards to the home-maker, who the majority of are women.  

I think that this program is highly beneficial for women than 

that which exists today. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- We've talked about soft tissue injuries here, 

Mr. Minister.  I'd like to examine a case, an individual case of a 

woman who was driving along one day on her way home from 

the grocery store and she stopped at a red light and another 

driver slammed into the rear end of her car causing a whiplash 

injury, 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

a severe injury. 

 

After months of therapy she is able to perform only essential 

duties.  All major tasks -- lifting the children, ironing, 

vacuuming, even carrying the groceries -- result in excruciating 

pain, headaches, and general misery for this completely 

innocent victim of another driver's carelessness or an accidental 

mishap. 

 

Under the current system, this woman who paid insurance 

premiums just in case of an accident like the one to which she 

fell victim, could very likely receive a pain and suffering award 

of 35 to $50,000 plus a loss of housekeeping ability of 95,000 

to $100,000 and all medical expenses plus prejudgement 

interest on her claim.  The total award could likely be in the 

realm of 135 to $150,000 if the injury were deemed by 

qualified doctors and experienced impartial judgement in the 

courts to be debilitating to the victim. 

 

Mr. Minister, the judgement would not restore the victim to 

good health.  It would not give her back the quality of life she 

experienced up until that moment.  No insurance scheme in the 

world can change history but at the very least the award for 

pain and suffering serves to pay for substitute help, for therapy 

and hope for the occasional and temporary relief from the pain 

and suffering arbitrarily imposed on an accident victim. 

 

Under no-fault, a 15,000 award would be the best one could 

hope for, small compensation for what could be a lifetime of 

interminable suffering.  As I said, the no-fault system will be 

very tough on women and most unfair to victims.  The scenario 

I've referred to above was one in which the victim's pain and 

suffering was ongoing and permanent. 

 

Under the old system the victim could sue, just as this one 

actually did, and receive a judgement of combined pain and 

suffering and loss of home-making income -- 150,000 may 

sound like a lot, but spread over 20 years, it works out to a little 

more than $500 per month. A small help when one considers 

paying someone to do all the work in the home, as well as 

cover the costs of therapy and medication not covered by health 

care. Under no-fault the settlement received, spread over 20 

years, would be less than $100 per month, not even enough to 

pay for painkillers. 

 

Mr. Minister, what happens when the costs of living, and 

treatment, and painkillers, and health care ultimately increase?  

Can the victim appeal for an increased settlement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think I'll provide you a straightforward 

example in regards to home-makers.  Supposing that the victim 

is a 35-year-old home-maker who sustains an injury to her 

spine.  She's the mother of three children, and has been a nurse 

but decided to take time off to be with her children.  She 

requires assistance for her children and also home care 

assistance.  After five years she is rehabilitated sufficiently to 

return to full activities.  In the new plan, 

she will get approximately . . . she will get $304,600.  In 

addition, she will get up to half a million dollars on 

rehabilitation. 

 

On the current plan, she can get up to the $16,100 on part II 

benefits.  If she was at fault, that's all she would get.  If she hit 

a deer, that's all she would get -- $16,100 versus $304,000 in 

the new plan. 

 

In regards to having to be not at fault, and you have the 

liabilities backing you up on the existing system, what you will 

get on average payments in regards to the record in the 

province of Saskatchewan is this:  you'll get approximately 

34,000 to $104,000.  That is what is on the average.  So the 

new plan, even in this case, the person will get three times 

more than even the best legal decision you will get. 

 

And that is the way the new legislation is for . . . (inaudible) . . . 

And I'm not even talking about the person in regards to overall.  

Let's have an overall review.  They can get up to 550 a week on 

personal care.  They will get up to 400 a week for child care 

that was never there before. 

 

You don't have to wait for a legal decision over a five-year 

period.  You don't have to wait for five years.  You can have 

that within 14 days.  You don't have to go through lengthy 

worries about whether or not you will ever win a court case.  

Sometimes you get a good lawyer; sometimes you may have an 

excellent lawyer, but the decision may not go your way.  And 

sometimes in many cases you will have technicalities that you 

deal with and you have to wait a long, long time.  In this case, 

you will be able to move forward and get properly protected. 

 

In whiplash, we have support on a whiplash clinic to try and 

determine, you know, soft tissue injury.  And also the other 

major point -- right now, once a decision is made it is final in 

the courts.  In this case, if you suffer a relapse, you have a 

chance to get back on the benefits.  Right now, once a decision 

is made in the courts, that is the end.  In this new law, if you 

have a relapse, we will be able to help you again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, in the issue of no-fault and 

fairness, currently all accident . . . I'd like to quote Jack Carr 

from the University of Toronto, economics professor: 

 

 Currently all accident victims receive accident benefits and 

those innocent accident victims who have permanent and 

serious injuries can claim for compensation for all their 

losses.  Under a pure no-fault system, the right of all innocent 

accident victims to claim full compensation for losses are 

eliminated.  Under a pure no-fault system, accident victims 

will receive accident benefits and nothing else.  Thus a 

Quebec no-fault system will substantially reduce the level of 

compensation to innocent accident victims. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

Could you make a comment on the comparison to what this 

legislation is doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to the new system . . . and you 

saw the Sobeco Ernst & Young report.  I mean there was about 

$15 million worth of contingency fees in the legal profession.  

And in this case we don't have to look at that particular cost to 

as great an extent, you know, as before. 

 

And we're looking at, as well, this whole idea that indeed the 

benefits that we see, you know, accumulating from this is 

essentially where it's at.  And I feel that as far as overall costs, I 

mean, it'll be a lot less in the long run.  And I've stated it 

before, administration costs are going to be less, etc.  And I feel 

that the shift is definitely from pain and suffering. 

 

Certainly, the cases on pain and suffering where we have a lot 

of payments, you know, for low-level injuries, they're not going 

to be there because we're looking at permanent injuries.  

Definitely we will have more for permanent injuries, people 

who are badly hurt.  That's where the majority . . . that's why 

we have shifted from 10,000 to half a million dollars on 

rehabilitation.  And that's where the shift, you know, takes 

place. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, Jack Carr said in his study of 

no-fault: 

 

 Owners of small businesses also can have serious, 

uncompensated losses under a pure no-fault plan.  If a 

small-business owner is the innocent victim of an automobile 

accident, as a result of an inability to run the business while 

recovering from the accident the business becomes bankrupt, 

the owner of the small business receives no compensation for 

the loss of his business. 

 

How would you respond to that and what assurance can you 

give to small-business people who might find themselves 

injured under a no-fault system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think you're quoting from Carr, who is 

looking at other no-fault plans, and that's true.  But you have to 

read the legislation as it stands today in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  The legislation has a clause where the person 

can hire replacement labour.  So that's an important difference 

between that which you quote Mr. Carr as stating on the 

no-fault plans in Manitoba.  So they could have replacement 

labour.  I think that's an important change in regards to the 

people, the business people, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- It never ceases to amaze me that New 

Democrats, a government that is constantly talking about being 

the government of the little guy, the government which claims 

exclusive, compassionate rights for all women and children, the 

government who claims to be so interested in doing right by the 

Indian and Metis people of Saskatchewan, 

is the same government who introduced policies which 

victimized those with the fewest resources. 

 

It doesn't matter whether it's your gambling policy, your 

no-fault insurance, or even your labour legislation.  Ultimately 

when everything is said and done, it is the little guy left holding 

the bag with a gambling addiction, the lay-off notice, and now 

the lack of compensation under no-fault. 

 

(1645) 

 

That's right, the people with good jobs and security and 

insurance policy should be okay.  In fact some people are 

double covered under the current system, a cost which could be 

eliminated, but you have done nothing to address that situation.  

The well-educated people who can advocate for themselves, 

and can go in and make a strong argument with the adjusters, 

they will stand a chance.  But many people will do far worse 

under this system. 

 

People who have no options, who don't know their rights, those 

are the people who will lose under this system because they 

will no longer have the right to sue; no longer have the right to 

hire a professional to defend their interests when they have 

been victimized by being in the wrong place at the wrong time.  

That seems to be acceptable justice under this administration. 

 

Who will advocate for the poor and the illiterate and the 

elderly, who do not understand how to advocate for 

themselves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I think it's very important to recognize 

that . . . You keep on saying that there's no right to sue; there is 

a right to sue.  I mean I think I've been saying that for half a 

dozen times already, you know, this afternoon. 

 

So I think on the report you're reading, I think that's inaccurate.  

And even many people . . . I think for a lot of people who are . . 

. even middle income people, I mean they don't want to pay 

another 24 per cent.  Maybe the Liberal Party would want to 

have an increase of 24 per cent.  But nobody that I have talked 

to wants a 24 per cent increase. 

 

You keep wanting to keep the system the way it is.  And you 

want, you know, this hundred dollars, you know, for poor 

people to pay.  I mean the poor people have a very difficult 

time in paying, you know, another hundred dollars.  You may 

have people . . . maybe some of your friends can afford the 

extra hundred dollars, but not the people that I know.  So I 

think that you have faulty reasoning in regards to who is 

protecting the little guy. 

 

I mean just a few weeks ago here, you were protecting a 24 per 

cent increase for judges.  And I think we know exactly who you 

were trying to protect in that sense. 

 

And I feel that in this case, we're looking at increased benefits 

for the home-maker, increased benefits for seniors, increased 

benefits for youth -- maybe you 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

disagree with all of that but I think the essence of the program 

that we have is a lot better than whatever you'll ever propose. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, there have been proposals for 

graduated licensing designed to reduce the number of 

alcohol-related accidents among young people.  Have you seen 

those proposals and if so what is your reason for not 

incorporating them in this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Well I have introduced the legislation in 

regards to the suggestions by youth.  I know that my member 

from Moose Jaw has also been very instrumental in involving 

the youth of this province.  And we've had excellent ideas in 

regards to probationary licences on the issue of .08 to .04.  

We've had issues in relation to making sure that the vehicles 

were . . . when a suspension was there that the vehicle would be 

of 30-day impoundments. 

 

And the legislation is there and you've got to understand that 

when . . . the process we're going through will involve you as a 

member of legislation.  It will involve the members also from 

the Tory caucus.  And we will have a select committee that will 

look at this and come up with recommendations for next year's 

legislation and I think you will be involved with that.  You'll 

have adequate time to express your views in regards to 

probationary licences, etc., and I think we can work together, 

you know, for the benefit of the people of the province in that 

sense. 

 

So wait till the select committee is fully rolling and we'll be 

very happy to have your views expressed at that point in time. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Coming close to 5 o'clock.  Mr. Minister, I 

would like to know why there have been no public hearings -- 

getting back to the issue of public hearings -- at which the 

people of Saskatchewan could become informed about the 

alternatives to your proposal. 

 

Have you considered any proposals involving deductibles?  

And if so, why have you rejected them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, we've had a lot of proposals in 

regards to deductibles.  Right now a lot of people have the $500 

deductible and they feel that's high enough.  And again that 

goes back to your question on poor people and that type of 

thing.  I mean what . . . the suggestion I've heard is $5,000 

deductibles.  That's 10 times more than what it exists.  How can 

you take money away from poor people and from innocent 

victims in that sense when you're going to now penalize them, 

you know, $5,000 on a deductible?  We looked at that 

suggestion and we disagreed with that in that sense. 

 

The other reason why we disagreed with it is that adjustments 

would have been made in the process of other jurisdictions who 

have had experience in this area.  And things are inflated, you 

know, over and above that and the costs still remain.  And it 

doesn't take more than a year and a half for the cost, you 

know, to come back again after that. 

 

But over all, bluntly, a lot of people have a tough time dealing 

with the $500 deductible, and now you're saying we might have 

$5,000.  I would find a lot of people would be opposed to that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd like you to respond to the fact that there 

was no public information early on in the process of drafting 

this legislation and consulting, and that all the material sent out 

has been biased towards no-fault. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I read the complete list earlier on.  Maybe 

you can read the answers in regards to all the people that I have 

met with.  And I might say this, you know, for your benefit.  In 

regards to a person like Rodger Carter, who was the dean of the 

College of Law, I mean this is a person who has probably 

taught, you know, half of the lawyers in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And he is well recognized; he's a professor 

emeritus at the university; he was a professor emeritus at the 

University of Saskatchewan.  And I think that a person, you 

know, with that background and with that knowledge, in 

regards to not only law but the insurance field, is something 

that needs to be respected. 

 

And there was people such as Pat Harrison from the Canadian 

Paraplegic Association.  We've had people such as Karen 

Rutherford from the past president of the insurance brokers.  I 

might add the insurance brokers are supporting this program.  I 

might add that Dr. Ann Dzus from the department of 

orthopedic surgery has supported it.  And I might say that in 

regards to the process, we've had people such as the 

physiotherapy association supporting it and we've had the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association supporting it.  So we're got 

a lot of support from the people and we've had a lot of calls and 

a lot of letters supporting to the fact that we indeed are having 

an excellent program. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, it seems to me that as you put 

this down, like so many other pieces of legislation, it was a 

foregone conclusion that this is how you want it to be.  And I 

realize that you've introduced some amendments today, but it is 

very difficult for the progress of democracy in our province 

when a government refuses to listen, to actually listen and hear 

what people have to say, to make public hearings available to 

everyone in the province to have their say in what will affect 

the lives of many, many people in the province. 

 

So with that, I'll thank you for your answers and thank you to 

your officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I would also like to thank my officials and 

also the members, you know, from across in regards to their 

questions, and we will then proceed on. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move to: 

 

 Amend subsection 25(1.1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 8 of the printed Bill, by striking out "section 188" and 

substituting "section 189". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

The Chair: -- With respect to clause 18, I'm going to rule that 

clause 18 is an omnibus clause which has a proposal to add in 

excess of 100 sections to the Act.  I propose that we should 

deal with each of these proposed sections as a distinct clause -- 

even though members may want to deal with them part by part 

or division by division -- to facilitate the amendments which 

are before us. 

 

Clause 18 agreed to. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thought 

you were going to go through the clause 18 section by section, 

but you just passed a motion to accept clause 18. 

 

The Chair: -- We do have a clause 18 but we also have 

subsequent to that then clause 100, clause 101, and so on.  And 

so now I'm getting to clause 100, and I know the member has 

amendments, and when we get to it, I'll recognize the member. 

 

Clause 100 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- 

 

 Amend section 100 of the Act, as being enacted by section 18 

of the printed Bill, by striking out "permanent physical or 

mental impairment and death" in clause (1)(d) and 

substituting "any acquired brain injury, permanent physical or 

mental impairment or death". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 100 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 101 agreed to. 

 

Clause 102 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, I will move the following 

amendment at the end that we amend Clause 18 of the printed 

Bill by: 

 

 (a) deleting section 102 as being enacted therein; and 

 

 (b) renumbering sections 103 through 219 as 

being enacted therein as sections 102 through 218 

respectively. 

 

This amendment deals with what I consider to be the main 

subject matter of this piece of legislation and that's the denial of 

people to have the access to go to the court system for redress 

when they feel they are not receiving the proper amount of 

compensation from SGI. 

 

While the minister has allowed a number of opportunities 

throughout the Bill if a person does not feel they're receiving 

the proper redress from SGI through a mediation service, 

through a limited appeal through Queen's Bench court, it still 

does not provide an overall access to the court system for 

someone who feels aggrieved by a settlement with SGI.  And 

it's this section 102 that denies them that right. 

 

I would move the amendment, Mr. Speaker, as I have outlined. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I disagree with the amendment.  The right 

to sue for economic loss has been changed from the area of 

pain and suffering, and we would like to keep it that way. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clauses 103 to 109 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 110 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

 Amend section 110 of the Act, as being enacted by section 18 

of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering subsections (1) and (2) as subsections (2) 

and (3); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection before the renumbered 

subsection (2): 

 

  "(1)  In this section, 'rehabilitation' includes any or all of 

the following measures, programs and treatments 

that the insurer considers necessary or advisable to 

contribute to the rehabilitation of a victim, to lessen 

the victim's disability caused by an accident and to 

facilitate the victim's recovery from the accident: 

 

(a) physical and acquired brain injury programs and 

treatment; 

 

(b) occupational and vocational training and programs; 

 

(c) alterations to a victim's residence; 

 

(d) modification or purchase of a vehicle for a victim; 

 

(e) purchase of special equipment for a victim; 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

(f) any additional measure, program or treatment prescribed 

in the regulations. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 110 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 111 to 152 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 153 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: --  

 

Strike out section 153 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

18 of the printed Bill, and substitute the following: 

 

"153  In this Division, 'permanent impairment' includes a 

permanent anatomical or physiological defect, a 

permanent disfigurement, a permanent acquired brain 

injury or any other permanent impairment prescribed in 

the regulations". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 153 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 154 to 167 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 168 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move to: 

 

Amend section 168 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

18 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by renumbering it as subsection 168(1); and 

 

(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

"(2) Subject to the regulations, the insurer shall promptly 

release to a claimant, at the claimant's request, all of the 

insurer's information respecting the claimant or his or her 

claim that the claimant may reasonably require for the 

purposes of this Part". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 168 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 169 to 184 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 185 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move to: 

 

Amend section 185 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

18 of the printed Bill, by striking out clause (b) and 

substituting the following: 

"(b) refuses or neglects to produce information reasonably 

required by the insurer for the purposes of this Part or to 

provide an authorization reasonably required by the insurer 

to obtain the information". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move to: 

 

Add the following section after section 185 of the Act, as 

being enacted by section 18 of the printed Bill: 

 

"No Division 6 benefits if victim at fault 

186(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part, a 

victim is not entitled to any lump sum benefits for 

permanent impairment pursuant to Division 6 to which the 

victim would otherwise be entitled if: 

 

(a) the victim is more than 50% responsible for an 

accident; and 

 

(b) the victim: 

(i) at the time of the accident: 

 

(A) was the driver or had the care and control of an 

automobile involved in the accident; and 

 

(B) was under the influence of alcohol or drugs to such 

an extent that the victim was incapable for the time 

being of having proper control of the automobile; 

 

(ii) was convicted, with respect to the accident, of an 

offence pursuant to one of the following provisions of 

the Criminal Code: 

 

(A) section 220; 

 

(B) section 221; 

 

(C) section 236; 

 

(D) clause 249(1)(a), subsection 249(3) or subsection 

249(4); or 

 

(E) subsection 252(1); or 

 

(iii) was convicted, with respect to the accident, of an 

offence pursuant to a law of a state of the United States 

of America substantially similar to an offence 

mentioned in subclause (ii). 

 

(2) For the purposes of subclause (1)(b)(i), a victim is 

conclusively deemed to be under the influence of alcohol or 

drugs to the extent that the victim was incapable for the 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

time being of having proper control of an automobile 

involved in an accident if the victim is convicted, with 

respect to the accident, of an offence: 

 

(a) pursuant to section 253, subsection 254(5) or 

subsection 255(2) or (3) of the Criminal Code; or 

 

(b) pursuant to a law of a state of the United States of 

America substantially similar to an offence mentioned in 

clause (a). 

 

(3) The insurer shall determine whether a victim mentioned 

in subsection (1) was more than 50% responsible for the 

accident. 

 

(4) A victim who disagrees with a determination of the 

insurer pursuant to subsection (3) may appeal a 

determination to the Court of Queen's Bench within 180 days 

after receiving written notice of the insurer's determination. 

 

(5) For the purposes of this section, a certificate purporting 

to be signed by a judge of the convicting court or other 

officer having custody of the records of the convicting court 

certifying that a person has been convicted of an offence 

mentioned in subsection (1) or (2) is admissible in evidence 

as proof, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, of the 

conviction of that person without proof of the handwriting or 

position of the person purporting to have signed the 

certificate". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move to: 

 

Renumber existing sections 186 to 219 of the Act, as being 

enacted by section 18 of the printed Bill, as sections 187 to 

220. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clauses 187 and 188 agreed to. 

 

Clause 189 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 189 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill, by striking out "section 

189" in subsection (1) and substituting "section 190". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 189 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 190 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- 

 

Amend renumbered section 190 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill, by striking out "section 

188" in subsection (2) and substituting "section 189". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 190 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 191 to 195 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 196 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 196 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill, by striking out "section 

194" in subsection (1) and substituting "section 195". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 196 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 197 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 197 of the Act as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in clause (a) by striking out "section 194" and substituting 

"section 195)"; and 

 

(b) in clause (b) by striking out "section 195" and substituting 

"section 196". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 197 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 198 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 198 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by renumbering subsections (2) and (3) as subsections (3) 

and (4); 

 

(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

"(2) If a claimant puts the insurer's findings of fact in 

issue, the Court of Queen's Bench may hold a hearing to 

determine the facts"; and 

 

(c) by adding the following subsection after renumbered 

subsection (4): 

 

"(5) Subject to the regulations, the insurer shall reimburse 

a claimant who 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

is successful on an appeal pursuant to this section or 

section 199 for the claimant's costs on a solicitor and client 

basis". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 198 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 199 and 200 agreed to. 

 

Clause 201 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 201 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill, by striking out "section 

203" in clause (1)(a) and substituting "section 204". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 201 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 202 to 216 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 217 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I: 

 

Amend renumbered section 217 of the Act as being enacted 

by section 18 of the printed Bill by striking out clauses 

(1)(x), (y), and (z) and substituting the following: 

 

"(x) for the purposes of section 190, authorizing the use of 

ratios calculated pursuant to section 189; 

 

"(y) respecting mediation pursuant to section 196, including 

prescribing procedures pursuant to which mediation shall be 

conducted; 

 

"(z) prescribing fees payable by a claimant who requests 

mediation pursuant to section 196". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 217 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 218 to 220 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

The Chair: -- And with my apologies to the member from 

Souris-Cannington, who is absolutely right, clause 18 of the 

Bill as amended, is that agreed? 

 

The division bells rang from 5:21 p.m. until 5:23 p.m. 

 

Clause 18 as amended agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Wiens Calvert 

Shillington Murray 

 

Johnson Hamilton 

Goulet Sonntag 

Mitchell Crofford 

Cunningham Wormsbecker 

Hagel Stanger 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Jess 

Lautermilch Carlson 

-- 20 

Nays 

 

Swenson Toth 

Neudorf D'Autremont 

Boyd Bergman t 

-- 6 

Clause 19 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended on 

division. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- I move that the amendments be now read 

the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that Bill No. 56 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- They were going to let this vote off 

before I got a chance to ask my one question. 

 

Mr. Minister, my concern deals with the district health boards 

and nursing homes.  In the community of Carnduff, the district 

health board has come to the nursing home with the proposal 

that they can have either a director of education or a 

community coordinator but they can't have both. 

 

Now they're asking the nursing home board to make that 

decision.  The nursing home board's position and job is to look 

after the nursing home, not the rest of the community health 

concerns.  So they're not in the proper position to make this 

kind of a determination for their community because they feel 

they need both a director of care at their facility, which is a 

level 1 to level 4 facility.  They also feel that there is a need for 

a community coordinator for health within their community. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

Why are they being asked to make the determination?  If they 

choose the community health coordinator, it's to the detriment 

of their own facility, and yet they're being put into that position 

of making a determination for the community when that is not 

their responsibility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's inquiry, at least individually this is the first I've heard 

of this particular difficulty in Carnduff, and I'll ask the member 

if we can have a discussion, maybe follow a little more on the 

very specifics.  There's some detail here that I'm not aware of 

regarding the facility in Carnduff -- whether we're speaking 

here of an amalgamation of that facility into the district board, 

or whether there's going to be an affiliation. 

 

But generally let me say this, that one of the goals of district 

board governance and the whole process of the structural 

reform that we've been involved in is to try and coordinate 

much more than we have in past the package of facilities and 

services available to the community.  And so I am assuming 

that what's happening here is that the district board is working 

with the community and trying to bring about that coordination. 

 

If the member's interested we can have a further conversation 

about this either later this day or at some future point. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when the district 

health board gives the entire community of Carnduff . . . when 

they come up to the nursing home and say you can have a 

director of care, that would indicate to me that there is a need 

there to have a director of care because the health board is 

saying we're prepared to fund a position for director of care. 

 

But then when they say, or you can have a community 

coordinator, and are prepared to fund the community 

coordinator, that would also indicate to me that there is a need 

then in the community for a community coordinator. 

 

Well if you need the director of care and you need the 

community coordinator, why are they not prepared to fund both 

positions?  Why are they asking the nursing home board to 

make the determination?  You can have a director of care or 

you can have a community coordinator, but you can't have 

both. 

 

Now if there's a need for a director of care, then they should 

have a director of care.  If there's a need for a community 

coordinator, they should have a community coordinator.  And 

therefore funding should be provided for both positions.  And 

by saying you can have one or the other seems to indicate that 

there is a need for both of those positions.  So why are they not 

funding both of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, just on the basis of the 

information that we have here I'm not about to begin to second 

guess or to insert myself into the discussions that must be 

happening in Carnduff. 

As the member will know, each district board is doing its needs 

assessment and working with local communities. 

 

This may be part of the needs assessment discussion that's 

going on -- what is the appropriate person or office or service 

that should be in place in Carnduff.  Again I say, I don't insert 

myself here on the floor of the legislature into a community 

discussion just on the basis of this little bit of information. 

 

I wonder, has the member talked to the district board about 

this?  I would suggest that that would be an appropriate thing to 

do, first of all.  And again, I suggest that he and I could have a 

discussion following our discussion here. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, would you then 

suggest that the nursing home board is the appropriate body to 

be making that determination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm sure that what's happening here is 

that the district board is trying to work with the residents, local 

residents of Carnduff, including the existing board of the 

nursing home.  But again, I repeat, the goal of the structural 

reform is to bring integration into decision making and to base 

our decision making on the needs of the community. 

 

I presume, on this little bit of information, that what's 

happening here is that the district board is trying to assess the 

appropriate use of the resources that they have in the 

community of Carnduff, and I assume they're working with that 

board to try and determine that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well if the district health board is 

prepared to fund a director of care, would that indicate to you 

that there is a need for that position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, again, I repeat, I'm not going 

to begin here on the basis of this information to start 

second-guessing the discussions or potential decisions that are 

being made in that very local context on the basis of the little 

bit of information that's before us here in the House. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well let's remove it from the 

community.  If within the province of Saskatchewan a health 

district board is prepared to fund a position, would that indicate 

that that position was needed within the health service delivery 

in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Rosthern wishes I would just say yes, and get on with it.  Again 

I'm going to say to the member, Mr. Chair, that structural 

reform in health care means, for the first time in this province's 

history, much more ability to make local decisions.  Local 

decisions that we want based on real health needs within the 

population of the district, and so there will be variances in 

different districts according to needs. 

 

Ultimately, given the resources that a district has available to it 

-- and of course the resources are not unlimited, the resources 

are not unlimited to any  



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

department of government, not unlimited in health care or 

anywhere else -- based on the limited resources that they will 

have, they will make choices based on the need; hopefully 

meeting the needs as best they can.  If that requires a director of 

education or a director of care, that decision will be determined 

on a local basis. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, since you won't say 

yes to the fact that if the health board is funding a position that 

it's needed, what is your response then to the question: will the 

health board fund positions that are not needed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No.  Mr. Chair, Mr. Member, as we 

restructure the delivery of health care in our districts, the 

district boards are charged with the overall responsibility of 

assessing the need and then determining what is the most 

appropriate use of their resources.  Now we're not going to get 

into a situation where we second guess all of the decisions 

being made on a district basis, here on the floor of the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, since it's no, that the 

health boards will not fund positions that are not needed, I 

gather one would have to then assume that all the positions 

funded are indeed needed.  If that is the case then any 

community that a health board is prepared to fund a position for 

must therefore be needed. 

 

And in Carnduff a director of care, since the health board is 

prepared to fund that, must be needed.  A community 

coordinator, since they're prepared to fund that, must also be 

needed.  I would suggest therefore that both positions are 

needed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I hear the member's opinion 

that both positions are needed in the community of Carnduff.  I 

hear that loud and clear.  That will be, I am sure, of interest to 

the district board who will be working with the local 

community to decide what can be provided to meet the needs.  

I'm sure they will be interested to know that the member 

believes that both positions are needed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Whenever I get this opportunity, particularly in the Health, I 

suppose it's because of my experience of having been the critic, 

I get this primordial urgings in my breast to castigate and 

chastise members opposite for some of the reforms in the 

health program.  I think what we have just witnessed with my 

colleague from Souris-Cannington, and the associate minister, 

is a classic example of don't blame me, it's the local board that 

is making these decisions.  And time after time I have made the 

point that's exactly and precisely the problem. 

 

You've given the responsibility to the district health boards to 

make decisions as to what they're going to cut and they are the 

ones that are being forced to make those cuts so that you can 

say it's not us doing it, it's not my responsibility, blame them.  

But they have to 

make those unfortunate choices because of underfunding. 

 

And that's the whole problem here.  You're offloading funding 

and you're offloading responsibility.  And that is what I find so 

reprehensible about the approach that you are taking. 

 

So if they are going to be making decisions, as my colleague 

was just saying, on appropriate staffing or whatever, or the 

delivery of services, then the funding must be in place for that.  

But certainly, don't put them in the unenviable position of 

having to make decisions that are not necessarily acceptable or 

liked in the community, that they have to face the wrath of the 

community, as is happening in my Rosthern Union Hospital 

right now. 

 

When this whole program was announced a year ago, they 

figured they were pretty safe, that they wouldn't lose jobs.  But 

as a result of last week, or the week before, they all of a sudden 

find out, whoops, yes, we are losing positions, and they lost six 

or eight positions in the Rosthern Union Hospital. 

 

But it wasn't you that's getting blamed because you didn't make 

that decision, it was left up to the Rosthern Union . . . or to the 

health district board to make that decision.  And they had to 

make that decision reluctantly because of underfunding. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm not even going to get into that topic -- that 

was an aside so far.  I want to now get into the issue that I 

wanted to talk about and that is this -- and this is completely on 

a different topic -- you as a government have always, and the 

Minister of Health and you have always said, if you have a 

constituent that's got problems and can't cope, bring them to us.  

The only reason I'm bringing this to you in a public forum as 

such as this is because it affects more people than the 

individual that I'm talking about. 

 

I'm going to describe the situation for you and then I want your 

reaction.  The individual that I'm talking about, his name is 

Elmer Sawatzky.  He is from Hague.  And this gentlemen is 31 

years old.  He was born . . . well I don't know if he was born 

with cystic fibrosis or whether he contacted it shortly 

thereafter.  But when he was diagnosed as having cystic 

fibrosis, he was given 14 years to live.  The doctor said that's 

max. 

 

But as we know medicine is a wonderful thing, and over the 

intervening years there have always been progressions made in 

the medical field that has lengthened his life span to where he 

is now 31 years old.  And he's married, has a child and he had a 

job -- he had a job.  And being a cystic fibrosis victim, of 

course he has lived with a lot of struggles in his life.  His lungs, 

and as you can appreciate, have from time to time given him a 

great deal of trouble. 

 

(1745) 

 

Over the last little while I am told now that there's a new drug, 

a new medicine called Pulmozyme that has been developed -- 

Pulmozyme.  It's a drug, Mr. 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

Minister, that has the potential of changing the lives of cystic 

fibrosis people because it attacks apparently and digests the 

white blood cells.  I'm no doctor so please forgive me if I'm not 

totally accurate.  But it does thin the mucus in his lungs so that 

he can clear them quite readily. 

 

And over the last while this gentleman was on that drug 

because it was an experimental drug at that time and apparently 

there were 14 people in the province that participated in that.  

And he found out now that when the experimental aspect of 

this drug ran out, now this drug is being charged.  And it is a 

terrifically expensive drug, Mr. Minister; I'm told it costs $35 a 

dose -- $35 a dose.  And he needs a dose a day, which means 

$1,000 a month for this gentleman.  And obviously he can't pay 

that. 

 

He then said, well it's probably not helping me anyway so he 

went off the drug.  After being off the drug for a couple of 

weeks, the mucus and the phlegm in his lungs became so 

congested on Friday of last he went into the hospital.  But he 

was not admitted because there wasn't room for him.  And 

being able to walk, he walked out.  On Tuesday he was 

readmitted and this time kept in the hospital.  And I didn't 

check today, but I believe he is still in the hospital, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And so what he is asking, and his family is asking me is, here 

we have a potentially productive member of society who could, 

with this drug, remain exactly thus.  But what I'm being told 

now is that, because of the formulary plan, it's not being 

accepted yet as a drug that is covered by the prescription drug.  

And all CF (cystic fibrosis) patients up until this time have had 

everything covered.  Now here's a drug that could change his 

life, improve his quality of life, but apparently your committee 

that's in charge of this is still considering: well is it worth it or 

isn't it worth it.  And yet it is a drug now that has been 

recognized as a legitimate drug, as a legal drug. 

 

I would much rather have this gentleman working out in 

construction than lying in the Royal University Hospital where 

he is right now.  And so what I'm saying to you, Mr. Minister, 

is: here's a case -- I'm not condemning you at this time.  All I'm 

saying is let's get on with it -- let's get this guy back out as a 

productive member of society. 

 

Because I'm told by . . . now what was her name?  Shirley 

Patola, I believe is the executive director -- if I have her 

position right -- of the CF foundation, and she was the one that 

gave me most of this information that I'm relating to you now. 

 

And there are apparently, at the max, 40 to 50 people in the 

province to whom this drug would make such a difference.  So 

I'm saying to you, can we speed this process up; can we get this 

drug approved so that the people can get on with their lives?  

I'd like your reaction, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

his question around the medication that 

 may be of some real potential benefit to cystic fibrosis victims 

in our province. 

 

I am told by the officials that are with us here today, that it will 

be reviewed at the very next meeting of the formulary 

committee, which I'm not precisely sure but will happen, I 

believe, in the month of June.  So it is on the agenda for 

decision at the very next meeting of the formulary committee.  

And I think the member would admit we want those decisions 

to be made by the formulary committee, by the professionals 

involved. 

 

But in terms of speeding the process up, I think it is on the fast 

track now -- it's at the next meeting. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The fast track means one thing to you and me 

and it means another thing to Mr. Sawatzky, lying in the 

hospital.  I just want you to be cognizant of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- And again, Mr. Chairman, I thank the 

member for his question and for raising this.  It's an important 

issue -- one we're treating very, very seriously. 

 

However now, Mr. Chair, the member had a few comments at 

the beginning of that discussion. 

 

I do want to point out to the member that in terms of decision 

making, the district boards will have some difficult decisions to 

make, and that's true, and some of them are financially related.  

But already, Mr. Chair, the member will know that our district 

boards are making some very positive decisions in 

communities -- decisions which they are being applauded for.  

And so that cuts both ways. 

 

And I think as the months and years evolve, you will see our 

district boards becoming very positive influences in the 

delivery of health care in our province, and there'll be lots of 

credit given to them that some future provincial governments 

may wish were coming to the province. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thought I was finished, but maybe we're on a 

roll here now.  The district boards are making a lot of 

decisions; there are some of those decisions that are positive, 

I'll grant you that.  A lot of them that are negative, and 

basically and quite frankly they're doing your dirty work for 

you and getting blamed for it, to a large measure. 

 

But I would suggest to you, if that is what you think of a board 

and the potential that these boards have, then why would we 

not be able to give the citizens of this province the comfort 

level of knowing that the members on that board are the ones 

that they want -- not you want, but they want. 

 

And I guess that begs the question then, Mr. Minister, let's get 

on with it.  Let's do away with the phoney Garf Stevenson road 

show, pony show, and get in there and let's hold those elections 

like the people in this province are asking.  Then, Mr. Minister, 

there would be some legitimacy to what you're saying.  So I 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

challenge you on this issue as well -- get those boards elected 

and then you will maybe have more credibility. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, a couple 

of questions that were called in, and I just want to bring them to 

your attention and maybe get some feedback from you. 

 

Number one, a number of rural hospitals still continue to have 

baby deliveries, and in some cases, a choice of whether there's 

a delivery in the hospital is basically a doctor deciding whether 

or not they want to proceed and deliver children -- or babies -- 

or whether they have the staffing equivalent as well.  The 

question that was called in, apparently in a number of 

communities, doctors and staff feel they have the qualifications 

and the capabilities to continue to do birthing in their hospitals, 

but they're being hindered by local boards from what I 

understand. 

 

Does the local board make that decision, does the Department 

of Health make the decision as to what services are available, 

or who makes the decision whether or not a doctor can provide 

a service in a local hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

member's question, essentially procedures like maternity or 

other procedures are determined by the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons, that will make the determination about the 

appropriate placement within the system on where those 

procedures should be done. 

 

Now there is a relationship, of course, with district boards and 

their planning and other community concerns.  But ultimately 

for those kind of procedures, they are determined by the 

college. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Would a local doctor and staff have any 

involvement, any say in the matter of whether they provide 

maternity services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, I'm told by the officials here that the 

procedure that's usually followed is if a physician in a 

community wishes to perform -- let's use maternity as the 

example -- then that would be coordinated now through the 

district board, an approach would be made to the district board, 

the district board then would approach the college for the 

ratification or the permission to go ahead. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you've just indicated then, if the 

physician and the staff feel they have the ability to provide the 

maternity services they would approach the board and the 

board then could approach the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons.  If for some reason they've said, no we would prefer 

no deliveries in that particular hospital, this is an avenue that 

could be proceeded through to maintain that service or provide 

that service. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, to the member, the college is 

concerned of course, as all of us must be concerned, about 

public safety, safety in medical 

procedures.  But I think if those criteria are met then that's how 

it would work. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Another question, a 

question that's been basically on my mind and I think on the 

minds of a lot of people for quite a while -- and it's not just the 

Department of Health, it's all departments of government. 

 

And it's a fact that . . . and I even look at the district board 

concept or the boards concept we have right now.  I think what 

you basically have in place is each board is allotted -- based on 

the services that they're providing, the facilities in the area -- X 

number of dollars.  And I think over the years what we've seen, 

hospitals have been funded based on the number of beds that 

have been utilized. 

 

And on many occasions I think, Mr. Minister, there have been 

times when local hospitals possibly, the real need maybe was 

five or six hospitals, maybe they've had . . . or pardon me, beds.  

They've got a 26-bed facility but there's been occasions when 

they've been . . . could be down to five or six essential, 

essentially using five or six beds. 

 

On other occasions, whether it's a flu epidemic breaks out or 

whatever, they're up to their 26 beds.  But basically because of 

the bed utilization, hospitals have always tried to maintain that 

high level of utilization which I think at times may not have 

been the appropriate use of funds. 

 

And I think what I'm seeing here even with the district board 

level that there's a lump sum of money comes to the boards and 

the feeling I get, if that money isn't utilized then they are going 

to lose it down the road.  They really don't have access to the 

funds when they need it. 

 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is there anything or is the 

department taking any steps, that would say, if the board is 

allotted so many dollars to operate the facilities and provide the 

services in their area and if they for some . . . if they're able to 

find some ways of savings, that that board doesn't necessarily 

lose that funding but isn't forced to utilize all that funding? 

 

Possibly it's maybe banked in some case or it becomes a 

surplus to the department, let's say, in general that could be 

used in other areas but at the same time that board still has 

access to the fund should something arise in the next term that 

indicates that they would have to substantially use all those 

funds. 

 

Are those types of steps available or being taken, to look at 

ways in which boards can utilize their dollars more efficiently 

and so that the taxpayers of the province, their funds are being 

used carefully, and at the same time receiving the best service 

for the dollars involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

his question.  It's a very appropriate question and it's not been 

only on his mind but on the mind of 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

this government, and I think on the mind of health care 

professionals, and planners, and citizens of our province for a 

long time. 

 

We have had, up until very recently, a system of funding in 

health care that was based on utilization, and particularly on 

utilization of existing beds and so on, as you pointed out, with 

its -- as you pointed out -- its drawbacks. 

 

I'm pleased to say that we are now the first province in Canada 

to be pioneering in the direction you would have us go. And 

that is to move away from strict funding according to past 

utilization, but to move to health care funding which is based 

on essentially needs based, a combination of need- and 

population-based funding.  And this is for the very first year we 

have begun that process in our province. 

 

(1800) 

 

Now as a result of that process, it will mean over the next few 

budget years there will be continuing changes in some of the 

historic funding patterns.  And so this year, just for your 

information, based on the new funding kind of formula -- it's 

based on population and need rather than former utilization -- 

seven of our districts have shown a small decrease in their 

funding; 12 of our districts have shown a minimal increase, up 

to 2.6 per cent; and 11 of our districts have received what we 

describe as a moderate funding increase, up to 4 per cent. 

 

And so the point that you make is well made and we're very 

cognizant of it, and we are, in fact, in this regard, pioneering 

across Canada.  And I can tell the member that we're being 

observed not only by other Canadian provinces, but by 

international bodies based on this new method of funding 

health care. 

 

And finally then to your last point, in terms of monies available 

to the districts, we are not reclaiming any monies.  We want the 

monies to be there for the district to use to meet the needs of 

their communities. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 

officials.  I have a number of specific things that I wanted to 

discuss with you and then we'll get into the broad area of health 

care after that. 

 

I received just this afternoon a fax from a family in 

Saskatchewan, and they're talking about . . . and I think I'll read 

this one into the record because I think it highlights the concern 

that a lot of people have with new drugs that are coming on to 

the market and all of those kinds of issues that are surrounding 

that; how quickly they should be dealt with, how quickly they 

should be put on to the formulary plan, and that sort of thing. 

 

And I'll quote the letter to you now: 

 

 I am 29 years old and a mother of a three-year-old girl.  I was 

diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and since that time have 

had 10 or more severe set-backs.  I am a young woman 

struggling to be a good wife and mother 

and would do darn near anything to keep my disease in 

control and my life as normal as possible. 

 

 I realize there is no cure for MS but it has come to my 

attention that Berlex Canada has submitted a new drug called 

Betaseron to the health protection branch for its review as a 

treatment for MS.  This drug has been found to be effective in 

reducing the severity and frequency of MS attacks in people 

with relapsing and remitting MS.  This drug was approved in 

the United States in July of 1993. 

 

 As an individual whose life has been affected by this disease, 

I urge the health protection branch to expedite the approval of 

Betaseron for Canadian MS patients as soon as possible.  MS 

patients in the U.S. treated with Betaseron have had fewer 

hospitalizations which reduced the cost to the health care 

system.  Taking this into consideration, I urge the health 

protection branch to move quickly in approving the use of 

Betaseron in Canada as a treatment for MS. 

 

And the last paragraph says: 

 

 I love my husband, daughter and family.  Daily I pray for a 

treatment that will make our lives a little more tolerant.  

Please approve this drug and give Canadians and 

Saskatchewan people affected with MS a glimmer of hope.  

Thank you for your assistance. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think what this highlights is the kind of concern 

that people have out there about new drugs as they come on to 

the market. And I think I'd like you to respond to that specific 

one and give some kind of an assurance to this lady and this 

family that you will be dealing with this particular drug as 

quickly as possible to give her and her family some kind of 

comfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, let me say this, the 

member will know from the letter or the facts that he has just 

read that this particular drug is now at the stage of being 

reviewed by the federal government.  And I'm sure he 

understands that the system . . . that review is done by the 

federal government for approval nationally, and then 

provincially, we review if we are able to then cover it through 

our formulary process. 

 

Let me say that in terms of any new medication, I think we 

would be agreed that we want the proper scientific and research 

work done to ensure that this is an effective and in the long 

term a drug that we want to have available to Saskatchewan 

people.  I mean, we have had some experience in the past of 

drugs that have come along and then we've discovered some 

time later they've created a great deal of difficulty.  And so I'm 

sure we would agree that we want the proper checks and 

balances in approving new drugs. 

 

Secondly, he will know that with every new drug there are 

costs, and this becomes one of the very difficult, difficult, 

difficult ethical issues in terms of provision of 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

health care when our resources are fixed or limited and we have 

to ration those resources as best we can. 

 

And so every decision must be very, very carefully made 

because if we take the tax dollar and spend it in the provision of 

one particular drug or one particular health care service, that 

means those resources are not available to another drug or 

another service.  And so the decisions that we try to make with 

as much care and as timely as they possibly can make. 

 

I thank the member for sharing the letter and the concern about 

this particular drug. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Can I have the commitment from you and your 

department then that you will be making representation to the 

federal government for asking for speedy, not necessarily 

approval, but looking into this drug as quickly as possible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we'll . . . again there 

are the mechanisms in place.  One does not want inappropriate 

haste, but then one doesn't want long delays either.  We will be 

in touch with the federal government and the health protection 

branch to ensure that the process is moving along as it should. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  There's two issues that 

I raised last time with the Health minister.  They were specific 

areas of concern within my constituency.  I raised the situation 

with Mr. Erwin Jasman, of Eatonia, Saskatchewan and the 

minister committed to providing some information.  I wonder if 

you have that.  And I don't think it's necessary to share the 

information; it's just I would appreciate it's being sent over.  

And as well, with Mr. Gordon and Helen Leach, of Eston, with 

respect to long waiting lists. 

 

And I guess that certainly opens up the larger issue of waiting 

lists that we'll deal with a little bit later, Mr. Minister.  So I 

wonder if you would provide the information requested on 

those two specific concerns that I raised last time with you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, we do not have with us 

today the sort of the type . . . some research has been done on 

both of the issues that you raise, or both of the cases, and I'll 

commit we'll get this material put into a print form that we can 

get to you in the next few days. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I 

received a letter from Raymore that I'd like you to respond to.  

It reads: 

 

 I heard a report on TV that the risk of women getting breast 

cancer increases substantially when they have had an 

abortion and continues to increase proportionately to 

subsequent abortions. 

 

Does the Minister of Health have any information regarding 

this matter, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member from 

Rosthern indicated earlier, neither of us are 

physicians or medical specialists.  The officials that are with 

me here today have not heard that that risk exists and so I can't 

really comment on it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'd appreciate it if you would get your department 

to do some research on that and provide us with an answer to 

that question, Mr. Minister. 

 

The second question comes from Marg Bergen of Regina.  She 

says that her MLA member for Regina Wascana Plains spoke 

recently about a $7.9 million going toward cancer equipment.  

Ms. Bergen would like to know the following: 

 

 What sort of equipment is being purchased?  Where does this 

equipment come from?  How is the money split up between 

cancer institutions in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the information I have, I 

think the question is specifically to the 1.79 million increase 

and that is accurate -- that's part of a total of a $2.5 million 

increase to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation this year; 

$292,000 of that will be general operational increase. 

 

The enhancements to the screening program for breast cancer, 

which will allow that program to be accessed by women across 

the province, to give women across the province reasonable 

access, is an addition of $432,000.  And then the special 

allocation of $1.7 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation to . . . it's in essence to replace some very 

expensive radiation therapy equipment for its clinics, both in 

Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

The information I have is that the money will be used to buy 

four pieces of specialized radiation therapy equipment, and I'm 

told that among them is a linear accelerator. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  We received a letter as well from an 

owner of an ambulance care service, and it states: 

 

 We are requesting that you check into the situation that is 

arising with the health boards in the province in regards to the 

difficulty of ambulance personnel being able to take 

additional training. 

 

 The training is approved by Sask Health and recognized by 

the provincial government but the difficulty lies with trying 

to put it into practical use.  This company has taken a 

semi-automatic defibrillator course with SIAST and approved 

by Sask Health but is unable to use their skills in this regard 

due to the fact that we cannot get our health board approval. 

 

 We feel that since we are a private company and have paid 

for all of the expenses ourselves and have our physician's 

backing and approval that we should be able to get our health 

board's support to benefit the district.  This seems like an 

ongoing problem with any type of training 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

course that are are attempting to take.  I'm sure that not only 

this ambulance company is experiencing this problem. 

 

 At this time, most health boards have little or no knowledge 

of everyday operations, equipment, or level of training that 

the ambulance personnel have. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you received any letters along this regard, 

and if so, how have you responded to their concerns and what 

is the policy that you've handed down regarding ambulance 

services and training? 

 

And I would be willing to send a copy of the letter to you if you 

would give the commitment to looking into this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, Mr. Chair, I'd very much appreciate 

it if the member would send the letter over.  I have had, not too 

many weeks ago, a meeting in my office with some of the 

ambulance owners and we discussed a variety of these issues. 

 

In response to the specific issue there, I would appreciate if the 

member would send it over and we will certainly respond. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I understand that plans 

are being submitted to build a new health care centre in Birch 

Hills.  I have received a number of calls regarding this issue 

since the people in the area seem to think that the hospital they 

used to have was just fine until you decided to slash the . . . all 

acute care funding last year.  This seems like a trend, Mr. 

Minister, you close down the local hospital and then build a 

brand-new facility.  Can you confirm that Birch Hills can be 

expecting a brand-new health care centre soon? 

 

(1815) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in regard to Birch Hills, 

it's my understanding that no official proposal has yet arrived at 

the Department of Health for a health centre or for construction 

in Birch Hills.  However we do, at this point, anticipate that. 

 

I'm told that part of the planning being done by the P.A. (Prince 

Albert) district and its board in consultation with the Birch 

Hills community is they're looking at construction of a health 

centre attached to or adjacent to the existing long-term care 

facility to facilitate the integration of services in that 

community.  We've not yet received that particular proposal so 

it hasn't received formal approval, but I'm also told we're 

expecting it. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Who makes the 

decisions on capital projects and would you also . . . would you 

provide a list of all capital projects in the upcoming budget 

year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- In terms of capital, Mr. Chairman, the 

situation is today as it has been, I think, for many years, that 

proposals will be brought to the 

Department of Health -- request for capital expenditures -- and 

then must receive approval of the department.  The proposals 

used to come from individual boards -- be it an individual 

hospital board or institution, special care institution.  Now 

proposals will be brought by the district board, but the process 

will remain the same in that the department will need to 

approve capital expenditures.  And we'll be very happy to 

provide a copy of those capital expenditures approved for this 

budget year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- With regard to the Birch Hills project that you are 

giving some consideration to.  What is the expected budget of 

that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, because we have not yet 

received the formal proposal, we're not able to answer that 

question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It is interesting that 

some communities have no health centres at all, such as St. 

Brieux and others, and have to travel long distances to Melfort 

to see a doctor.  Yet others like Birch Hills and Gravelbourg 

now have a shell of a hospital and will soon receive brand new 

health clinics.  Why is that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in terms of any capital 

expenditure that is currently happening in the province or that 

will happen in future, we want that capital expenditure to very 

closely harmonize with the goals of health reform and to 

provide the appropriate level of service in communities. 

 

The member refers to the community of Gravelbourg.  Well he 

will know -- at least he should know -- that the facility that's 

being replaced in Gravelbourg is a long-term care facility that 

has been in desperate need of replacement for some many, 

many years, and indeed presents . . . the existing facility has 

presented some hazard to the residents. 

 

And so the decisions around capital are being based on very 

careful criteria -- criteria that will include real emergent 

physical need or expenditures that will harmonize with the 

goals of health reform.  And so in some communities it will be 

appropriate indeed to build a health centre adjacent to, adjoined 

to, a long-term care facility so that one can make the maximum 

use of staff and resources and provide the maximum amount of 

benefit to the needs of the community. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Another question from a constituent, would like 

some information on health boards.  Are there any individuals 

on health boards that have gotten laid off, received severance, 

and then been rehired within the Regina Health Board system 

or any other health districts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'd like the member, if he 

could, give us a little clarification.  Is his question: are there 

members who sit on the health boards who have received 

severance and now the place on the board, an active member of 

the board? 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to member's 

question, we're just not sure.  We're just not sure.  Of the 30 

boards -- and I think it's 12 or 14 members on each of those 

boards -- out of that number of people there may be, but we're 

not aware of one, or several; and we're just not sure. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Would you give us the commitment that you 

would look into it and give any information with regard to that?  

If there are any members of the . . . on any district boards 

anywhere across the province that have been . . . that are no 

longer sitting on those boards, and if they've been provided 

with any severance package or anything with regard to that sort 

of issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to apologize to the 

member.  I misunderstood his question.  I thought his question 

was to the effect, has anyone who has received severance or 

been . . . in health care, then been appointed to a board? 

 

I think what you've asked here is, has a board member departed 

a board and received, for that departure, a severance?  Well 

now we'll check that through. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I received a memo 

from a doctor from your government which states that under 

new regulations, that your government is now imposing an 

annual registration fee for radiation equipment.  Can you 

confirm that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, the Department of Health 

does not do inspections on the radiation equipment.  That 

would be done, I think, through occupational health and safety. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, we are told that there is, in some 

cases, up to a thousand-dollar fee which seems pretty 

ridiculous.  Why did you find it necessary to impose such fees 

on medical, dental, veterinarian, industrial and educational 

areas in our province who use this kind of equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, it is again, I repeat, not the 

Department of Health who does that work.  We will take the 

member's question and research it and provide for him an 

answer. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm going to read a 

section of a letter that I received on the subject from a 

concerned equipment owner.  And I quote: 

 

 The NDP have once again singled out a small group of 

private business people.  In this case, dentists, veterinarians, 

physicians in private medical clinics and in some private labs, 

and a few radiologists and chiropractors. People in the above 

groups have already been taxed to the hilt, paying income tax 

of the highest bracket, property tax, business tax, sales tax, 

etc. 

This act will only further discourage medical professional 

people from locating in this province.  What is there to say it 

will stop here?  Will the NDPs soon be collecting a fee for 

any air compressor, farm tractor, or back hoe?  It seems to be 

another attack on private business. 

 

This is how people feel, Mr. Minister.  What's your response? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, again I repeat it's not the 

Department of the Health that does this kind of testing.  I'd 

want to say, and I'm sure the member would agree, when it 

comes to this kind of equipment, I think we would be agreed 

that it should ought to be tested. 

 

I will again take the member's point of view here and questions 

in the correspondence that he has, and we'll get him a response. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I understand that you 

have a gentleman working within the Department of Health by 

the name of Mr. Allan Walker.  Could you provide details of 

the specifics of the study that he is engaged in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'm informed that the 

individual that the member raises is currently with SIAST, and 

is serving as the dean of general studies at SIAST.  And yes, he 

is coming over to the Department of Health on June 1 -- he's 

not there yet -- he is coming as a secondment to the department, 

and I am told that he will be working in program development. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Will Mr. Walker be receiving contract salary or 

per diems, or what will his . . . how will the arrangements be 

for him? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Yes, he will be a . . . Mr. Chair, he'll be a 

salaried. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Could you confirm that Kelly 

Kummerfield-Smishek was hired by your deputy minister in 

personnel about a year and a half ago without advertising the 

position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I understand this, as the 

member indicates, happened I guess about a year and a half 

ago.  I'm told the individual he asks about was formerly 

employed at the cancer foundation and so has that health 

background.  We believe there was a competition, but we'll -- 

because it's a year and a half ago, we don't have that 

information with us -- and we'll check it out. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I'd also like you to check out any relationship that 

there may be between Kelly and Walter Smishek, the former 

NDP MLA. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- We'll check that out.  I note they bear the 

same name.  There may well be a . . . there may well be a 

family connection there, but we'll check that out for the 

member's interest. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, it's my understanding, and 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

I would like you to confirm this, but is it correct that the district 

health board in Estevan has appointments . . . or vacancies on 

the board, and it's our understanding that they're being delayed 

for some reason.  Could you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, the member may not be aware 

that there has been a rather tragic circumstance involving Mr. 

Cal Mitchell, who has been, had been serving as the chair of 

that district board. Mr. Mitchell was injured in a pedestrian-car 

accident in Estevan and was very seriously injured, has spent 

considerable time in hospital here in Regina and now back in 

Estevan, and he's certainly been in our thoughts and prayers. 

 

And so as a result of Mr. Mitchell's injuries, there has been a 

change in the chairperson there, but I'm not aware . . . but Mr. 

Mitchell will still continue to serve as a member of the board, 

being named as a member of the board.  I'm not aware of any 

vacancy.  There has been that change. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Our office received a 

phone call today from a woman who said that casual 

government employees in standard government departments 

lost their dental benefits as of February.  Can you confirm that 

for us, Mr. Minister? 

 

(1830) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we're certainly not aware of 

that.  We will check with the Public Service Commission and 

respond to the member. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, the calls 

and letters are not letting up as to the effects of your so-called 

wellness plan that is . . . and they are being felt throughout this 

province.  It seems to me that a whole lot of money is being 

wasted by adding many, many jobs to health board training and 

staff while services are being slashed and cut further. 

 

We've talked a great deal over the past two and a half years, 

Mr. Minister, about health care services, how you said and your 

department said that they were going to improve for 

Saskatchewan people.  And, Mr. Minister, I'd like now to take a 

look at some of those improvements that you and the Minister 

of Health promised the people of Saskatchewan could be 

looking at. 

 

Implementing the wellness model -- what it did was force local 

communities into health districts, against their will in a lot of 

cases, Mr. Minister.  To replace former health boards with new 

boards appointed by the minister, many of whom are NDP 

supporters who had no experience whatsoever.  And I think 

that's clear across the province, Mr. Minister, that there are . . . 

it's obvious that that's the case in a lot of areas. 

 

You've closed hospitals in rural Saskatchewan -- 52 hospitals; 

pitting, I say, Mr. Minister, to you, community against 

community; where one community is wondering why their 

hospital has been closed and the next one down the road is still 

open.  It's 

pitted rural Saskatchewan against urban Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Minister, where the people in urban Saskatchewan feel that 

rural Saskatchewan has got too much services and theirs should 

be taken out; and rural Saskatchewan doesn't feel they have 

enough services and urban Saskatchewan has them all.  That's 

what your program has done -- it's highlighted all of those 

kinds of concerns for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another improvement was imposing user fees on chiropractic 

services, something you said, while in opposition, would never 

happen.  You've imposed user fees on optometric services; 

tripled the prescription drug plan deductible from $125 per year 

to $380 per year, then later basically eliminated it altogether.  

The deductible is now about $1,700 a year.  Another 

improvement for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

You've removed insulin and medical supplies from diabetics 

from the drug plan, Mr. Minister.  Another improvement that 

the people of Saskatchewan have been asked to endure. 

 

You froze a number of services.  You've slashed funding to 

hospitals; eliminated level 1 and 2 funding for seniors in 

special care homes.  You've increased air ambulance services 

and fees . . . or pardon me, increased air ambulances' fees, not 

services; cut them. 

 

All of these -- and the list goes on and on and on -- are the 

services that have been cut in health care and the kinds of 

improvements that you talked about that are being asked for the 

people of Saskatchewan and forced on them to endure. 

 

Increased resident income charges for seniors in special care 

homes by as much as $211 per month.  You've removed 

coverage for oxygen users from the Saskatchewan aid to 

independent living program and forced oxygen patients to pay 

the bill themselves. 

 

You've eliminated acute care funding to 52 rural hospitals in 

the 1993 budget and confirmed more cuts to rural acute care 

beds in 1994.  And we can only wonder where that's going to 

happen, Mr. Minister. 

 

You've increased the auxiliary fee to hearing-aids through the 

Saskatchewan hearing-aid plan from $80 to $230, resulting in 

the average hearing-aid cost to hearing-aid patients by between 

400 and $550 each.  Another improvement for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You've eliminated coverage for several types of surgery.  

You've eliminated funding to the Regina Victorian Order of 

Nurses.  You forced the Wascana Rehabilitation Centre to 

severely cut back services provided to Saskatchewan children 

across the province with severe handicaps; closed Myers 

House, the addiction centre that you promised to fully fund 

while you were in opposition.  You are closing the entire Souris 

Valley regional health centre 400-bed facility in Weyburn; 

eliminated most of 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

out-of-province coverage. 

 

Mr. Minister, where are these improved health care services 

that you talk about?  Where are they?  Where are they, 

especially for people in rural Saskatchewan?  They're not there.  

There are no improvements.  There's only less and less 

services, more and more pain for the people of rural 

Saskatchewan when it comes to health care services in this 

province. 

 

There is no improvements, Mr. Minister.  And on top of that, 

Mr. Minister, you and your government said to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they would have local autonomy.  You 

promised that to the people of Saskatchewan in order to get 

some measure, I suggest, some measure of support for your 

health care reforms.  And it isn't there, Mr. Minister.  There 

isn't support for this kind of thing any longer because you 

promised local autonomy, you promised health board elections, 

you promised a whole bunch of improvements for the delivery 

of health care services in this province, and it hasn't happened. 

 

And you know that's the case, Mr. Minister.  These kinds of 

things just illustrate and highlight for the people of 

Saskatchewan the kinds of things that you have done and your 

department has done to the delivery of health care services in 

this province. 

 

And I say to you, sir, you and the Minister of Health should be 

ashamed for the kinds of things that you have done to the 

health care services within this province, Mr. Minister.  Your 

party, the NDP of Saskatchewan, were always the great 

defenders, always the ones that stood up and trumpeted the 

cause for health care in this province.  And now we see, Mr. 

Minister, your true colours. 

 

When you come to office, what do you do?  Everything directly 

opposed to what you promised and said you would do.  While 

you were in opposition you were the great defenders.  You've 

lost all credibility, Mr. Minister, when it comes to dealing with 

health care services in this province.  Your party is no longer 

the defender of health care services in this province; your party 

has lost whatever shred of respect it had for health care, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Maybe Garf Stevenson should add those kinds of questions to 

his $200,000 study on health board elections, Mr. Minister -- 

$200,000 being spent, wasted, absolutely wasted on something 

that is no more necessary to this province and you know it -- is 

not necessary to this province. 

 

You gave a commitment to hold health board elections this fall, 

Mr. Minister -- keep that commitment.  And we would ask you 

today, Mr. Minister, that if the people that attend these 

meetings that are coming up around the province of 

Saskatchewan, if they call for health board elections this fall, 

will you and your department heed that call? 

 

Mr. Minister, everyone -- SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), SUN (Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses), SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and 

thousands of Saskatchewan people -- would like answers to 

those very basic questions. 

 

You know yourself, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Health has 

confirmed that it will cost somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

$1 million to hold them outside of the municipal election 

process this fall.  A million dollars will be spent to hold those 

elections outside of the municipal process this fall, all in an 

effort to deflect criticism of you and your department.  That's 

the sole purpose of Mr. Garf Stevenson and his road show that 

is going to be staged here very soon. 

 

And on a CBC radio interview here just recently, Mr. 

Stevenson confirmed that for the people of Saskatchewan; that 

in every likelihood, he suggested, Mr. Minister, that there 

would not be health board elections this fall. 

 

The most important question that people have been asking right 

since the wellness program was introduced -- some degree of 

local autonomy, some degree of control -- you have taken away 

from them in one broad sweep because you have to deflect 

some measure of criticism from you and your department.  And 

you know that's the case, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, and to the Madam Minister, the people of this 

province don't trust you on this issue any longer because you 

have broken your word to them once again, just as you broke 

your word with respect to the improvements that you promised 

would be available to the people of Saskatchewan once we 

embarked on this wellness program. 

 

The Premier said, the train has left the station when it came to 

health care reform.  You would not slow the process down at 

that point, of health care reform.  People all over this province 

asked for it.  There were meetings, large public meetings, large 

public rallies held around this province, Mr. Minister, that you 

and your department officials and the Minister of Health 

attended where people begged you to delay the implementation 

of health boards so that people had some time to adjust.  And 

the Premier stood in his place in this legislature and said no, the 

train has left the station; we're embarking on this wellness 

program; it doesn't matter what anybody thinks. 

 

And you also at that same time promised to the people of 

Saskatchewan that there would be health board elections as 

soon as possible, Mr. Minister.  But somehow or another the 

train's starting to back up, isn't it, Mr. Minister?  When it comes 

to health board elections, somehow or another the commitment 

that that Premier gave to move ahead with health care reform in 

this province, and the train has left the station, it's stopped, and 

it's backing up because it doesn't suit the political agenda of 

your party any longer, Mr. Minister, does it? 

 

It doesn't suit it because the health board elections that will be 

held this fall -- or should be held this fall -- will simply open up 

the sores of health care reform that were there a couple of years 

ago when this was 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

embarked on, Mr. Minister.  That's what will happen.  It will 

give people across this province a platform to stand on and 

condemn your government for initiating these health care 

reforms, condemn your government for closing 52 hospitals 

across rural Saskatchewan, condemn your department and your 

minister and your government for slashing services, even 

though you promised improvements, Mr. Minister.  That's what 

would happen and you know that's what would happen. 

 

Your party's popularity is dropping and you're aware of that.  

The polls are showing that, Mr. Minister.  And one of the 

things that you know you cannot do is afford further erosion of 

your electoral base, the one that you could always count on, 

and that was that you had people believing that you were going 

to be the defenders of health care services in this province, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'll make this prediction to you now and to the 

people of Saskatchewan.  I suspect at the end of September or 

October we're going to have a cabinet shuffle within this 

province.  And you probably will take over as Minister of 

Health in this province because of the dreadful, absolutely 

dreadful, job the current Minister of Health is doing in this 

province, Mr. Minister. 

 

She will be relieved of her duties by the Premier of this 

province.  And then the people in this province, Mr. Minister, 

at the next election in this province, I believe will relieve your 

entire government of their responsibilities, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, this health care reform has been a sham right 

from the very beginning.  It has nothing to do with 

improvements.  It has nothing to do with health care, wellness, 

or anything else.  It was simply a fiscally driven process to try 

and balance the budget of this province on the backs of health 

care in this province.  And you know that's the case and 

everybody across this province now knows that that's the case, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that the people of this province have 

been deceived by you and your government with respect to 

health care services in this province, and I don't think they'll 

ever forget it.  And I don't think they'll ever forgive the NDP of 

this province for what they did to health care. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would at this time allow you to comment on 

that. 

 

(1845) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, that is very generous of 

the member to allow me to make a comment, and I fully intend 

to make a comment.  I mean it's very illustrative of what's just 

happened in this House -- very illustrative, Mr. Chair. 

 

We've had some, I think, reasonable discussion around 

estimates for the Department of Health, some serious health 

issues.  And then of course, at the what I 

presume is the close of the member's presentation -- at least I 

hope it's the close -- we get about a 15, 20 minute speech which 

is just pure politics.  I mean it's recognized by anyone who may 

be watching.  It's recognized by every member in this House.  

It's nothing but a political presentation we've just had at the 

end.  And I guess that's fair enough -- this is a political 

Chamber. 

 

But I just wish the member wouldn't use this Chamber 

continually in his bid for the leadership of that party.  I just 

wish he wouldn't do that. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the member would at least be more 

credible in his remarks if he engaged some notes of accuracy 

into some of the things he said.  And indeed, in some of the 

things he said, it's absolutely false, absolutely false in some of 

his comments.  And this is what creates difficulty for 

Saskatchewan people because they want to believe that 

members of the legislature, when they speaking on the floor, 

are speaking a modicum of truth. 

 

Here is an illustration, Mr. Chair.  This member stood in this 

House a few moments ago and said, and I quote, that the Souris 

Valley Regional Care Centre in Weyburn is closing.  That is 

absolutely false.  And if he doesn't know it, he should know it 

before he says that kind of totally inaccurate statement which 

causes nothing but grief to those who might, on the outside 

chance, might believe something that he said.  I won't illustrate 

further in that regard. 

 

He talks about some of the very, very difficult choices that 

we've had to make as a government in terms of funding for 

various programs in Health -- programs, Mr. Chair, I remind 

you and I remind all members were programs that were 

pioneered by this particular political party.  You've heard of the 

drug plan, optometric care, and so on. 

 

He knows; he knows the circumstance of this province.  I mean 

it was his government, his group of political colleagues that put 

us into this mess, that left us with a $15 billion debt.  He knows 

that.  He knows that. 

 

He knows that it is his federal counterparts, and now the 

Liberals continue the practice, same thing, same thing in 

Ottawa, of the offloading onto the provinces of the cut-backs 

from the federal funding.  Do you know, Mr. Chair, that since 

1982, while we had Tories in Regina and Tories in Ottawa and 

now Liberals in Ottawa, this province has suffered a net loss of 

$1.47 billion in reductions of funding from Ottawa. 

 

Now you take that loss in our funding base and you add to our 

provincial budget a cost of $850 million every year to pay the 

interest on the debt that those people ran up, is he surprised that 

we are not able fiscally, that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are 

not able to continue all of the benefits which we have once 

enjoyed and which we pioneered in this province? 

 

Now he would have us believe tonight that somehow 



2646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

this is only happening in Saskatchewan.  I ask him to look a 

little bit West and see what his Tory colleagues are doing in 

Alberta; look East, look to see what his Liberal friends are 

doing in the Maritimes. 

 

Mr. Chair, he had some comments about the Minister of Health 

and I understand his position.  I understand why he does that.  I 

mean it's using this as a political platform and I guess again 

that's fair enough.  And that's his opinion, it may be the opinion 

of his caucus, but I'll tell you it's not the opinion of the people 

of this province and it's not the opinion of health care leaders 

across this country and indeed across this world. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to refer here to what is the most recent 

publication in the health care reform field in Canada -- a large 

volume of review of what's happening in health care reform 

across Canada, written by Dr. Michael Rachlis and Carol 

Kushner, RN, who have reviewed the process of health reform 

across Canada.  What do they say, Mr. Chair?  What do they 

say regarding the Minister of Health in Saskatchewan? 

 

They say, quote: 

 

 There is nothing more gratifying to a politician than being 

acknowledged as a good leader.  In this respect (and I quote, 

Mr. Chair) Saskatchewan's Health minister, Louise Simard, 

has been outstanding unlike (quote) some other health 

ministers who are using slash and burn tactics to cut both 

hospitals and community care (and I just might insert here, 

we know where that's happening). 

 

 Ms. Simard has taken the long view by putting in place two 

of the key mechanisms for shifting the way resources are 

allocated.  In 1992-93, Saskatchewan's hospital budget 

decreased by 2 per cent, while the home care budget 

increased by over 10 per cent. (Quote) Other ministers of 

health could benefit from Ms. Simard's example. 

 

And I could go on, I have pages here of comment from that 

particular work discussing what's happening in Saskatchewan, 

discussing very particularly the role that the Premier has taken 

in health reform, the role that the Minister of Health has taken 

in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been difficult choices.  But it comes 

down as simple as this: either we, as a community, as a 

province, and as a government will reform our health care 

system, both in its structure and in its programing and its 

delivery, in a way that makes it sustainable financially not only 

today but for the next decade and beyond, either we make the 

changes now, Mr. Chair, or we stand the risk of losing the very 

basic health and medicare that we have fought so hard for in 

this province. 

 

I want to ask the member not to always turn this into a political 

platform or into a political cause.  I want to ask him to join with 

us, to join with us in creative effort to reshape health care and 

its delivery for the long 

term for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I realize, Mr. 

Minister, that all of our blood sugar is dropping as we've 

missed our supper, but I have some questions I'd like to ask. 

 

You wrote to the Leader of the Third Party on February 11 in 

response to several letters of concern received from students as 

well as faculty from, I believe, the University of Regina 

concerning your department's policy for providing health care 

coverage for foreign students.  Could you please update the 

Assembly on the status of these benefits to temporary students? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 

question and I appreciated the letters that her leader had 

forwarded to me on this issue of out-of-country international 

students. 

 

I want to indicate to the member tonight what has happened in 

this discussion.  At the time we were corresponding back in 

February we had . . . the benefits were guaranteed till the end of 

April.  We have extended those benefits to April 30, 1995, so 

they are guaranteed for the coming year.  And we are working 

with a working group that's made up of federal and provincial 

and territorial governments to look at this whole issue across 

Canada. 

 

As you will know or perhaps know, it's currently only 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, Ontario, and the Northwest Territories 

who provide full health care coverage for international 

students.  There are limited coverages in B.C. (British 

Columbia), Nova Scotia, Quebec.  And Manitoba, New 

Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, Yukon, 

provide no coverage at all for their international students. 

 

And so we're working with the federal government, we're 

working with those other provincial jurisdictions, to try and 

bring some consistency to what's going to happen across 

Canada.  But for those students who may have concerns or 

those . . . their instructors who are writing and so on, and your 

leader, benefits have been extended for sure until April 30, 

1995. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Are you involving students and 

faculty from the post-secondary institutions in your 

department's fact-gathering process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, we have indeed met or 

officials of the department have been meeting with students and 

instructors.  We are in constant sort of communication with 

both campuses and we have made this commitment.  If there 

will be any change, there will be a full consultation with them 

before the change is instituted or applied. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We recently 

received a copy of a letter written to you by Mr. Earl Poidevin 

of Caronport, regarding the charges 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

for level 1 to 4 service at the Providence Hospital.  And he has 

agreed to my using his name and situation today. 

 

Mr. Poidevin's specific concern is regarding the charges that he 

is being assessed for level 4 care for his wife Elizabeth.  In his 

letter he says that during the past six and a half years the cost 

for his wife's care has risen from 600 per month to $761 per 

month, an increase of 27 per cent.  Recently, after completing a 

form outlining his income, he was advised that the cost of care 

for his wife is now 961, which represents 45 per cent of his 

total gross income.  This latest assessment of charges he must 

pay sounds very exorbitant to me.  Do you have an explanation 

to offer to Mr. Poidevin? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chairman, it's interesting that the 

member would raise this particular case.  I had opportunity to 

meet with the gentleman some weeks ago.  I have corresponded 

with him.  I understand he's been out of the province.  In fact I 

tried to phone him, and I understand he's been out of the 

province.  He may now . . . he's been out of the province 

visiting family, I understand; he may now be home, and I 

anticipate being in touch with him by phone. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you address the issue of those 

increases at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Let me say generally then to the member 

that the charges are income-tested resident charges, and I don't 

want to here on the floor of the legislature discuss the specifics 

of Mr. Poidevin's income situation.  But just to say that those 

charges are based on income available to families.  And it's 

always ensured that the charge always leaves a certain amount 

of income available to the individual. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I appreciate your further contact with Mr. 

Poidevin.  In some cases, large dispensing fees are added to 

prescriptions.  And one case we're familiar with is the fees 

charged at the Shoppers Drug Mart at Circle Park Mall in 

Saskatoon.  A Saskatoon resident had a prescription for 400 

pills, and since it was company policy to not fill prescriptions 

of over 40 pills, she was charged a fee of six seventy-five for 

each of 10 orders of 40 pills.  She was charged sixty-seven fifty 

just to fill a single prescription.  All the druggist had to do was 

count to 400 instead of 40, and that person was charged over 

$60 more. 

 

What is the maximum dispensing fee that may be charged in 

Saskatchewan and how does Saskatchewan's policy for 

dispensing fees compare to other provinces? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- This is a very timely question the 

member asks, in that there is some small public discussion 

happening now about the whole issue of dispensing fees, and so 

on. 

 

The practice in Saskatchewan has been that the Department of 

Health, Government of Saskatchewan, has provided to 

pharmacists a maximum dispensing fee -- a maximum 

dispensing fee.  Other jurisdictions in Canada have not done 

that and so you see quite a 

variance in other jurisdictions.  We've always set a maximum 

because we've enjoyed a universal drug plan.  And so we've 

inserted a maximum dispensing fee.  Pharmacists have been 

able to charge less than that. 

 

In the circumstance of a maximum dispensing fee, however, it 

is based on a unit.  And that traditionally has been a 34-day or 

about a month's supply.  In some cases it's extended to a 

hundred-day supply.  And this has been as a result of a matter 

of negotiation with the pharmaceutical association over the 

years.  And every time we negotiate that contract, these issues 

are set up. 

 

And so that's the situation here as it compares with other 

situations.  We do have a maximum.  The pharmacist can 

charge less.  But the dispensing fee is per unit which is 

generally a 34-day supply. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Does this particular case impress you as 

being unusual?  Is this something that happens frequently if 

there is a prescription over . . . 

 

(1900) 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, what struck me as unusual -- I 

think there are a number of issues here we need to be 

considering as government and so on -- but what struck me I 

think as a little unusual about the illustration that you bring to 

us, that that seems to be an unusually long prescription.  Now 

again, I can't second-guess the physicians or the pharmacists 

involved, but it just struck me as an unusually long 

prescription. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well it would be interesting to have further 

public discussion of this issue because it certainly can have a 

big impact on a pocketbook. 

 

I have some other public concerns brought to our attention by 

private citizens.  We were informed by a man from the Stewart 

Valley area that some members of the Rolling Hills District 

Health Board are bragging that they make so much for doing so 

little.  He estimates at the time that he was talking to us that 

they had earned $6,000 since the board was formed. 

 

Is this a common attitude among board members?  And what is 

the role of a board member, and how do they earn their per 

diems?  And how were the Rolling Hills board members 

selected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The member asks, is that the attitude of 

board members?  And I can say categorically no -- 

categorically no.  And I've had the pleasure of meeting many of 

those who are working in the district boards.  I mean in the 

number of people involved we may find one or two individuals, 

but generally I say that's categorically no; that those who have 

volunteered to serve in the capacity of a district board member 

right now have undertaken a great deal of work.  They are 

literally spending days and days of their lives in terms of this 

early process of structural reform. 



2648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

We have set, as the member will know, maximum per diems 

for board members.  Some boards are perhaps paying the 

maximum, others are not.  It will be based entirely on the actual 

meetings that they are a part of.  But given the tremendous 

amount of work that these members are doing, it strikes me that 

we're certainly getting good value for the monies being 

expended there. 

 

I would hope, I would hope that there is no one in our system, 

no one in the system currently who would take an attitude that 

we're here because of the money.  My observation is that these 

folks are all working very, very hard and doing a great job. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well on behalf of the person who asked the 

question, who I think asked it in all seriousness and concern, I 

would appreciate your looking into the Rolling Hills board and 

just see what might be going on there. 

 

The Swift Current board spent a two-day retreat at Riverhurst 

last year at the public's expense.  Is it common practice for the 

health boards to spend public money to go away for private 

meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I believe maybe what the member is 

referring to here is that the board may have -- I not sure of this 

-- but the board may have taken some time to go away for a 

planning conference or something.  And I think that's typical of 

most organizations.  I'm sure she'll find that the Liberal caucus 

at some point in time will want to engage in some planning 

meeting.  I think that's true of most any organization.  So that 

may be in fact what has happened there. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Just one more question about the Swift 

Current board: apparently they spent $7,000 on a new 

boardroom table to ensure it was colour matched with their 

decor.  Were you aware of this, and is colour-coordinated 

office furniture a priority for the district health service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I personally was not aware 

before this move was made.  I do understand and was informed 

in fact at a meeting of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses in 

Swift Current, that in fact there had been some furnishings 

purchased by the district board.  I'm not able to confirm the 

value.  Our district boards will need some furnishings to do 

their office and it would be my hope that each of our boards 

would look very carefully at their budgets and try and do this as 

frugally as possible. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I share your optimism and concern that they 

would.  It's these examples that sometimes lead to cynicism 

among those of us who are participating in your health reforms. 

 

In terms of the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, the budget 

for the plan is staying relatively stable and the actual allocation 

for transfers to individuals is frozen.  How has this been 

achieved?  With a steadily increasing demand, how have cuts 

been made to keep the budget stable? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, in essence, as we budgeted 

last year, this was with . . . sort of our first budget with the 

revised benefits and in fact we may have over-budgeted some 

last year.  We also had an experience last year where some 

were not aware of benefits that were available under the drug 

plan so we did a direct mailing to all of those who we knew 

might well qualify.  That brought the numbers of people back 

up and so this year the budget, we expect, will be very close to 

the accurate need. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- By freezing the amount of subsidization for 

prescription drugs, there is considerable pressure on some 

household budgets.  What mechanisms are there available for 

people for appeal or additional assistance in the drug plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, without describing all of the 

provisions of the drug plan, I think the member will know that 

it is income tested but that we have maintained all of the 

coverages for a list of special conditions and so on and special 

provision that no one should be denied access to a prescription 

drug because of need.  And of course, those on social services 

are still fully covered and so on. 

 

If any individual has a particular difficulty or feels that they're 

not receiving the benefits, I'd encourage them to contact the 

prescription drug directly or to contact my or the Minister of 

Health's office and we would try and pursue and help them out. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The decision to simply not take a prescribed 

medication is really not an option in a good health care system, 

but it's a choice many seniors and persons on fixed income face 

every day.  And in this past year when I've been at so many 

people's doors, I have talked to seniors who, with the 

cooperation of their doctors, have cut back on their medications 

because they can't afford it. 

 

Have your officials estimated the number of households or 

persons affected in this way?  And do you have any estimates 

of people who are reducing prescription drug use to the 

detriment of their health? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I think we've all been 

concerned that when changes are made to a plan that some who 

may in fact need the medication may opt not to take it for the 

financial reasons.  Now we've monitored this very closely, I 

want to assure the member we've monitored this very closely 

and our tracking has shown only a small decline in the actual 

number of prescription drugs being used. 

 

Now on the other side of that equation, I think there may be 

appropriate circumstances, where we've been perhaps 

over-prescribed, that there may well be situations . . . I can 

recall visiting with seniors where over the course of years, in 

fact we got into situations where we were over-prescribed.  But 

we're sensitive to the concern the member raises and we've 

been monitoring it very carefully. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- You're monitoring and listening to 



May 26, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

this.  What can you do about it in terms of making sure that 

people are able to take the medications they need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- As I indicated earlier, Mr. Chair, one 

thing we certainly did do, when it became apparent to us that a 

number of people who should be receiving benefits simply had 

not made the approach to receive the benefits, we did by direct 

mail contact each and everyone to ensure the people were fully 

aware of the benefits.  And as a result of that, I believe we had 

something over 10,000 new applications. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- That's a rather large response.  I'm glad you 

made the approach. 

 

How many complaints has your department received from 

people who have trouble affording prescriptions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- I'm afraid, Mr. Chair, I can't accurately 

respond to that.  We have a toll-free line that comes into the 

department; I've been there on occasion, and toured, and 

watched it work.  And there will be a number of calls on a daily 

basis; we don't keep accurate records of all of the issues that are 

raised in the toll-free line.  But the toll-free line is available if 

anybody has a concern. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How is that toll-free line advertised these 

days?  I know there was some advertising when it was 

introduced.  How is it advertised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Now we're referring here to the drug plan 

toll-free line. The number will be regularly displayed in 

pharmacies.  We sent out posters and so on; it's regularly 

displayed there.  It will be available in the blue pages of any of 

our phone books.  For the member's information, if she would 

like to have it for future reference, the toll free to the drug plan 

is 1-800-667-7581. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  We're mercifully coming to the 

end.  I just have a couple more questions. 

 

The nursing home program in Regina was started by the VON 

(Victorian Order of Nurses) in 1925 and ran until 1985 without 

any district board structure.  Although they were never direct 

employees of the new organization, they enjoyed a close, direct 

working relationship.  When their services were no longer 

required, they were not all offered jobs by the Regina Health 

Board, although SAHO has claimed this in the past.  In spite of 

their innovative and tenacious commitment to wellness and 

community-based health, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations decided to deny the VON nurses any 

career adjustment assistance.  Are you familiar with this 

situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, yes, we've been familiar with 

the situation and regarding the VON services here in Regina, 

and we know that the district board worked very hard and 

through their process of decision making, we know what the 

result of that 

decision making was. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In terms of the career adjustment assistance, 

what role does your department play in the health board's 

decision about the VON? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- The decision was a Regina district board 

decision.  Now of course we're aware of what, you know, the 

decisions that they make, but ultimately that decision was made 

by the Regina district board. 

 

I know a similar situation existed in my own community of 

Moose Jaw some years ago when the home care board there 

opted to change.  This was not unlike that; in this case it was 

the total Regina district board opted to change from the VON. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you tell me on what grounds the 

district board denied the VON the career adjustment 

assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, it's my recollection, my 

information tonight, that the VON nurses were all offered 

positions in home care.  I would ask the member if she wants to 

really pursue this.  I think it would probably be appropriate to 

make a direct contact with Regina board and I'm sure they can 

provide full information, would be more than willing to do that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The Saskatchewan head injury 

association has been advocating for 10 years to create 

specialized services for head injured patients.  At present there 

are no specialty services in Saskatchewan; there are minimum 

services however.  For example, the Plains hospital in Regina 

has the role of stabilizing patients and the role of patient 

rehabilitation is left to the Wascana Rehab Centre.  And that is 

the extent of services in Regina, in the capital. 

 

Now your cabinet colleague, the Minister of Labour, has 

proposed that the emphasis in SGI will be on getting injured 

persons rehabilitated and back to work.  Why are there no 

speciality head injury services in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, to the member, I don't think 

she wants to leave the impression there are no services.  She 

identified herself, there are services and we . . . the specialty 

services, as best we can, are provided to individuals who need 

those services. 

 

Again, I say to the members -- I said to an earlier questioning, 

in the earlier questioning tonight -- these are the difficult, 

difficult decisions when resources are essentially limited and 

we have to allocate the resources as best we can.  There are 

many, many, many needs and many, many demands.  This is 

not in any way to diminish the needs of the head injured and we 

are working with the association, as you know. 

 

But again, we are limited in the resources that we can provide 

in a small province with a relatively small population.  And we 

are and we do.  And I don't think 



2650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 26, 1994 

the impression should be left there are not services available --  

there are.  We might wish they would improve. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Well, given the shift to more funding from 

SGI for head injuries, will this effect the provision of services?  

And what is your department doing to prepare for the quite 

increased, possibly increased, case-load? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, yes indeed then, the 

Department of Health has been in conversations, ongoing 

conversations, with SGI over this, on this very issue, and we 

hope that we might see some positive developments as a result. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In this particular budget then, there wasn't 

anything in particular to improve rehabilitation services for 

head injury patients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No.  In this budget, Mr. Chair, there's no 

specific identification. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- On a light note, the Saskatchewan health 

card reads benefits may expire if you leave Saskatchewan.  We 

have received calls and complaints about this.  People wonder 

to themselves what benefits expire?  All of them, some of them, 

which benefits under what conditions?  Do they expire if I go 

to Manitoba or Malawi?  Have you received similar 

complaints? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- No, certainly I have not.  And the 

department officials say they have not had that complaint.  It's 

an interesting comment on the wording on the card. 

 

What we do want to be sure that Saskatchewan people are 

aware of is if you change your residence, if you leave the 

province and change residences, that the benefits we provide at 

some point do end.  And arrangements must therefore need to 

be made in your new locale -- if it's another province in Canada 

or if it's in the United States or in some other jurisdiction in the 

world.  We do want people to be aware that if you're not living 

here, the benefits will expire. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Indeed, and perhaps a simple word to clarify 

it might be helpful.  But that'll take a while with our new health 

cards when we just put the sticker on. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials, for what's been a 

short but fruitful exchange and appreciate the answers you've 

given me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Chair, I'd want to thank the member 

for her questions and other members tonight for their questions.  

And I particularly want to express thanks on behalf of the 

Minister of Health and myself to all of the officials from the 

Department of Health who have joined us throughout this 

process of estimates, to thank them for their work in the House 

and all of their work outside the House. 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7:22 p.m. 

 

 


