




















































Hansard: May 19, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2429 

 May 19, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to lay on the Table, for the citizens 

of this province, in excess of 1,500 petitions that: 

 

 Pray that the entire process regarding the trials of child sex 

offenders needs review; child witnesses require safety and an 

appropriate condition in the courtroom while testifying 

without question; mandatory training for judges, lawyers, and 

investigators is required; that sex offenders are dangerous and 

should not be released pending appeal; victims' rights through 

victims' compensation programs should equal those offered to 

the defendants through legal aid; that this has resulted in the 

lack of confidence in the judicial system and the judicial 

process. 

 

 That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately investigate and offer changes in 

these failed areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Martensville, 

Saskatoon, and in fact and indeed across the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and it gives me pleasure at this time to lay these 

petitions on the Table. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 36 students, grade 4 students, from Wadena School. 

 

When they first wanted to come to the Assembly they were told 

there was no tour guides available, so I agreed to be their tour 

guide for the day and am touring them around.  It certainly gets 

appreciation of how hard our guides do work, and maybe from 

time to time our members should do that, and they'll realize that 

our guides are a very important part of this Assembly. 

 

They're accompanied today by teachers, Reg Glennie and 

Denise Nelson, also by a student teacher, Garth Ulrich, and two 

chaperons, Pat Nakrieko and Margaret Nataraj.  I would like all 

members of the Assembly to greet them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like 

to join the member from Kelvington-Wadena in welcoming the 

students and teacher from Wadena, Reg Glennie, a personal 

friend through wildlife circles for a number of years. 

Some of us hope to see Mr. Glennie and some of the students in 

Wadena next Friday at the western hemispheric shorebird 

reserve dedication ceremony and welcome you here, in joining 

with your member. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

HMCS Regina 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a comment to make 

about Saskatchewan's navy.  On June 13, Her Majesty's 

Canadian Ship Regina will slip Halifax and proceed to sea.  

After stops in Charleston and Aruba, she will transit the 

Panama Canal on Canada Day.  San Diego will be her final port 

of call before she sails into her new home port of Esquimalt, 

British Columbia, on July 20. 

 

HMCS (Her Majesty's Canadian Ship) Regina is the fifth of 

twelve Canadian patrol frigates.  This world-class vessel, 440 

feet long and displacing 4,750 tonnes, was built at Lauzon, 

Quebec.  One of the sub-contractors was SED Systems from 

Saskatoon, who assisted in developing the communication 

system. 

 

The total complement of 225 officers, sailors, and air crew 

includes several people from Saskatchewan including her 

captain, Commander Mike Jellinek, who  grew up in Estevan.  

After her commissioning on September 30, Regina will be 

stationed on Canada's west coast to advance Canada's maritime 

interests.  She will be an ambassador for the city of Regina and 

the province of Saskatchewan in ports around the Pacific rim.  

God bless the good ship Regina and all who sail in her.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rosetown Water Treatment Plant 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday I was honoured 

to take part in the dedication ceremony of the new water 

treatment plant in Rosetown; an event that has some promising 

implications for all those regions of Saskatchewan and other 

areas of Canada which suffer from poor quality water. 

 

Much of Saskatchewan was an old seabed.  The high levels of 

salts and minerals in groundwater have, until today, been 

difficult to remove.  The old Rosetown plant was worn out and 

left quite a bit of iron and manganese in the water.  We have all 

drunk that kind of water somewhere in Saskatchewan and are 

familiar with its taste and its effects. 

 

This new plant is only the second of its kind in Canada and 

represents leading technology in water treatment to remove 

these elements through a process called electrodialysis reversal.  

The end result will be an excellent quality of water for 

drinking, manufacturing, and food processing.  As well, the 

plant will provide a 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

demonstration of the technology for other areas of the province 

and Canada with similar water problems. 

 

Two quick notes, Mr. Speaker.  The plant is financed by the 

town of Rosetown and assisted by a grant approved by the 

PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on Water Based Economic 

Development) agreement, the federal-provincial agreement 

with Sask Water and PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) -- a good example of cooperation between 

three levels of government. 

 

Particularly significant was the naming of the plant for Mike 

Bohn, the former public works superintendent for Rosetown 

and long-time dedicated public servant.  It was good to see his 

family take part in the dedication in memory of the work Mr. 

Bohn did in achieving the goal which Rosetown has now 

achieved -- high-quality drinking water. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Student Summer Employment 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a well-known 

fact that this weekend is Queen Victoria's birthday observed, 

and that we in Saskatchewan have almost a religious 

responsibility to plant our gardens in honour of the good 

Queen, which must mean that Victoria is the fertility goddess 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now all levity aside, Mr. Speaker, this weekend also marks the 

beginning of summer which means that university, technical 

school, and high school students will be beginning their 

summer employment, and those not yet employed will be 

looking in earnest.  So I remind students, businesses and all 

interested people, that there are two provincial programs and 

one federal, dedicated to placing students in summer jobs so 

that they can gain worthwhile experience and earn something 

towards their education. 

 

The Partnerships '94 program sponsored by the Department of 

Education, Training, and Employment hopes to find positions 

for 3,200 students.  Interested employers should contact the 

Partnerships '94 office in Regina. 

 

As well, through the Public Service Commission, applying 

students are placed through a random selection process into 

appropriate available jobs.  This program runs from May 1 to 

August 31. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, an employment officer, who noted that 

we make private members' statements, asked that I would 

mention that their centre provides many services for students 

and employers, its main objective being jobs for students. 

 

These are all worthy programs, and hiring a student is a worthy 

investment in our future.  I encourage all organizations that 

can, hire a student. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Preventing Child Abuse 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you.  Today I was privileged to meet with 

a group of courageous women and men who are passionately 

concerned about the horrors of childhood sexual abuse.  The 

ugliness of the Martensville and other childhood abuse cases 

across Canada focuses attention on the continued need for 

vigilance and improvements to the system to protect the 

children. 

 

Our government has developed a number of initiatives -- the 

children's action plan; the discussion paper Children First: An 

Invitation to Work Together; victim services; improvements 

to the judicial process; and ongoing work to develop the 

respectful, decent protocols that enhance the dignity of these 

unfortunate victims. 

 

Even more important though, Mr. Speaker, is the need for 

public education about this soul-destroying sort of abuse and 

the continued ongoing dedication by all people, and most 

importantly, commitment by governments to stop the abuse, to 

cry out for the children, and to vow for zero tolerance of 

violence. 

 

All of us have a responsibility and a role to play in the healing 

and helping.  Together, all of us can stop childhood sexual 

abuse.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Premier's Comments on Quebec 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question will 

be to whichever minister feels qualified to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm sure everyone in this Assembly believes in 

national unity.  We're all proud Canadians, and from the 

speeches I've heard in here I think we all have a strong sense of 

nationalism as far as our country goes.  And it is appalling, Mr. 

Speaker, to see the Bloc Quebécois and their leader running 

around using taxpayers' money to break up our country. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of our province is 

performing his own con game for the last couple of days at the 

expense of the people who elected him. 

 

The western premiers' conference was called, Mr. Speaker, so 

that the economies of western Canada could come together and 

solve some of the pressing problems in front of us.  It's 

painfully obvious, Mr. Speaker, to me today, and that's why I 

place the question to the government ministers here, that the 

Premier is picking a play with Quebec to detract from his own 

dismal performance in this legislature.  He's playing into the 

hands of Lucien Bouchard who has counted on someone like 

the Premier of our province to spout off. 

 

My question to a minister is this: will you contact the Premier 

of our province who is currently in Manitoba, 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

and remind him that your government has chased 16,000 jobs 

out of our province and playing politics does nothing to solve 

the fact that 16,000 jobs are missing.  Would you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

question from the hon. member.  I want to say that if he is so 

naïve to believe that the issue of separation of Quebec has 

nothing to do with the economy and jobs, then he in fact is 

sadly mistaken. 

 

The fact is, is that in the world economy the ongoing debate 

about separation in Canada directly affects jobs, company 

profit lines, bottom lines, right across Canada.  And when we 

talk about the importance of keeping Canada together as a unit, 

we are talking about stability of the economy and stability of 

the job market in this country.  And that's fundamentally 

important. 

 

At a local level obviously we are dealing with agriculture, 

we're dealing with economic development in western Canada at 

the Gimli, Manitoba premier's conference. 

 

But for you to say that unity of Canada has nothing to do with 

jobs, and nothing to do with the economy, shows why after 

nine years of governing this province we have a $15 billion 

deficit.  Because Canadian unity has everything to do with jobs 

and the economy of this country and our Premier is taking that 

message very strongly to the western premier's conference in 

Gimli today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, there isn't a person in this 

province, and certainly the people in this Assembly, that don't 

understand that a separate Quebec would have strong economic 

ramifications for all of us.  But the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is 

doing nothing to keep that from happening.  And contrary he's 

promoting a raising of the temperature in the debate that is 

politically motivated with inflamed rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bouchard is looking for people around this 

country to come out and beat their chests so that he can go 

home and say, see, Quebec must separate from the rest of 

Canada. 

 

The message that needs to be delivered, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier of this province, is that we have our own separatist 

movement right here in the province of Saskatchewan.  People 

are being separated from their jobs, families are being 

separated from their pay cheques, and rural people are being 

separated from their health care. 

 

I ask again, Mr. Minister, will you contact the Premier and tell 

him to get off his contrived Quebec bashing and get on with 

building the economy of western Canada.  Would you do that, 

sir? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say to the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition here in the legislature, that I believe 

that the Premier is speaking  very directly to the people of 

Quebec and the people of Canada, talking about how important 

it is to keep Canada together. 

 

Now, sir, I want to say to you and to your members of your 

caucus, it was not that long ago in this very Assembly that the 

leader of the Conservative Party, Mr. Dick Collver, stepped 

aside from the Conservative Party to start, what? - 

_ the Unionest Party that advocated separation of western 

Canada.  That's deep in the roots of your Conservative caucus, 

sir. 

 

I want to say that the attempt of our Premier to hold Canada 

together should be applauded by all members here in the 

legislature, and supported; not politically attacked for some 

phoney argument that you and your members opposite 

promote.  I say if there's any separatist movement in this 

Assembly, it comes from the Conservative caucus, as proven 

by the Dick Collver move and Dennis Ham, the brother of the 

Leader of the Liberal Party, when they started the Unionest 

Party here in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this is just like 1981 all 

over again.  While Saskatchewan burns, the member from 

Riversdale is off playing the national political game.  I mean 

this guy's been around almost as long as nationhood itself.  The 

only difference this time, Mr. Speaker, while our province 

burns, is that the Premier is off seeking a little personal glory, 

and politics is the prime motivator this time.  He knows full 

well that all of us have a commitment to the national unity 

debate. 

 

But it's the polls at home that bother the Premier right now, and 

that's why we have this inflamed rhetoric when the province's 

economy is in such rough shape.  So he serves his own selfish 

political interest, rather than the interest of building this 

country. 

 

And I say again to the minister, I say to the minister, contact 

your Premier and tell him to get off this performance -- it's the 

same as a $3 bill -- and tell him that he needs to concentrate on 

building the economy of western Canada along with his fellow 

premiers; and if he's got something concrete to say about 

national unity, do it; cut out the rhetoric.  Let's get on with 

fixing the economy of our country, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I say again to the member 

opposite, to the Leader of the Conservative Party, that that is 

exactly the message that our Premier is taking to Gimli, 

Manitoba, and to Canadians -- that jobs and the economy of 

Canada depend very much on keeping Canada intact.  And that 

is the confidence that we are sending to the people in Quebec 

who want to remain in Canada, and we believe that to be 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

the majority of people in Quebec. 

 

And we're saying, and we should be sending a consistent 

message from this Assembly, that we support our Premier in 

keeping Canada intact.  Your attempt, your attempt, I say, to 

play politics flies in the face of what your Conservative 

members did, the predecessor to the member from Estevan, Mr. 

Dick Collver, when he set up the Unionest Party. 

 

So it is very, very suspect for you to stand today and talk, and 

talk about what you are going to do to keep Canada together, 

because it is not very realistic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Judges' Court Action 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Justice will understand where the question's 

coming from, considering the debate we've had in this House 

regarding the whole court case and judges from . . . rather, 

about a month ago. 

 

On May 4, Mr. Minister, I asked you how much it would cost 

to defend yourself and your government against a potential 

lawsuit by the Provincial Court judges.  You said, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the department has not made any such estimate because 

frankly we don't expect to be sued. 

 

Wrong again, Mr. Minister.  Have you made that estimate now? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the defendant please rise and 

tell this Assembly how much taxpayers' money will be spent 

defending his illegal actions in this lawsuit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's a well-framed question, Mr. Speaker, 

a well-framed question. 

 

I want to say that we have made no estimate as to the cost of 

defending the lawsuit.  We had come to the conclusion that 

there wouldn't be any such lawsuit; we weren't expecting it.  

But we are going to be instructing counsel to defend both the 

government and myself, and it is something that we have to do. 

 

Our advice, as I said in this House, our advice from our people 

in the department who are expert on these matters was that 

what we have done in this House . . . the law that this 

legislature has passed is constitutional, within the competence 

of this government, and now, by virtue of this lawsuit, we're 

going to have to go court and defend ourself on these matters 

before the Court of Queen's Bench.  So that's how the system 

works and that's what we're going to have to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, again to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

we're quite well aware of a number of the lawsuits that have 

taken place over the last few years and the costs associated.  

We've spoken to people in the legal community who estimate 

that this case . . . that if this case went all the way to the 

Supreme Court it might well add up to some 4 or $500,000 of 

taxpayers' money -- this because of your incompetence in the 

flawed process you've put in place.  At the end of that process 

you might lose anyway and end up having to give the judges 

their increase on top of it. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to appear that you and your government 

colleagues were more interested in public approval rather than 

heeding your own laws and setting the example.  Mr. Minister, 

as you like to say, there is law and then there is justice. 

 

Will the defendant again please rise and tell this Assembly 

whether he thinks it is just that Saskatchewan taxpayers may 

wind up footing the 4 or $500,000 bill because of the major 

blunder made by you as a minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well in the short time permitted to me in 

question period, Mr. Speaker, let me sum up for the hon. 

member the basis on which the government acted. 

 

We simply couldn't afford to pay the award.  One of the major 

problems with the award is that it threatened the consensus that 

we have built in this province around the idea of expenditure 

restraint, and a balanced budget. 

 

It's been very difficult, very hard, very taxing work for us to do 

that, but we have managed to do it.  We did it on the basis that 

everyone's had to sacrifice.  And in that atmosphere, in that . . . 

with that background, we simply couldn't pay the award. 

 

Now I've made this point at length.  The member knows 

exactly why the government acted. 

 

It doesn't sit well in his mouth to stand up at this late date and 

suggest it was only because it was trying to appeal to the 

popular opinion -- that was not the issue.  Popular opinion 

comes and goes.  But the fact of the matter is that if we had 

shattered the consensus around expenditure restraint, we were 

threatening the whole program of the government, and we 

simply couldn't allow that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, again, I 

think, Mr. Minister, if we look at the case that's rising before 

us, whether you win or whether you lose, the taxpayers pay, all 

because of a decision made by your government to disobey and 

to rescind its own laws. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

Mr. Minister, you yourself have admitted -- and we've had this 

discussion in this House -- that the commission was a bad idea.  

So even in the best-case scenario for your government if you 

win the case, it costed Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government's incompetence will wind up 

costing Saskatchewan taxpayers hundreds of thousands of 

dollars.  I believe, Mr. Minister, on the basis of the discussion 

we've had, you should do the honourable thing, Mr. Minister, 

and resign.  For the people of . . . for the sake of the people of 

Saskatchewan, will you do the honourable thing, Mr. Minister, 

and rather than being asked to resign, will you resign in light of 

recent events? 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investment in National Pig Development 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister in charge of Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government recently invested 1.25 million 

in National Pig Development north-east of Regina and this 

increases your ownership to some 72 per cent.  This is on top of 

the two and a half million dollars in equity and loans the 

government invested in 1989 and another 2.75 million you 

have promised if National Pig expands. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you confirm those figures and table your 

study that proves this is a profitable investment for the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me say to 

the member opposite that the Government of Saskatchewan, 

through CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan), has had a share in Nation Pig now for 

approximately four years, I believe. 

 

We had a portion of about 50 per cent for a while, and we have 

now increased our investment in National Pig -- it's not a loan, 

it's not a grant; it's an investment in National Pig -- by $1.25 

million to build the expanded facility at Balcarres.  This is a 

state-of-the-art facility; it is the only one in Saskatchewan, and 

it is renowned across the world.  We have contracts with 

countries all over the world to buy the product that comes out 

of the barn in Balcarres. 

 

This is a good investment, it's good for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it's quite different than some of the 

investments we're dealing with that we inherited from previous 

administrations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

speaking of investments, a Manitoba company is moving its 

hog operation to Humboldt and will be investing $350,000 of 

its own money, Mr. Minister -- its own money.  Your 

government has been very vocal in saying that if projects are 

viable, they should be able to draw private investment and that 

no government money should be provided.  People will invest 

if they think they can get a good return. 

 

Mr. Minister, if investors thought National Pig Development 

had a feasible business plan, they would probably invest.  As 

majority shareholders in this company, we assume that you 

have a complete business plan.  And would you table it today, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The company 

does have a complete business plan, and I haven't got it with 

me here, but I'm sure that that can be made available. 

 

I want to say to the member opposite and to the people 

listening that the barn in Balcarres is entirely different than the 

one that the member is talking about that is being developed at 

Humboldt.  One is a nucleus barn -- and I don't know all the 

details about that -- but one is a nucleus barn and the other is a 

multiplier barn. 

 

And the company in Manitoba that is building the barn or 

filling the barn in Humboldt is simply using the hogs from 

Manitoba and sending them over to Saskatchewan so that they 

can raise those hogs here.  It's an entirely different operation.  

The NPD (National Pig Development (Canada) Co. Ltd.) barn 

in Balcarres is unique and the only one in Saskatchewan.  And 

to mix the two is absolutely wrong and it's discrediting the 

work that this organization is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I guess this 

barn must be unique.  Experts tell us that the industry standard 

for building a hog-breeding facility is $3,400 per sow place.  

Your company is costing taxpayers almost $12,000 per sow 

place to build this facility.  If this is so, how do you expect to 

make this a viable, profitable operation that won't cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers any more money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The history of 

this company clearly indicates that it's a profitable company.  

Expanding the barn is not the same as expanding an ordinary 

hog barn, and I think the member should understand that.  I 

tried to explain that we are dealing here with different 

situations. 

 

One is a nucleus barn, the other one is a multiplier barn -- 

they're entirely different.  And then if you want to go beyond 

that, I'm sure that the members opposite, some of them also 

have experience with pig barns and do it for a lot less than 

$3,400 per animal.  So it 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

depends on what kind of a facility you have. 

 

We have a state-of-the-art facility here which is going to make 

money for the people of Saskatchewan and supply products to 

all over the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, National Pig 

Development is building a hog truck-washing facility right in 

the middle of the town of Balcarres.  Residents in the area are 

upset; the facility is too close to their homes, the town's 

ambulance service, and a public park.  They're worried about 

the smell, of course.  They've been told the manure removed 

from the trucks will be hauled to a field just east of Balcarres 

right next to a natural waterway. 

 

Mr. Minister, while we agree with the need for a truck wash for 

such a facility as National Pig Development, the location leaves 

much to be desired.  Did your government conduct an 

environmental impact study that you're so famous for 

demanding of others? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is interesting 

to hear the members opposite now being against all forms of 

economic development in this province.  When the economic 

development isn't moving as quickly as they'd like to see it 

move, then they complain about it being too slow.  Today 

they're saying you're moving too fast or you shouldn't be doing 

economic development.  You've got to make up your mind 

which way you want it. 

 

Let me comment briefly on the truck-wash facility at Balcarres.  

I understand that that is one site that had been indicated that 

they would want to build it on.  If that's not going to be 

acceptable to the town of Balcarres, I've been given to 

understand from the National Pig organization that they will 

move that to a place or a location that was acceptable to the 

town. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Arts Board Grant 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board or designate.  Mr. Minister, the other day you 

promised to undertake a complete review of the $9,500 your 

government is giving to Christopher Lefler.  Have you 

completed this review, Mr. Minister?  What changes will you 

be making in the policies of the Arts Board as a result of that 

review?  And what will you be doing about the $9,500 grant 

given to this individual that is receiving it for defamatory art? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, in the 

absence of the minister, I'll take notice of that question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this 

morning on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 

the executive director of the Arts 

Board said that all policies were followed in awarding this 

grant.  She said that the grant was awarded even though the 

Arts Board had full knowledge of the defamatory nature of Mr. 

Lefler's work.  She said this was not a consideration, that the 

Arts Board has no business even considering whether or not a 

project is defamatory or may hurt others. 

 

Mr. Minister, this simply is unacceptable.  The Government of 

Saskatchewan should not be giving taxpayers' money to 

so-called artists who use their work to defame and hurt other 

people. 

 

Mr. Minister, did this grant fall within government policy; and 

if so, will you change that policy and cancel that grant? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To 

answer the question from the member, I want to say firstly that 

no one on this side of the House would believe the 

interpretation of any quote that may come from a member of 

the Conservative caucus.  And in the absence of the minister, 

I'll take notice of the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the quote 

was direct from CBC this morning.  The Arts Board is saying 

that the public defamation of another person is art and is 

worthy of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please come 

to order.  Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Arts Board is 

saying that the public defamation of another person is art and is 

worthy of government funding.  What else could the Arts 

Board fund under the guise of art?  Would racist material be 

eligible for public funding under the guise of art?  How about 

pornography?  Would that be eligible for funding under the 

guise of art?  The point is your . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have just called the members 

to order.  Would the members please allow the member to ask 

his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The point is, your 

government has the responsibility to set some standards and not 

award money to people who use their so-called art to defame 

and hurt other people. 

 

Mr. Lefler and your Arts Board are hiding behind freedom of 

expression the same way Ernst Zundel hides behind freedom of 

speech.  The fact is, freedom of expression does not give you 

the right to hurt other people. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan understands this and the 

people of Saskatchewan understand this as well.  Everyone 

seems to understand it except the Arts Board and your 

government. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you take some responsibility and 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

ensure that taxpayers' money is not used to fund this type of 

defamatory and offensive material. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

absence of the minister, I'll take notice of this question as well. 

 

Proposed Gun Control Legislation 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, last weekend the Prime 

Minister announced that his government will be bringing in 

more restrictive gun laws this fall.  And once again the federal 

government appears to be developing a Canadian-wide 

response to a problem that exists mainly in major urban centres 

like Toronto and Montreal; and there are thousands of 

responsible gun owners in this province who may end up 

suffering as a result. 

 

Mr. Minister, this legislature recently passed a resolution 

calling on the federal government to consult thoroughly with all 

provinces before any new gun control laws are introduced.  

Have you followed up on that resolution, Mr. Minister?  What 

contact have you had with the federal Minister of Justice about 

this matter?  And what assurances can you give us that the new 

federal gun laws will not put unwarranted restrictions on 

thousands of responsible gun users in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I sincerely thank the 

member for that question.  We've just come through the 

implementation of the last round of federal gun control 

legislation and it was quite an experience.  The legislation was 

clearly drafted for problems other than those that exist in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And it was very difficult to make 

the federal legislation fit the Saskatchewan situation.  We went 

as far as we could in implementing the legislation, but even so 

it was an awkward piece of legislation for Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

I've written to Mr. Rock asking that this time there be full 

consultation on this legislation before it's implemented in 

Saskatchewan.  He's undertaken to me that there will be such 

consultation, and we'll try to deal with it in a more appropriate 

way this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Construction of Bridge at Cumberland House 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to inform the House about a very important and historic 

announcement that was made this morning in Cumberland 

House. 

 

I, and the Minister of Highways and Transportation, and the 

Associate Minister of Education, had the honour of 

participating in the announcement of the construction of the 

Cumberland House bridge under 

the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program.  The 

cost of the bridge is estimated to be $6 million.  The cost of this 

project will be shared equally by the federal government, the 

provincial government, and the Cumberland House 

Development Corporation who will contribute up to $2 million. 

 

I want to at this time, Mr. Speaker, thank Mayor Harold 

Carriere and Chief Pierre Settee for their dedication to this 

project, and I want to say that their leadership and their work 

with the government and their local MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) played a very important role in this 

important decision. 

 

Bridge, environment, geo-technical, and design work will start 

immediately.  The actual construction activity of the bridge 

approaches and the connecting roads will begin in 1995 and 

should be completed by late 1995 or early 1996. 

 

The announcement of the bridge was very welcome news to the 

residents of Cumberland House.  This project will provide the 

community with a dependable, year-round road link and 

essentially makes Cumberland House a part of Saskatchewan.  

The bridge will lower personal transportation costs and travel 

time, and generally make travel easier.  Year-round access to 

supplies essential for daily living will also relieve some of the 

financial burden of isolation that some residents have felt. 

 

The Cumberland House bridge should also increase 

opportunities for economic development in the community.  

Cumberland House is the oldest community in Saskatchewan.  

As such, it has considerable tourism potential.  Year-round 

access will help develop that potential; hunting and guiding 

opportunities may also be increased. 

 

There will also be other important economic benefits related to 

the planning and the construction of the bridge, Mr. Speaker.  

Not only will local residents have an opportunity for jobs and 

pay cheques, but they will be able to obtain on-the-job training 

and experience, the kind of lifelong job skills that can be 

applied to other opportunities in related fields. 

 

Northern firms and businesses should also see a significant 

increase in their activity.  As a way of ensuring that the 

economic benefits of the infrastructure works program are felt 

in the North, we are encouraging northern sourcing of 

contractors, materials, and services for the Cumberland House 

bridge project wherever possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is confident 

that the Cumberland House bridge project will improve the 

quality of life for northern families, help build the North, and in 

doing so, help fuel Saskatchewan economic recovery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd like 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

to thank the minister for having the text sent across.  Most of 

all I think I would like to offer my congratulations to the people 

of Cumberland House who obviously have been looking for 

this project for a very long time.  And it was only a short time 

ago that we saw the former mayor trek all the way from 

Cumberland House to Regina here with a cross on his shoulder 

to get the point across to people in public places that 

Cumberland House deserves some attention.  So I join with the 

Deputy Premier in congratulating those people. 

 

I hope that as this project goes along that it doesn't have the 

same criteria attached to it that the Melfort water pipeline did.  

It's one thing for us to have a water pipeline that leaks, but to 

have a bridge that won't stand up would be too bad.  And I say 

to the government opposite, if you apply the same criteria and 

principles, we'll have trouble, and the people of Cumberland 

House will still be on an island. 

 

So please do it properly this time and let Northern people direct 

some of the traffic up there and I'm sure we'll have a very fine 

bridge that we can all use in the future, and the people of 

Cumberland House, after 300 years, can finally join the 

mainstream of Saskatchewan society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to congratulate Cumberland House today on this 

very, very exciting endeavour. 

 

I think perhaps that there are individuals both past and present 

that deserve some recognition.  And credit must be given to the 

many, many people who have kept this issue at the forefront for 

such a long time. 

 

A past mayor of Cumberland House, Lennard Morin, who 

actually represented our party in the last election, did see this as 

probably one of the most important issues that his people faced 

in Cumberland constituency.  And what he did do, as 

acknowledged by the Leader of the Official Opposition, was to 

carry a cross from Cumberland House to Regina, in order to 

raise this issue before the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I also think that it is significant and deserves some recognition 

that the new Member of Parliament representing that part of the 

province, Mr. Gordon Kirkby, as well was very, very intimately 

involved.  And this is one of the things that Gordon Kirkby had 

indicated that he would take as an issue to the Ottawa 

government. 

 

I do think that it can't go unnoticed that it was the federal 

infrastructure program that was able to bring forward many, 

many of these dollars.  So as much as that may be skirted over 

by the province of Saskatchewan, I don't think that it goes 

unnoticed by the people of Saskatchewan and particularly the 

people from Cumberland House. 

 

We are very, very pleased that this is finally going to be 

available to them.  It'll make for a much safer and 

more comfortable existence for all the people of Cumberland 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we go on to the next question, I do 

want to remind members that the ministerial statements should 

be non-partisan as I think they were today.  And the responses 

also . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I said non-partisan.  The 

ministerial statement was non-partisan.  And the response to 

that should also be non-partisan, and I think some of them were 

on the realm of being political, and members should take note 

of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, could I have leave of the 

Assembly to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are four 

people who are representative of the Cryout for the Children 

organization.  And the member from Rosthern I understand 

tabled a petition from that organization earlier today. 

 

I and the member from Saskatoon Wildwood had the pleasure 

of spending approximately 80, 85 minutes at a meeting with the 

four people who I'm about to introduce today, and we had an 

excellent meeting.  We share a deep commitment to the plight 

of children who are the subject of abuse and we had a most 

productive discussion along the lines of what can be done and 

how we can work together in the future to resolve some of 

those problems. 

 

So I will introduce them, Mr. Speaker.  Carol Dalton -- I'll have 

Carol just stand up so that the Assembly will see her -- Linda 

Guenther; Debbie Hills, and John Guenther. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would my colleagues in the legislature welcome 

these guests today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, I would like to join with the Minister of 

Justice in welcoming these people to the legislature.  I have 

been working with them for the last couple of months and I 

have been extremely impressed with their compassionate 

dedication and their desire to see real and meaningful social 

change in the area of social justice -- childhood sexual abuse.  

Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

my colleagues across the way in welcoming Linda, Debbie, 

Carol and John here.  I had the opportunity to introduce them a 

few weeks ago.  And I also share the member of Wildwood's 

concern that 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

we know that there are a lot of problems that these people are 

putting an extremely great deal of time, personal effort and 

energy into trying to address. 

 

I'm very pleased that they were able to meet with the Minister 

of Justice.  I hold the right to reserve judgement on the results 

of that meeting.  I don't gush with the enthusiasm at the time 

that the minister does, but I'm sure that his words will be 

reinforced once I've had a chat with these folks up here. 

 

And I'm very glad, Mr. Speaker, to be able to say to them, 

welcome here and I hope that we have results for what you are 

intending.  And thank you for your work. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I would like to request of members that I 

could revert back to routine proceedings.  I skipped over one 

particular item, introduction of bills. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act (No. 6) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I move 

that a Bill to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act (No. 6) be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to question 

no. 60, I hereby table the response. 

 

The Speaker: -- The answer for no. 60 has been tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Goulet that Bill No. 56 -- An Act to 

amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it's been a while since we debated this particular Bill 

before the House, and it seems that some things have changed 

since then. 

 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) did a 

study which showed that 40 to 45 per cent of the people at that 

time were in favour of no-fault insurance as outlined by the 

government.  But I strongly suspect, based on the number of 

letters to the editor in various newspapers across this province, 

that that number is dropping.  The phone calls I receive in my 

office are not supportive whatsoever of no-fault insurance. 

 

I shouldn't say that -- I did receive one phone call from one 

person who felt that some changes to the insurance was needed.  

His particular concern was the legal fees that were being asked 

for by the lawyers.  But even he, Mr. Speaker, was not totally 

enamoured with it, although he felt that there was some value 

with the changes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that was the only individual who called my 

office supporting.  All others have been opposed to this.  And 

more and more people in the public, as they phone or as you 

run into them in our daily business, are opposed to this 

particular form of taxation, because that is indeed what it is, 

because it limits the amount of monies being paid out to 

victims while the rates remain the same, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I received a very interesting letter in the mail, dated May 10, 

from a Robert L. Stevenson of Saskatoon.  And Mr. 

Stevenson's letter is very good, Mr. Speaker, very good indeed, 

because he goes through it and outlines the major problems, as 

he sees them, in no-fault insurance. 

 

The major problems, as he sees them, are also the problems that 

everyone else is witnessing in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

And the reasons, the explanations for these problems, are the 

things that the minister must take a look at and must fix.  And 

that's part of what the minister is trying to avoid doing in not 

appearing in the public and debating this issue. 

 

And more and more groups are calling for that kind of debate 

to take place, Mr. Speaker.  The consumers association of 

Saskatchewan is calling for it, and the legal profession is 

calling for it, the public is calling for it, and yet the minister 

resists because he knows that to go before the public on this 

issue will expose the flaws, the very serious flaws, in no-fault 

insurance. 

 

And I'd like to read Mr. Stevenson's letter into the record, Mr. 

Speaker, because it does a very good job at outlining all of the 

errors in this particular piece of legislation.  The letter is 

addressed to Mr. Premier and members of the Legislative 

Assembly.  It says: 

 

 No-fault insurance Bill 56 is proceeding rapidly through the 

legislature, and if passed, will radically change the legal 

rights of accident victims in our province.  SGI is currently 

sponsoring an advertising campaign in support of alleged 

improvements and benefits.  The public will realize that 

advertising slogans are just that, no more, no less.  Their 

decision about such an important measure must be one that is 

informed and based on facts. 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

 Now that it is finally possible to see Bill 56, after months of 

secretive, behind closed doors lobbying by SGI and 

manoeuvering with your government, lawyers are forced to 

say to the public: "BUYER BEWARE".  There are four basic 

and important issues for (the) public (to consider) . . . 

 

 ISSUE 1: WHAT WILL BE THE CHANGES IN 

INSURANCE COVERAGE IF PROPOSED NO-FAULT 

BILL 56 BECOMES LAW? 

 

 Basically, insurance is supposed to be about spreading risk.  

Risk means the possibility that on a given day one may be 

involved in an accident in which they risk losing their car, 

their health, even their life.  Everyday we are all at risk of 

losing something of benefit, known in insurance jargon as 

"loss".  The question is: "Who must bear the burden of loss;  

who has to pay?" 

 

And I'll repeat that, Mr. Speaker.  "Who must bear the burden 

of loss;  who has to pay?" 

 

 Normally, without insurance, the law stays with the victim.  

However, when one purchases insurance, in exchange for the 

premium, the insurance company agrees to accept the risk of 

loss within the subject matter of the auto insurance policy.  

The key issue then is the extent of coverage. 

 

 Bill 56 and as yet unpublished regulations will state the 

extent of coverage.  Significantly, they will not state 

exclusions. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, as in many other pieces of legislation 

before this Assembly, the concern here, as expressed by Mr. 

Stevenson, is more than just the actual piece of legislation but 

how regulations will become a part of this Act and how they 

will be implemented; what will be covered and what will not be 

covered.  What will be excluded?  What is the small, fine print 

on the back of this contract, Mr. Speaker, that people have to be 

afraid of? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Stevenson goes on to say: 

 

 Significantly, they will not state exclusions.  Exclusions are 

matters specifically not included in coverage.  Although 

excluded, they will be very real losses to the victim and for 

this reason everyone needs to look beyond SGI's no-fault 

insurance proposal if they are to truly understand exactly 

what areas are specifically not covered by the scheme.  In 

other words, what no-fault Bill 56 does not cover is just as 

important as what it does cover. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll repeat that: "In other words, what no-fault Bill 

56 does cover is just as important as what it does not cover." 

 

Carry on with the letter: 

Where an exclusion exists there is no protection afforded by 

no-fault insurance.  Further, it will not be possible to 

purchase coverage separately as a rider or endorsement in 

most circumstances even though the basic premium has been 

paid.  Escaping the no-fault system will be virtually 

impossible. 

 

 SGI's publicity alleges that the new no-fault plan will mean 

improved benefits for everyone.  However, scrutiny of Bill 56 

reveals the truth to be the very opposite: 

 

 1. There is no compensation for pain and suffering, including 

chronic pain, loss of amenities, or loss of 

expectation of life in most circumstances; 

 

 2. There is no compensation for pain and suffering where 

there is non-permanent partial or total disability; 

 

 3. There is drastically reduced compensation based on flat 

rates for permanent partial or total impairment; 

 

 4. There is under compensation for lost wages; 

 

 5. There is no assured compensation for rehabilitation and 

other expenses; 

 

 6. There is no lump sum compensation to long-term 

disability victims for future lost earnings capacity or 

future costs of care in most circumstances. 

 

 When SGI advertises that current program benefits are 

inadequate, they offer partial truth in the place of the whole 

truth.  In fact, they are referring to present no-fault benefits 

which we may all agree are inadequate.  But this is only part, 

and a very small part, of the coverage story.  What about 

public liability protection, based on plate insurance, which 

provides coverage up to $200,000 and which has actually 

fairly compensated the great majority of injury claims?  What 

about extension insurance which provides coverage up to 

$2,000,000 for severe and catastrophic injuries?  This 

information does not appear in SGI's advertising nor does it 

acknowledge that the SEF 44 family protection endorsement 

which provides coverage up to $2,000,000 against the risk of 

personal injury or death caused by an under-insured motorist, 

now forms part of nearly all automobile insurance policies 

issued in Canada! 

 

 If no-fault Bill 56 becomes law, current extension insurance 

coverage of $2,000,000 including the SEF 44 family 

protection endorsement will be of no help to Saskatchewan 

accident victims in most circumstances.  The no-fault scheme 

retains the accident victim's legal right to bring a law suit 

under traditional principles of tort law only in 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

strictly limited cases.  The threshold requirements, necessary 

to trigger extension insurance coverage, are astronomical and 

mean that SGI will keep virtual control of all cases under the 

no-fault category. 

 

 The public needs to know, but the straight story is not being 

told, that no-fault Bill 56 will actually seriously reduce 

coverage and restrict benefits for Saskatchewan residents.  

No fault Bill 56 will mean that innocent victims of accidents 

and their families will be forced to pay for the wrongdoing of 

those who have caused the accidents.  It is true that unsafe 

drivers will benefit through SGI's proposed no-fault scheme, 

but in doing so, it will penalize safe drivers.  Why should 

innocent accident victims give up compensation for severe 

pain and suffering in order to fatten SGI's coffers?  Why 

should innocent accident victims give up compensation 

awards in order to subsidize an enlarged insurance 

bureaucracy?  Why should innocent accident victims who 

have permanent partial or total disability be subjected to the 

uncertainties of benefits decided by SGI, paid every 2 weeks, 

coupled with never ending surveillance and scrutiny? 

 

Fairly indicting   It indicates, Mr. Speaker, that there are a lot 

of serious problems with the no-fault insurance on that first 

item, Mr. Speaker, items that need to be carefully considered 

by the general public before they make up their mind as to 

whether or not SGI's no-fault insurance scheme has any benefit. 

 

And when the public is prepared to make up their mind, Mr. 

Speaker, they need an avenue available to them in which to 

express that.  And the government's 1-800 number, Mr. 

Speaker, is definitely not the avenue by which the public can 

properly express themselves.  That can only happen, Mr. 

Speaker, through public debate. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Stevenson's second item from his letter, and it 

reads: 

 

 WHAT IS A REASONABLE PRICE FOR THE REDUCED 

COVERAGE OF SGI'S PROPOSED NO-FAULT PLAN IF 

IT BECOMES LAW? 

 

 No-fault will mean significantly reduced insurance coverage 

and restricted benefits for Saskatchewan residents but there 

will be no corresponding reduction in premiums.  SGI's 

publicity states: "No rate increases in 1994 and probably none 

in 1995".  Rate increases? For reduced coverage and 

benefits?  How can this be?  The explanation is that in order 

to achieve seriously reduced compensation for Saskatchewan 

accident victims, SGI will deploy an enormous bureaucracy 

to "look after" the claims, to "advise" on them, and to 

"determine" them.  For the seriously injured and disabled, 

this process will not end until 

 they die which will mean years and years of administration.  

Such an "enhanced" bureaucracy will not come without a 

substantial overhead cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to agree with Mr. Stevenson in this 

concern that under no-fault insurance we will have an 

ever-growing bureaucracy, somewhat like Topsy, Mr. Speaker, 

that will grow without control. 

 

SGI bureaucracy is already fairly large, is already fairly 

cumbersome, and goes in its own direction, Mr. Speaker, 

without considering the benefits of its clients, of those who pay 

the premiums, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I carry on with the letter, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 In fact, a study of no-fault plans in other jurisdictions show 

that they characteristically involve increased premiums.  

Quebec, which has a no-fault system since the late '70s, has 

amongst the highest premiums in all of Canada.  Under 

no-fault, Quebec drivers have been penalized by their 

insurance companies with premium increases even when they 

have not been at fault in an accident.  Premium increases 

have ranged from 15% to 25% and in extreme cases almost 

167%. 

 

And Mr. Stevenson takes that information from a Globe and 

Mail article of March 25, 1994. 

 

 In the United States, four jurisdictions which experimented 

with no-fault insurance, discontinued because of premium 

increases.  Under no-fault, Saskatchewan drivers face not 

only reduced benefits but seriously increased premiums.  The 

public will realize the delay in premium increases of up to 2 

years merely coincides with the timing of the next provincial 

election. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Stevenson has hit on a very 

important point there, that yes indeed, premiums may remain 

relatively stable over the next two years but will start to 

increase after that point.  And the reason this is being brought 

in now is that it will be approximately two years, as one of the 

back-bench members told us the other night, probably 1996, for 

the next provincial election, so increases would hit somewhat 

after that, Mr. Speaker, not before. 

 

No. 3: 

 

WILL THE CLAIMS PROCESS UNDER THE NEW PLAN 

BE FAIR AND RESPONSIVE IF NO-FAULT BECOMES 

LAW? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this will be again another serious problem. 

 

 SGI's publicity states: "Victims will automatically receive 

compensation . . . " The word "automatic" has a dictionary 

meaning which includes " . . . something mechanical . . . not 

characterized by active intelligence". 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that could be applied to a number of other 

items in this government's particular operation. 

 

 In truth, examination of no-fault Bill 56 reveals the claims 

process will be neither fair nor responsive.  The potential for 

conflict between SGI and accident victims is due to the fact 

that they have opposite interests.  SGI will maximize its 

control and minimize benefits, which is really what no-fault 

is about.  For that purpose, it employs and no doubt will 

continue to employ, even more adjusters, lawyers, mediators, 

claim managers and so on and has the resources of the 

government itself behind it. 

 

 What about the injured accident victims?  They must cope 

with serious injuries and their effects.  Few, if any, know 

anything about claims procedures or legal rights.  Until now, 

only lawyers have stood (against) . . . SGI with all its 

resources and the injured accident victim.  Accident victims 

have thus had the benefit of the lawyer's knowledge, training 

and experience in handling the personal injury claim both in 

direct negotiations and, if necessary, in court.  However, 

under SGI's no-fault Bill 56, the vast majority of accident 

victims will no longer be able to afford legal representation.  

The new legislation actually contemplates SGI assuming the 

role of legal advisor to the victims! 

 

Sort of advising the victim against yourself, Mr. Speaker.  I 

hardly think that SGI is going to be providing substantial 

advice to the victim of an accident that they should proceed 

against SGI when it would be against SGI's best interests to do 

so. 

 

 SGI is empowered by the legislation to determine matters 

such as rehabilitation, income replacement benefits, 

employment, death benefits, percentage of impairment, etc.  

The probability of conflict of interest on any one or all of 

these issues about which it is purported the insurer will 

advise on and determine for the insured will be obvious to 

most.  "Don't worry", says the fox, "I will look after the 

chickens!" 

 

 Occupations which are professions such as law have legal 

duties of care to the client which, if breached, and loss or 

damage is suffered by the client, means liability to 

compensate for such loss or damage. In other words, if the 

client suffers loss or damage because of professional 

negligence whether it is a lawyer, doctor, architect, engineer 

or accountant, there is protection for the public as an integral 

part of the professional responsibility.  Under SGI's proposed 

no-fault Bill 56, although SGI will be constituted the accident 

victim's supposed legal advisor, and, worse, the judge of 

benefits, it will have absolutely no liability for any loss or 

damage it may cause to an accident victim as a  

result of mishandling of a claim.  On the contrary, no-fault 

Bill 56 gives SGI or any director, officer, employee or agent 

of SGI, legal immunity from any such claim.  It is 

unacceptable that SGI purports to take direct responsibility 

for accident victims, without the accident victim having the 

protection of independent legal counsel and free access to the 

courts.  It is unconscionable that SGI should not be 

accountable in cases where it causes loss or damage in its 

direct dealings with accident victims.  Why should it not be 

compellable in a court of law to compensate its victims for 

wrongdoing? 

 

 It is an underlying principle of our legal system that those 

who advise and those who judge should be impartial and 

appear to be so.  Under the existing automobile insurance 

system, SGI's authority with respect to claims extends only to 

negotiating and settling them.  It certainly does not have the 

legal power to determine them, and if a settlement cannot be 

arrived at, it is an independent, impartial court which 

determines them.  Can any claims process which constitutes 

the insurer, the advisor and the adjudicator, one and the same, 

be fair and responsive?  No-fault will constitute SGI an 

unaccountable, all powerful bureaucracy which ignores legal 

traditions and safeguards.  In this respect, SGI will resemble 

if not rival the bureaucracies of the Workers' Compensation 

Board and the Tax Offices. 

 

 SGI's publicity in support of the new plan alleges that it 

offers an independent appeal process provided through the 

courts.  What could be more fair?  The truth is that SGI's 

appeal process will be for the vast majority a complete 

illusion.  There is more than one way to take away an 

accident victim's right to sue.  One is to make the appeal 

process uneconomic for the accident victim.  Under no-fault, 

there will be no lump sum settlements which means there is 

no basis for the lawyer's fee to be assessed on a contingency 

fee basis.  Instead, the accident victim will have to pay the 

lawyer a fee based on standard hourly rates.  This will mean 

that SGI will be able to bankrupt the accident victim by 

having their lawyers drag their feet to force the victim to 

incur excessive fees.  Contingency fees which are attacked by 

the insurance industry and other business groups notably the 

media, are far from being a problem for the client.  In fact, 

contingency fees have allowed the accident victim to have a 

fighting chance against powerful and rich insurance 

companies.  No wonder the insurance industry, SGI included, 

is trying to eliminate contingency fees because it means they 

can deal with the accident victim without the person having 

effective legal representation to protect their rights. 

 

 Under no-fault, benefits are typically limited and paid every 

two weeks.  The amount in issue 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

 will be consequently small.  Furthermore, as previously 

noted, SGI will be empowered to "determine" numerous 

issues, such as rehabilitation, income replacement benefits, 

employment, death benefits, percentage of impairment, and 

so on.  Any one of these issues is subject to the following 

legal obstacles. 

 

 1. When SGI determines a claim for such a benefit, the 

legislation states that it is final; 

 2. However, the victim has 60 days to apply in writing for a 

review; 

 3. After review, if SGI has not changed its final 

determination, the victim has 30 days to request 

mediation in which case the victim must pay the 

insurer a fee (and in this case, Mr. Speaker, the 

insurer is SGI); 

 4. After mediation, the victim may then appeal to the Court 

which must be within 90 days after the insurer has 

reviewed its determination; 

 5. On an appeal, the court must adopt SGI's findings of fact 

unless the victim puts them in issue; 

 6. Within 30 days of the court's decision, the insurer or the 

victim may appeal to the Court of Appeal. 

 

 How many accident victims will be able to afford legal 

representations at standard hourly rates through such a 

process?  How many will successfully overcome the issues 

raised by SGI without the help of legal counsel in such a 

process? 

 

 The so-called "independent appeal process" is in fact 

modelled in part on a procedure found in The Small Claims 

Act which in itself should ring alarm bells as far as the type 

of compensation to be expected is concerned.  The procedure 

will be so cumbersome and so uneconomic for the vast 

majority of accident victims, that it will prove to be a sham. 

 

 The legislation also creates inequities between different 

classes of claimants.  For accident victims with earnings 

more than $50,000 per year, or rehabilitation and other 

expenses more than 500,000, there is the possibility of 

pursuing regular court action but only for the excess amount.  

In the result, there is a statistically remote potential liability 

for Saskatchewan residents which will mean continuation of 

package policies, continued premium earnings for SGI, but 

without the coverage and benefits for the great majority of 

Saskatchewan residents who may sustain serious but not 

catastrophic injuries in motor vehicle accidents. 

 

 ISSUE 4: THE NEED FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS 

 

 The public does not realize that "no-fault" has seriously 

different, even opposite meanings depending on who is using 

the terminology.  The theory of no-fault -- to compensate 

anyone who is injured without assessing blame for the cause 

of the injury -- sounds good.  But in practice, when insurance 

companies use no-fault, it means inadequate coverage, 

reduced compensation, increased premiums, and a claims 

process which is neither fair nor responsive to the needs of 

the accident victim.  In certain important respects, no-fault 

Bill 56 adopts the worst of no-fault provisions as compared to 

other jurisdictions.  This is seen, for example, in its proposal 

to assume control over the accident victim's rehabilitation but 

with a cap to the total maximum amount of benefits of 

$500,000, as compared to jurisdictions where there's no 

limitation on the grounds of benefits payable for medical and 

rehabilitation costs.  Under no-fault Bill 56, victims who 

sustain catastrophic injuries such as quadriplegia, will find 

the coverage inadequate, about 25 per cent of what is needed, 

based on court assessments.  The extremely high monetary 

thresholds, coupled with the legal requirements of proving 

fault will mean that most if not all seriously injured people 

will not be able to obtain (the) compensation they need. 

 

(1445) 

 

 From SGI's perspective, the real agenda is power, its purpose 

to have total control over the automobile accident insurance 

business from the determination of premiums to the 

determination of benefits.  Lord Acton's dictum serves as a 

warning: "Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power 

corrupts absolutely."  From the government's perspective, the 

only analysis appears to be the economic analysis.  The 

essential element missing from the no-fault proposal is 

justice.  The omission is one which reflects the absence of 

thinking or even awareness about distributive justice which is 

at the heart of personal injury compensation law.  Those who 

analyse everything in terms of economics are frequently 

reluctant and unwilling to commit themselves to this type of 

thinking because for them justice is a notion that defies 

scientific analysis -- it can't be counted, or weighed, or 

measured.  Consequently elements such as pain and suffering 

are rejected.  Such a materialistic approach will create 

problems not solve them, in the face of human suffering. 

 

 The need for public hearings to ensure that everyone is 

properly informed regarding this important issue before 

no-fault Bill 56 becomes law, is imperative and urgent.  Who 

is there knowledgeable enough about the present personal 

injury compensation system, besides the legal profession, to 

say objectively whether or not SGI's new plan is what it 

claims to be?  How many people are familiar with the basic 

principles governing the award of damages for personal 

injuries and death in the tort system?  How many are familiar 

with the actual heads of 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

damage?  How many understand how the present value of 

future economic loss such as income or cost of care are 

determined in settlements in court cases?  How many know 

about the legal limit which has been imposed on 

non-pecuniary damages?  How many know the efforts taken 

by the courts including the Saskatchewan Court of Appeals 

and (the) Supreme Court of Canada, to ensure a rational and 

yet compassionate legal system, one that will not follow the 

extravagant example of our American counterparts?  How 

many are familiar with the actual settlements and damage 

awards to know whether or not they are fair and reasonable?  

If the average citizen is not informed on these basic matters, 

how can they possibly know whether or not no-fault will be 

beneficial as advertised or dangerous to the public interest? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Stevenson has an excellent letter here.  I 

know that he has sent it to the government.  I would sincerely 

hope that the minister and the Premier have taken this letter 

into consideration. 

 

I would like to read the last paragraph of this letter: 

 

 You are urged therefore, together with all MLAs, to 

immediately stop the passage of no-fault Bill 56 in the 

legislature in order to allow careful study and scrutiny of the 

proposed legislation.  Elected members will be wise, 

considering the seriousness of this matter, to distance 

themselves from SGI's "play to win" methods which depend 

for their success on the denial of proper public consultation 

including consultation with the legal and other concerned 

professions, and the suppression of public hearings. 

 

 Any legislator who does any less will do a great disservice to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

 Yours truly, Robert L. Stevenson. 

 

This letter outlines the vast majority of problems with the 

no-fault insurance scheme that the minister has proposed.  Mr. 

Speaker, we will have opportunities later to go through the 

various aspects in much greater detail and I will leave the rest 

of my comments until that time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I looked forward 

anxiously to an opportunity to contribute to the debate on this 

issue.  It won't take me very long to put my two bits worth in, 

but I think it's important to note a couple of things, and to let 

my constituents know where we stand on this Bill. 

 

The no-fault insurance Bill, Mr. Speaker, really is: it's not my 

fault that you need money Bill, but you do need the money so 

where do we get it.  That's what the Bill really says.  If we don't 

get it through the premium system of the insurance program, 

then even though it 

was your fault that you caused the accident, you're hurt and you 

have to go into the medical system, you need to replace a truck, 

or a car, or something, you have a financial loss and there's a 

burden on yourself that you can't pay. 

 

And society in Saskatchewan has always said we help those 

that can't help themselves, so we are all obligated somehow to 

help this poor fellow out, whoever he happens to be, or she.  

And the reality is that then do we put them on the welfare 

system and cause the taxpayers to have to pay the bill?  And 

we've shook our heads and said, no, the taxpayer can't afford to 

pay any more; we've got too many people on welfare already; 

we've got to have this all paid through the insurance system. 

 

And we went through some of these problems with SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) back in 

those days when I was a reeve, Mr. Speaker.  We found 

ourselves facing some real questions.  We found ourselves 

facing the questions of, why do premiums get so high -- and we 

had to identify that -- and how do your control those 

premiums?  And that was the important thing because 

unfortunately, if premiums get too high, then the insurance 

system itself collapses because people simply can't afford to 

pay the premiums and they don't buy the insurance to cover 

themselves no matter what the risk is.  And the system will fail. 

 

So you have to somehow control the pay-out for insurance to 

the extent that people can still afford to pay the premiums.  So 

it is a very complicated issue.  There's very many sides to this 

argument.  Unfortunately, through the research that I've done, 

the little bit of it that I've had time to do, I find that it's nothing 

new to have no-fault insurance in North America and in the 

free world.  It's been done in other jurisdictions. 

 

And what this government should have done, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker, is take a look at what has happened a little more 

closely in those jurisdictions.  Because what has happened is 

that when they went to a Bill in legislation that got as severe as 

this Bill is, they found that it caused an automatic failure of the 

system and they had to back up in a short period of time and 

rewrite the Bill and come up with another idea that was a little 

more moderate. 

 

In other words, the government is trying an overkill with this 

Bill, that has proven already not to work in other jurisdictions.  

Can't say that you are absolutely wrong in trying to solve these 

problems, but we've already got evidence that an overkill of 

trying to solve these problems will kill the workability of the 

legislation itself and you will end up having to come back to 

the drawing table and do it over again. 

 

And what we are saying is, as I hope a responsible opposition 

should, is that you should take a look at what will work.  And 

there are some workable plans in other jurisdictions that are 

getting closer to that centre of workability and you should work 

on trying to find those out.  Hire some university kids and send 

them 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

into that research program to find out what's going on. 

 

I know you're not going to let this Bill go; you couldn't do that; 

you have to save face and ram it through.  But we know you're 

coming back with it, absolutely, so we're saying to you right 

away, get some kids out of the university that are bright and 

young, and have them research what needs to be done to fix 

this thing. Because you're going to be back with it in a year or 

two anyway; so you might just as well start on it now. 

 

We find ourselves, Mr. Speaker, in a situation where once 

again we're asking the government to use a little common sense 

in trying to balance things between all of the factions that are 

involved.  And that's simply what I am saying. 

 

And there are so many questions that I don't understand about 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that I feel that it is really important that 

we get into a question and answer process with the minister so 

that we can ask him what is really his intention of the law, not 

simply what we would read out of it.  Because the intent of the 

law here may be as important as what we would read the words 

to say, because it's very confusing. 

 

And so with that, I think it's important that we get on . . . it is 

important I think that we get on into committee so that we can 

ask these questions.  So with that I'll thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

for the Assembly's time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 64 -- An Act to 

amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand after 

perusal of this Bill that the legislation will provide for the 

adoption of a concept of regional directors for the credit unions.  

I am sure this is a welcome change especially since presently 

director nominations are sought at the branch level and the 

names are taken to the annual meeting of the credit union for 

consideration.  The changes will allow credit unions to be 

elected at their annual meeting of members.  I'm sure this will 

simplify the process involved. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, the Bill contains a number of so-called 

housekeeping changes which will correct statutory references 

and allow for service of documents by certified mail or priority 

courier. 

 

Considering the way financial institutions must keep up with 

the '90s and beyond, I'm sure these adjustments are welcomed 

by all.  And considering this, we don't find the Bill 

controversial and, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to let the Bill 

move into Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

just want to say a few words in support of the Bill as well.  

With the many years that I've been involved in the credit union 

system, the old Bill and Act was certainly one that proved to be 

very cumbersome with the branches and the credit unions that 

we had in Saskatchewan. 

 

It certainly will ensure that the branch has regional 

representation on the board of directors.  The last credit union 

that I worked for in Meadow Lake, the nominations were 

sought from outside the main branch credit union and the 

branch. And certainly the local folks there did not feel that they 

had representation, or fair representation from their community 

when in fact those members had to be then officially re-elected 

at the main annual meeting in Meadow Lake.  So all they really 

had in effect was a nomination at their local area at the branch 

level.  I know this will be met by much support by the small 

branch credit unions in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think I simply want to conclude on that and leave it at that, 

and say that the Bill certainly cleans up a lot of the areas within 

Saskatchewan that were having difficulty with this.  And I 

know many of my colleagues will be happy to see that this has 

been changed as well.  So I encourage all members to support 

the amendment that's being put forth today.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It has been 

discussed earlier that I ask for leave to introduce a Bill from the 

Public Accounts Committee dealing with The Provincial 

Auditor Act.  And the amendments have been circulated briefly 

with the members of the committee and with the Government 

House Leader, and therefore I ask leave of the Assembly to 

introduce the Bill. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that a Bill to 

amend The Provincial Auditor Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

65 -- An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act and to 

enact a Consequential Amendment to The Forest Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  This Act 

to amend The Natural Resources Act and the Consequential 

Amendments to The Forest Act, I've read the Bill in its entirety 

very carefully, all two and a half pages of it, and I concur with 

the minister when in his second reading speech, he makes the 

comment that the amendments are essentially of a 

housekeeping nature. 

 

However that does not mean that I do not have some questions 

that I would like to ask him.  And to facilitate matters, Mr. 

Speaker, what I am going to do now is just suggest that we will 

allow this Bill to go into committee, and when this is done, that 

we could go into Committee of the Whole later this day and 

perhaps wind up this Bill this afternoon yet. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

and to enact a Consequential Amendment to The Forest 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the minister to introduce 

the official who has joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have with 

with me Mr. Michael Shaw, the deputy minister of the 

Department of Environment and Resource Management; 

joining us in a minute will be Mr. Les Cooke, associate deputy 

minister. 

 

And we appreciate the speed with which the opposition is 

facilitating this Bill, but they're calling some additional 

officials in the event that there are some questions here that go 

beyond the functional knowledge of either of the two officials 

that are here.  So we'll answer as we can.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

would not want you to get the wrong impression that the speed 

and alacrity with which we are proceeding is going to set the 

precedents that are necessarily going to be repeated all that 

often. 

 

Mr. Minister, I recognize that the forest renewal and 

development fund was set up to collect that softwood lumber 

export fee that the federal government was basically mandated 

to do and had to do.  And now that that has been resolved, that 

issue, you are in essence repealing that section of the Act that 

set it up. 

 

Now if you could concur on that, then I would have a following 

question and that is this: how much revenue was collected 

pursuant to the implementation of that 

requirement, and what happened subsequently to those sums of 

monies that were collected? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, the question the 

member opposite asks is correct, that actually the Bill is being 

repealed.  The officials don't have the exact number that was 

collected, but when we get into estimates later on, they'll be 

able to provide that information, if that's okay with the member 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I think that will be all right, Mr. Minister.  I 

have a kind of a vested interest in asking that question because 

our industry is also subject to some of those countervailing 

measures that we have been paying over the numbers of years, 

and so I have some empathy with the softwood industry . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I hope so; I hope we will be 

getting some of that money back, pursuant of course to the free 

trade arrangement and the dispute settlement mechanism that 

has been in place -- and only because of that, actually. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, another question that I would have is this, 

that there's a consequential amendment to The Forest Act to 

allow management of forest renewal funds, it says, in instances 

where no forest management agreement is in place.  I'm just 

wondering, can you give me an example of an area in 

Saskatchewan of this, and what kind of money are we talking 

about for this forest renewal project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite knows some of this, but for those who are watching I 

just want to outline briefly the nature of the organization of the 

forestry industry. 

 

There are several forest management licence agreements in 

Saskatchewan that cover significant blocks of Saskatchewan 

forest land, but there are also significant blocks of 

Saskatchewan forest land which are not within a forest 

management licence agreement. And in those areas cutting is 

permitted by permits, and fees then are charged on the basis of 

those cuts, and they don't have a forest renewal fund within an 

FMLA (Forest Management Licence Agreement) from which 

to function. So this then provides for a similar collection 

system for those funds so they can be used in the reforestation 

activity to maintain a sustainable forest. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- One thing I noticed when I was going through 

it is that a red flag was raised when you make the suggestion 

that these amendments are going to help ensure the financial 

accountability and contribute to the effective and efficient 

government operation.  And so we're talking about money and 

that usually means that there's going to be a transfer of money 

from this bin into that bin, and all the machinations that 

governments do, as they organize and reorganize departments 

and areas within these departments. 

 

The one thing that caught my attention is that one of these 

amendments is going to allow contractual services to be 

provided to other jurisdictions.  That means to me that you're 

going to contract certain 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

expenses, certain procedures, certain operations within this 

branch to other jurisdictions out of province or private 

businesses.  In other words, you're contracting out -- I mean 

that's almost one of the last things that I would expect you to 

do, so could you expound on that please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, one of your colleagues had 

commented on this the other day in a positive fashion in 

response to the original statement I made, but this is contracting 

in, not contracting out.  This is a case where we, in the 

establishment of a maintenance system for our own aircraft, 

can effect the economies for the maintenance of our fleet to 

prevent us from having to go as far away as Montreal for 

certain kinds of repairs.  And the process of establishing that, 

with the expertise we have in our branch, we also provide a 

service for neighbouring provinces. So this is an opportunity 

for us to actually bring some business home to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I misunderstood that part.  I thought I was 

coming to the section that you're just talking about now.  And I 

would assume that what you're doing here is trying to 

facetiously, heaven forbid, make a profit.  And so we'll be 

using a government department to make a profit.  I dislike the 

ring of that word coming from the minister opposite. 

 

And I see nothing wrong with that, so I'm not criticizing you 

for that.  And if you can use the resources that we have and if 

you can facilitate the generation of revenue, of course that is a 

good thing, and I would compliment you on that. 

 

And what I would like you to do is just expand a little bit of in 

what areas you're talking about your aircraft maintenance and 

so on.  I'm assuming you mean that other folks inside, outside 

of province would be bringing material in here to be upgraded, 

to be reconditioned, and so on, at an expense to them, which 

would be a profit for us.  And that these profits then in turn, 

would these profits go to the general revenue?  And I have 

some subsequent questions that I want to ask. 

 

Just leave that one for the moment.  But we'll take a look at 

what happens to these revenues and you will be applying them 

to the operational aspects of the department and help to reduce 

some of the expenses that way.  What kind of monies are 

projected, that this would generate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know why the 

member opposite would find it surprising that his colleague on 

this side in the same business as he, which is farming and 

raising hogs, would be averse to the notion of making a profit.  

It's sort of in the nature of the goals of farmers in the province 

to try and do that, however elusive that goal sometimes can be. 

 

Nor I think shouldn't it be surprising to the member opposite 

that as a government, social democratic government, it 

shouldn't be surprising that they are in the business of trying to 

do good financial management, because it's been the history of 

the 

province that we have restored financial stability to this 

province on a number of times, having seen others undermine 

it. 

 

But without getting into that rhetoric, I want to comment on the 

specific items on the Bill where the member asks about the 

nature of the service.  Primarily the area considered for this 

contracting within the province, bringing other business into 

the province, is the aircraft maintenance and repair business.  

These individual items on these aircraft can cost in the 50, 60, 

100, $150,000 for repair, because it makes it unnecessary for 

people to send their business far away.  If we're bringing 

business in from the neighbouring provinces, we can do it at a 

profit and still do it more cheaply for our neighbouring 

provinces.  And we are trying to work cooperatively with our 

neighbouring provinces in the forest fire business because it 

makes for better management of resources that way. 

 

But to the extent that we achieve revenues for this kind of 

service, it will go into the commercial revolving fund from 

which all expenses and revenues around the forest fire-fighting 

activity go, because it is sort of a business of its own.  So it will 

become part of the cash flow of the commercial revolving fund 

which is the fund out of which forest fire-fighting activities go. 

 

And because we do not yet have this in place, we're seeking 

approval here.  We don't have exact numbers because we 

haven't marketed, but we certainly expect that this would . . . 

that the returns here would be in the hundreds of thousands of 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You mention fire 

suppression, fire-fighting, and so on.  Do you do that for profit 

or do you do that for a break-even? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Fire suppression is done within the 

province and between provinces on the basis of sharing 

resources to simply facilitate cooperative fighting of the forest 

fires. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  I have to admit that I 

was a step ahead of you there and I had a personal reason for 

asking that question since one of your water bombers and bird 

dog came out to my farm the other day and helped suppress the 

fire, and I was just wondering whether this was done for profit 

or whether my bill would only be for expenses incurred.  But I 

haven't got the bill yet so I guess the jury is still out on that one. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Minister, now that we're on that topic, I do 

want you to pass on to Duncan Campbell and the folks up in 

the Prince Albert area, I was tremendously impressed.  From 

the car phone on the way home the previous Friday, around 3 

o'clock, I believe, my wife called me on the car phone and said, 

we've got a major problem here.  And I was not too far from 

home, but on the car phone Duncan Campbell phoned back 

immediately when he was informed of that and we got the 

whole situation lined up, that by the time I got home pretty well 

the bird dog was there 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

and a minute later the water bomber was there and they were 

tremendously helpful. 

 

And you could also pass on, if you don't mind, at the same 

time, that of the 200 or 300 people that were spectators at that 

particular spectacle, when they were pushed back, I have never 

been so amazed -- and I'm a pilot and I do a lot of flying and so 

on -- the accuracy was just amazing with which that fire 

depressant, the red mud was dropped.  It was like dead on from 

a hundred-mile-an-hour moving plane and to hit it at precisely 

that was very impressive.  And it was much appreciated.  And I 

would appreciate that, Mr. Minister, if you could pass that on to 

the folks. 

 

So having said that and getting back to what we were talking 

about before I tried to bait you there, the revenues generated 

and so on, and the contracting in, is this going to be in 

competition with private industry or is this relegated to more or 

less government to government? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No, this is to provide a service that 

otherwise is available only at distances such as California, 

Montreal, and other such places.  So this is a new service for 

this region of the continent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The other questions that I had, Mr. Minister, 

are pursuant to particular clauses.  So we'll continue on, Mr. 

Chairman, and as the clause arises, I will ask the question. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

clause 7(2) says: 

 

 All assets and liabilities of the fund are transferred at their 

book value to the general revenue fund. 

 

Could you indicate to me what the assets and the liabilities are 

that we're talking about that are going to be transferred, and 

that is the book value; do you have a comparative market value 

at the same time of those assets and liabilities?  So that's a 

twofold question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the assets that are 

remaining in that fund relate to the Hudson Bay reforestation 

fund.  It was a cash asset worth about $250,000. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- When you say worth, Mr. Minister, is that the 

so-called book value or is that the actual trading value. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's cash. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's cash, thank you. 

What kind of revenues are we going to . . . it says on (5) now: 

 

 After March 31, 1994: 

 

 all assets, revenues and liabilities accruing to the fund are 

deemed to have accrued to the general revenue fund; 

 

These revenues -- what types of revenues?  Is this an 

appropriation that we're talking about from this House or is it 

revenue that we were talking about earlier in terms of 

contracting in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's only the interest on that 

250,000, or whatever the amount is exactly, in the interim 

period between its being there and the transfer out. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Clause 8 is the transitional audit which talks 

about The Natural Resources Act and the Provincial Auditor 

shall audit the accounts and transactions of the fund for the 

fiscal year ending on March 31,1994.  Now, Mr. Minister, does 

this mean that this new Act is going to have in it as a 

requirement that the Provincial Auditor must audit those 

accounts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 

is correct.  The Provincial Auditor will be required to audit this 

fund because it is a final wrap-up of the fund. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well then, Mr. Minister, how do you equate 

the fact that the . . . I'll ask you a preamble first of all, a 

preamble question.  Where will the money come to pay for the 

audit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the auditor is billing our 

department for a number of audits that go beyond what he 

believes his other resources allowed him to do and it is likely 

that he will be billing the department for the audit on this as 

well. 

 

Clause 8 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to Create, Encourage and Facilitate 

Business Opportunities in Saskatchewan through the 

Establishment of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister at this time to introduce 

the officials who have joined us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to the members of the opposition, members of the 

Assembly, my staff who are with me. To my right is Zach 

Douglas, president of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

 Corporation); behind me and to my right, Hermien Pluimers, 

director of corporate affairs; and legal counsel, Garnet 

Holtzman, seated directly behind me. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 

welcome to your officials this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, in your second reading speech you noted that 

unlike SEDCO, SOC Co's allocation would come out of the 

Consolidated Fund.  Could you clarify that for us, where 

SEDCO's allocation came from and where SOC Co's is going 

to come from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It will be a simple line item in the 

Department of Economic Development.  So the flow-through 

will be within the Department of Economic Development.  One 

line will be for Sask Opportunities Corporation, and under that 

line there'll be an allocation of the amount of funds. And 

therefore during the estimate process, the opposition, or 

government members for that matter, would be able to ask 

about the performance of the corporation and what were the 

plans for the expenditures in that year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Given that this Bill 

does not eliminate SEDCO and that SEDCO will be wound 

down, I presume, over a course of several years, where will 

SEDCO's continuing funding come from?  Why was this 

funding not also moved over to the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- SEDCO will basically continue to 

be managed through CIC, as it has in the past, with the annual 

report, which will be reported to the legislature and reviewed as 

has been for many years under The Crown Corporations Act, 

and as well, performing and answering questions before the 

Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Why, Mr. Minister, did your government decide 

to make the change, this funding change for SEDCO and not 

for other Crown corps? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What we are doing here is because 

of the nature of the organization of SEDCO, or the Sask 

Opportunities Corporation, because of the arrangements that 

are being made on a constant basis, and the public scrutiny 

when it comes to spending taxpayers' money on local 

investment, what we're trying to do here is make the operation 

of this corporation as transparent as possible. 

 

And also because the funding is much more to do with 

economic development per se than any other of the Crown 

corporations that might provide power or telephone, or for 

example, SGI, these are loans that are being given out in large 

part for economic development.  We thought it much better and 

appropriate that it would be lodged within the Economic 

Development funding and come to the legislature, as I think we 

all support the idea of having a look at in advance the monies 

that are appropriated 

on an annual basis. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I 

wonder if you could outline for us again some of the kinds of 

businesses SOC Co, the new corporation, will be investing in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The arrangement will be 

considerably different than the mandate that SEDCO had 

developed over the past 10 or 15 years.  The new corporation, 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, will look at strategic 

investments in some of our cluster areas of development where 

we have identified, within the Department of Economic 

Development, fast growth areas of the province. 

 

We also believe that the tendency of SEDCO to lend money to 

competing businesses on Main Street, Saskatchewan should 

come to an end.  I use the example of a car wash or a restaurant 

in a local community where already that service was being 

provided, or a motel or a hotel.  In the past, SEDCO, in many 

instances, came in and loaned money to new operators who 

would compete very directly with established businesses. 

 

Now we all know that at best most of our rural communities are 

stable; some are growing slightly.  But the need for more 

infrastructure on Main Street just isn't a priority where we 

should be plugging in taxpayers' money.  So we're withdrawing 

from that large area where SEDCO had a fairly broad mandate. 

 

And you can go to most of our communities and find where, in 

the last 10, 15 years, SEDCO has actually invested in programs 

or projects that compete directly with other legitimate business 

people who have received their loans from the regular lending 

institutions.  We think those kind of loans in the future should 

be dealt with by local credit unions or Royal Banks who 

understand Main Street, Saskatchewan much more than the 

organization centred here in Regina. 

 

The loans that will be given out in the future will be for 

projects that are difficult, if not impossible, for lending 

institutions at the local level to handle.  We discussed in 

question period today some of the larger hog operations, for 

example, where a local community group may need 5 or $6 

million to do an operation.  Hogs may not be the best, but let 

me use an alfalfa dehy plant or possibly a pelleting plant in 

Meadow Lake or some of these larger projects where there just 

isn't enough money within the lending institutions at the local 

level. 

 

(1530) 

 

The entrepreneurs can come then to Sask Opportunities and 

make an application to finish off a deal.  Let's say they have 50 

per cent or 60 or 80 per cent of the money they need; they need 

10 or 15 per cent to finish off an arrangement.  Sask 

Opportunities Corporation would see their mandate to come in 

and help conclude a deal that was being pushed and formulated 

at the local level with a large component 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

of risk capital by the proponents as well as risk capital being 

put in by other lending institutions.  This would be an example 

of the kind of projects where we might be involved. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Will there be any other . . . you mentioned 

competing businesses under SEDCO and you won't be looking 

at funding this type of arrangement any longer.  Are there any 

other arrangements that you won't be considering funding 

under SEDCO? 

 

And as well, when we look at the -- under SOP Co now -- the 

kinds of things that you're going to be doing, you're indicating 

in your speech before that retail enterprises would only receive 

loans or other assistance if there was strong community 

support.  How do you intend to judge that strong community 

support?  What indicators will you be looking for in assessing 

strong community support? 

 

I wonder if you'd address that as well as if there are any other 

areas, other than competing businesses in SEDCO, that you'll 

be not funding. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The other fundamental changes . . . 

And the member raises a good point of other changes that will 

occur. 

 

First of all, it's my assumption, although not clear yet, that the 

small business loans program, SBLAs (small business loans 

associations), will not be transferred from SEDCO through the 

new entity, so the SBLAs will be located somewhere else.  So 

that will be a change. 

 

The other thing that will likely change is the property division 

within SEDCO, which had been built up over the years to have 

a whole array of property -- some buildings in Regina, 

Saskatoon, industrial parks in many of our smaller 

communities.  Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will 

not have a properties division.  And this will be a significant, a 

significant change from where we were in the past. 

 

And so that basically is where there will be other changes from 

SEDCO to the new Opportunities Corporation. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you'd touch on the other 

issue that I mentioned and that would be the judging of 

community support for new initiatives -- what kind of 

indicators you'll be using to assess that strong community 

support that you said you'd be looking for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- One of the key areas that we have 

been having a lot of discussion on is in the establishment of the 

REDAs, the regional economic development authorities.  We 

see initially the REDA's having a fair bit of influence on what 

projects are recommended to Sask Opportunities Corporation 

and those that aren't. 

 

So we will have consultation on a very close basis with the new 

regional economic development authorities.  This will not be a 

veto power over these 

kind of decisions, but they certainly will be called on to have a 

look at those projects that are being supported. 

 

The other thing that we find relevant in terms of one of the 

changes is the syndicating of loans where we will be doing 

deals with other regular lending institutions.  So there will be a 

level of due diligence being done by local investment banks, or 

the regular banks and credit unions, at the local level. 

 

The other thing that we will want to do is check closely with 

the business development people in the area, chambers of 

commerce, business organizations, to consult with them as to 

whether the project make sense in the broad terms for their 

community. 

 

So it will be broad-based, the kind of consultation that will go 

into that kind of a lending process, or on the other hand if we're 

doing a direct investment, which will also be the mandate of 

the new corporation, that is taking actual equity positions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That kind of provision 

to allow for an exemption to your policy in the case of strong 

community support, is there any concern that it may open the 

area of abuse up?  Do you not think that this is sort of the thin 

edge of the wedge, that once you make an exception in one 

case it will become increasingly difficult to turn down other 

cases?  What controls or measures do you plan to implement to 

ensure that this does not happen? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I think your concern is 

legitimate and I'll not argue with you on that -- that the 

argument that you start winding your way back into a problem 

of lending to competing Main Street businesses.  But I think in 

the formula that we've developed, there is a clear condition that 

we will not be lending a hundred per cent, or even a large per 

cent, of the monies that will go into these kind of operations 

and that there will have to be a large component of local 

investment. 

 

And along with that . . . for example, in Rosetown, where we 

made an exception on a hardware store I think about 12 months 

ago, we actually canvassed Main Street and got a petition that 

they actually wanted the investment to take place.  And so there 

will be that kind of scrutiny before monies are loaned out to 

that kind of a competing main street business. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You've stated that a 

major difference between SEDCO and the new corporation 

SOC Co will be that SOC Co will never participate if there is 

not also private sector involvement.  Can you confirm this, Mr. 

Minister?  Will this apply to just loans, or will it apply to other 

areas of activity such as equity investment as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, it will apply to both.  And it 

will not be just a marginal amount of entrepreneurial monies 

being put in and risk capital being put in by 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

the proponent, but we see it as being a partnership.  And also 

not only that, we will make sure that there is risk capital 

significantly being put in by the proponents, but also if we are 

taking an equity position in a company it won't be a lesser 

sharing operation; that if we put in 25 per cent of the money, 

we will expect to own 25 per cent of the operation, and accept 

for the people of Saskatchewan 25 per cent of the profits when 

profits come available. 

 

So it will be a business deal.  There will have to be a great deal 

of proponent's money at risk along with Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation.  And if there are profits made, we 

expect that those profits would flow back through the 

corporation to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  On the subject of 

equity investment, how is that a change from the past practice?  

As I understand it, SEDCO has always taken equity 

investments where necessary.  What kind of changes are you 

planning on implementing there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well you might argue that SEDCO 

took equity position, but it's interesting in a way this equity 

positions were taken.  Not up front.  It was never a policy of 

SEDCO to get into a business taking an equity position.  It was 

only after the business got in trouble and then some sort of pref 

shares were issued or loans were converted to shares to try to 

keep the company afloat.  And so you are really taking equity 

in a company that really had in fact lost its value, and that is not 

what is anticipated here at all. 

 

And in fact SEDCO's mandate was not to take equity positions, 

but only taking equity positions in a way to help relieve 

economic or financial problems on companies that had got 

themselves into trouble.  And these kind of equity positions are, 

in many ways, simply not an acceptable way to do your 

investment portfolio.  Because of course all of those equity 

positions -- not all of them, but the vast majority of them end 

up losing money. 

 

Our position will be is that we will put and take equity 

positions in good projects up front, and when profits are made 

on the majority of the investments, which we expect there will 

be, then the profits will flow back to support and promote those 

few operations that in fact may not make it. 

 

This was not the case with SEDCO.  We continually, as a 

government and taxpayers, ended up with the worse case 

scenario or the bottom 10 or 15 per cent -- that's where all of 

our equity positions ended up being at and we had none of the 

successful equity within the portfolio. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under this program 

will you be looking at taking controlling interests in any firms?  

Do you have any enterprises that are targeted for take-overs in 

that respect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, it's not our policy to take 

majority positions as a stated policy.  In fact, our policy is very 

clear.  Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation is to use the 

money as a revolving fund and, hopefully, although we will 

need annual allocations of money for the first few years, we 

anticipate and believe that in the longer run, if properly 

managed, that the amount of money we need within 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will actually not 

increase but hopefully decrease as the companies we invest in 

or loans that we lend out get paid back with interest, that the 

amount of money will actually be less.  And this was true of 

SEDCO for many years.  It worked on a break even kind of 

position. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I've noticed that few, if 

any, explanations you gave in second readings regarding the 

differences between SOC Co and SEDCO are actually in the 

Bill.  Will these be established in regulation or will they be 

simply general policies of SOC Co? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Actually, both.  They'll be some in 

regulation, but obviously the will of the management and the 

will of the government, and I might add, now that this is the 

prerogative of the opposition members to scrutinize the 

spending of the corporation in advance right here in the 

Assembly, it will be the responsibility of all of us to make sure 

that the spending habits of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation are kept on stream -- that we really reflect the 

economic needs of Saskatchewan business people. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  As the legislation 

reads, SOC Co has a very broad range regarding what it can do, 

and it appears that it's not substantially different from SEDCO 

in that regard. 

 

Again, I'd ask you: what comfort can you give to the business 

community, particularly, I guess, the business community, that 

their concerns regarding SEDCO are actually reflected in this 

Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I might add, with the 

exception of the Saskatchewan taxpayers' association, we've 

had broad buy-in by the chamber of commerce and other 

business organizations.  And the truth of the matter is that as 

this new entity has been formulated, it really has been with the 

advice of the lending institutions, both the banks and the credit 

unions; the chamber of commerce has had a great deal of 

advice that they have given to us, and also the economic 

development authorities.  So they will be very interested in how 

the company performs and will be watching very closely. 

 

And I think, quite honestly, with the structure and the 

fundamental change of having this corporation report on its 

spending in advance here in the Assembly, that this has really 

relieved much of the concern that business people might have 

had, had it been formulated under a standard Crown 

corporation strategy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a few 

questions for the minister based on some of his comments.  

Yesterday, Minister, in second reading debate I read you some 

verbatim from some of your members, and I would enter once 

more the verbatim which was given by your member from 

Prince Albert Carlton in second reading debate on this speech.  

And 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

he said: 

 

 I believe that this Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

which is formed by this Act will form a very important part 

of the Saskatchewan government economic policy because 

what it will do is it will be able to provide money to those 

businesses or corporations or enterprises which are 

developing which are unable to get money otherwise . . . 

 

And you've just told the member from Kindersley that that 

simply won't be the case at all; that this will not be the lender of 

last resort any more as it formerly was under its mandate, that 

you will be ensuring that there is lots of private capital involved 

in here.  And yet your member, who is a long-time member and 

fairly influential in your caucus, states that you will be lending 

money to people that can't get it anywhere else, and I just 

wonder how you square that statement with what you've been 

telling us in the House today. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I don't think they're inconsistent, 

although I don't have the actual quotes in front of me.  But as I 

mentioned only moments ago to the member from Kindersley, 

the operation of a new pelleting plant -- let's use that as an 

example -- that might be worth 5 or $6 million and the local 

community has raised the first 3 or 4, you might argue, and 

that's all they can get and they can't get the money anywhere 

else, Sask Opportunities could come in to finish off the deal.  

And these are the kinds of arrangements that Sask 

Opportunities will be involved in. 

 

Not only those.  I mean it may be that an entity may just want 

government involvement because it gives an extra security 

blanket by having the government involved to some extent.  

For us it may look like a good deal because there's a good 

return on it.  But a lender of last resort for deals that have been 

shopped around and can't get any money anywhere else, those 

will not be eligible for Sask Opportunities Corporation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I hope your members clearly 

understand that, because I've looked at the verbatim from a 

number of members on this issue.  And your member from 

Athabasca said that the key industry areas are agriculture, value 

added products, and forestry, minerals, energy, tourism, and 

information processing communications.  Well there's not a 

whole lot left there, Mr. Minister.  That tells me that you're into 

just about potentially everything. 

 

And the member from Prince Albert feels that if in any of those 

areas you don't come up with private financing, that you should 

be prepared to step in.  And I understand the want of companies 

to want some government financing as a security blanket.  That 

has been part of the SEDCO mandate for a long, long time 

under many different types of government. 

 

I remind the minister that the picture that has often been 

painted of the corporation, at least in the last few 

years, perhaps isn't a totally accurate one; and the numbers that 

are thrown around.  Because I noticed -- and I went back to the 

year-end reports -- that for instance in 1988 there was 119 loans 

made by SEDCO; 60 of those were under 50,000 and 99 of 

them were under 250,000.  They're the type of thing that the 

member from Prince Albert was talking about. 

 

In 1989 there was 260 loans approved; 160 of those were under 

50,000, and 229 were under 250,000 -- so that type of loan. 

Most of these, Mr. Minister, weren't reneged upon. 

 

In 1990, 183 loans; 123 of them were under 50,000.  Obviously 

they had some component of other financing available or they 

wouldn't have been under $50,000.  There must have been bank 

financing or there must have been some other equity financing. 

 

In 1991 there were 116 loans, and 79 of those were under 

$50,000.  The vast majority of the loans in each year that were 

approved by the credit officers of the time were under $50,000 

which tells me they had to have some other component because 

there's very few things in life that you could start or maintain 

with a $50,000 loan -- certainly not a pelleting plant or some 

large endeavour like that. 

 

So I'm wondering, given that there was that kind of history 

before and there's some expectation by your members that there 

will be some of that continuing in the future, that they won't all 

be big projects like pelleting plants.  And the member from 

Kindersley pointed out the concern that is on Main Street, 

Saskatchewan.  And it is a valid one, because there were loans 

made in the past that directly interfered with the commercial 

viability of existing businesses.  I admit that quite readily, that 

both in my time as minister and previous ministers, those 

things were done.  And in the world that we live in today, those 

probably are not appropriate because those existing taxpayers 

are under a tremendous amount of strain. 

 

Given that fact, I want to ask you, and we're getting into the 

personnel area here now, if the credit officers who approve 

those, in most cases, small loans -- and the stats would prove 

out that most of them were under $50,000 -- and there is the 

expectation that you will venture out into a number of areas, 

will the same credit officers that are currently with SEDCO 

move over to the new corporation, or are you going to make 

wholesale changes? 

 

In other words, you're saying to these people that you currently 

have, they're not up to the mark; that we're going to change 

these people holus-bolus out of there in order to come up with a 

new type of credit officer who understands commercial 

viability better than they did in the past.  Is that sort of the 

message that you're sending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I think it's key for us to . . . 

and I say again, all legislators, because we're all going to be 

involved in this new corporation in a new way that we weren't 

in SEDCO, and I say this to the member from Thunder Creek 

because as Leader of the 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

Opposition he'll have an important role to play in the funding 

of the corporation because the allocation will come through the 

Department of Economic Development, and we  will have a 

chance to debate each year here in the Assembly before the 

next   tranche or the next expenditure is made; I say to the 

member opposite, on the issue of staffing of the new 

corporation, there will be no general move of people from 

SEDCO to Sask Opportunities Corporation. 

 

The president has met with the employees and discussed this 

issue with them.  And anyone will be eligible to apply for jobs 

at Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, but there will be 

no automatic moving of people from one corporation to the 

other. 

 

So it will be twofold.  One, obviously a new mandate dictated 

to them by the Assembly, by the Legislative Assembly.  And 

this is part of it. Our discussion today will certainly be read by 

the new employees of the Opportunities Corporation so they 

will understand that we are all on the same ground when we 

talk about the need to not use taxpayers' money to compete 

directly on Main Street. 

 

And that signal has been clearly sent already; in fact SEDCO 

has already withdrawn from that area.  And secondly, there will 

be new people in Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 

 

So it's two-fold.  One, a new, directed mandate from the 

legislature, from all of us because I think we're all basically 

saying the same thing.  And that doesn't happen often but in 

this case I think we're all of the same view, that we have no 

need to use taxpayers' money to finance operations on Main 

Street, Saskatchewan, that is, in the retail end of the economic 

scale. 

 

And I think we also all believe that there has to be new people 

brought into the organization and that just shifting all of the 

folks from SEDCO over to Sask Opportunities Corporation 

wouldn't do either.  So I think in that sense we can probably 

agree to agree on that item. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder if you could tell me, Mr. Minister, if 

the current board of SEDCO will shift over then to the new 

operation.  Or will there be a new board put in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There again, it will be in fact a new 

board and my anticipation is that in the period between now 

and the passage of this Bill and July 1 when we're hoping to 

have the new corporation up and operating, we will have an 

interim board appointed.  And I would expect there not be 

crossover from the old board to the new board.  If it were, it 

would be very minimal.  But at this point the expectation is 

there wouldn't be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think it very important, Mr. Minister, 

that if you are to be successful at this that you do have an entire 

new entity there, that the current board members not be just 

transferred across, because 

they've worked under the old mandate with different criteria in 

front of them than the new. 

 

And I notice now that the minister will be the chairman of the 

board rather than someone else being the chairman of the 

board.  And I guess if that is to enhance accountability, you 

would indeed want to have a new board in place with yourself 

as the chairman to start off in a new direction. 

 

Can you tell me what the provisions for severance will be for 

laid-off SEDCO employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Let me just say that on the issue of 

severance if and when needed -- obviously we're trying to do as 

much of this through attrition, as we wind down the 

corporation, as possible -- but it will just be standard severance, 

whatever they are eligible to within their contracts or 

agreements. 

 

I want to say as well that on the issue of the board of directors 

of SEDCO, I must first of all compliment them strongly 

because much of the changes that have occurred here have 

come as a result of the work done by the board of directors that 

was appointed early in 1992.  And they have spent endless 

hours basically working out SEDCO's wind-down and giving 

recommendations to government on the establishment of the 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 

 

I want to say as well that the board is now down to five 

individuals and they simply will not have time -- even if we 

wanted them to or they would agree -- to come over and run the 

new corporation, because for the next 18 months, two years for 

sure, they are going to have their hands full winding down the 

old corporation. 

 

Now we had a long discussion about whether we would ramp 

the board back up to the 8 or 10 which traditionally sat on the 

board.  But we feel that rather than do that, we will just let the 

board wind down along with the corporation itself.  And so 

while we have five members now, there'll be no new people 

appointed to SEDCO board. 

 

Sask Opportunities will have a new, small, interim board set 

up, and we expect at no time will there be more employees in 

combination between Sask Opportunities and SEDCO than 

there were when SEDCO was running at full peak.  And nor 

will there be more board members than we might have had in 

the days when we had quite a few more board members a few 

short years ago. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- I ask leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the member for 

interrupting his line of questioning. 



2452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

I want to introduce to all members of the Assembly, my 

constituency assistant who is sitting in the west side gallery, 

Sharon Nedjelski, and she's accompanied here by her daughter, 

Darcy Jankowski.  I'd like all members to welcome them here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, will 

laid-off employees be entitled to collect their unused holiday 

pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- They will be entitled to all of the 

benefits that they might have at a time when they would . . . job 

would disappear if in fact that happened. 

 

I say again that in large part we're hoping that a number of 

these people will be simply dealt with through attrition.  I 

might add as well that we have developed programs that will 

help support the staff who have to find new employment.  

We've had a number of workshops on managing change and 

preparing résumés and job-search techniques. 

 

We've had individual consultations on career consulting and 

also a corporate campaign, a one-time résumé mail-out, and 

other services that we are providing for those people who might 

be interested in moving, even at this point, in order to be able to 

move from a position of employment to another position of 

employment, as opposed to just waiting until that final day 

when that job description might disappear and they would then 

have to go job hunting from a position of unemployment. 

 

So we're doing a lot of work with the employees well in 

advance, and I think the relationship with the management and 

the employer has been, in many ways, stabilized through some 

good work that the management team has done in preparing for 

the inevitable. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate your concern, Mr. 

Minister, but I need to clearly have you on the record on some 

of these issues.  A lot of these people are not unknown to me 

and I, in my office, have a picture of the 25th anniversary 

celebration with them all there and I proudly display that 

picture because, in my opinion, those were very good 

employees and I want to make sure that at the end of the day 

that they are treated appropriately and that's why I have to ask 

the next question: will the employees be entitled to use their 

unused sick leave and sick pay towards the end of the winding 

down of SEDCO? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want us to be clear on this because 

when I talk about holiday pay, that is very clear that there's a 

standard procedure that employees are eligible.  Sick leave, as 

you know, is different and 

those discussions are going on at the present time.  But as you 

might expect, not in all cases is the issue of sick leave 

automatically transferred to cash or to days off.  Sick leave, in 

many cases, is specifically intended for those days when you 

are sick, and if you're not sick obviously you're not 

compensated for it.  So that's something that is being worked 

on right now. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Will there be a criteria worked out, Mr. 

Minister, and when will you make that available to the House 

so that we can scrutinize that process?  Well you said sick leave 

is being worked on right now, that you're developing a process 

or a criteria.  I very much would like to have that criteria 

available to me so that I can compare that to reality as things 

change.  And I'd like your commitment to make that available. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The commitment I'll make to you is 

I will make the president or his designate available to you to 

discuss -- as Leader of the Opposition -- to satisfy your 

concerns, because I think we have legitimate concerns, and I'm 

sure the employees do. 

 

This is a bit of unusual circumstance in one sense that you have 

a Crown corporation that's actually winding down.  But in this 

day of downsizing of corporations there are just many, many 

examples of how to carry out proper downsizing of the 

corporation.  And on the other hand, there are many examples 

of how not to do downsizing. 

 

And I appreciate the member's concern and we'll make the 

president or his designate available to you to discuss this issue. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'll look forward to 

that. 

 

I see in the Act there's a provision to have an executive 

committee of the board and I'm wondering why this provision 

is necessary.  You've just told me that the board is going to be 

quite small; that the old SEDCO and the new SOC Co will 

have combined boards that would only be equivalent of the old, 

sort of 10-member board that was previously in place.  Can you 

explain to me why you feel it's necessary to have an executive 

committee of what could be a very small board -- four or five 

member board; and why it needs to be in the Act. 

 

What do you anticipate happening that this executive 

committee would have to deal with and who do you envision 

being on that executive committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as you will know, as minister 

of Crowns you often have executive committees that meet in 

between regular board meetings, and in order to basically save 

time for the board, prepare uncomplicated issues, research, that 

might be needed to do advance work to board meetings.  It's 

expected that this committee would not meet regularly, as I 

don't think most executive committees do; they're used on 

special occasions. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

And while the initial board of Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation will be very small -- four or five people -- I expect 

as SEDCO winds down and Sask Opportunities winds up, or 

ramps up, that we would end up with probably eight or nine 

members on the board.  And we will have all of the regular 

committees that an institution like this would warrant because 

there will be those times when an executive committee would 

serve a useful purpose for management. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And who would you envision, Mr. Minister, 

being on the executive committee?  Would it be yourself, the 

president, vice-president -- who would you envision this being 

made up of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well it's normal that the chairperson 

of a board is automatically on other committees.  But I would 

say that this is standard procedure within the Crown 

corporations sector, that executive committees are established 

to deal with specific issues. 

 

So you would pick those people on the board who may, for 

whatever reason, be obviously the most qualified.  It could be 

regionally based, people who could come in quickly.  The other 

criteria may be just simply people who have the expertise but 

also the time to meet more often than regular board meetings. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Given the new environment that we live in, 

there used to be an engineering component to SEDCO that 

dealt with issues surrounding gas tanks and that type of thing.  

That, as I understand, has been disbanded.  Is the Department 

of Environment now taking over that type of process that 

SEDCO used to manage in order to make sure that we don't run 

afoul of the member from Rosetown and his department when 

you're lending money?  Because a lot of commercial property 

today, for instance, is under a lot of environmental scrutiny by 

lending institutions.  Even farms today are having to come 

forward with environmental reports.  Who will perform that 

function for the new entity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well not unlike other lending 

institutions, obviously clients would have to provide some sort 

of a proper form of environmental sheet that would outline 

what they are going to be doing.  And then obviously if it were 

a project that needed an environmental assessment or an impact 

study, that would be a requirement and need that would be 

necessitated by the Department of the Environment.  And my 

colleague, the Minister of Environment, would have a direct 

responsibility to be involved. 

 

But as you know, we are no longer involved in a property 

division.  So it was seen that that area basically disappeared at 

the time that the property division was begun to wind down. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'm glad you brought that up, Mr. Minister.  

I'm very curious about your plans for the property division.  It 

was always one of the things that 

mystified me, why SEDCO owned so much ground around this 

province, all over the place -- all of it, I can assure you, 

acquired I think before I was ever around in that ministry.  And 

that is going to be a very difficult task, to dispose of that in any 

meaningful way. 

 

Are you going to continue . . . you're not going to continue on 

with the property division, so I want an understanding from 

you of how you're going to dispose of this stuff that in many 

cases no one has wanted, and how you foresee this being done.  

Is this going to be done with the private sector driving it, or is 

your department going to drive it, or how are you going to get 

rid of property that was bought mostly in the mid and early 

1970s that today is very, very difficult to dispose of?  Can you 

give me a window on how you're going to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as you know, within SEDCO 

you tended to have some non-productive assets or 

non-productive properties.  Already we have disposed of half 

of those.  I think when we came to government there were 12 

non-productive pieces of property; six of those have been 

disposed of.  And at this point we've chosen to do it in-house 

and it seems to be working almost better than we had hoped or 

expected, especially given the times we live in where properties 

are not in great demand in many of the areas. 

 

When it comes to some of the industrial parks, we have worked 

closely with the towns and cities to work out formulas where 

that land could be purchased or turned over at a reasonable 

number to the local communities.  And I think of our properties 

in total, when we came to government there was something . . . 

80 or a little in excess of 80; we are now down to slightly 

below 60, I believe, or right around 60.  And so it's being 

worked out.  And we expect as SEDCO winds down, along 

with it the property area will be wound down as well. 

 

One thing we have instructed our people to be careful of is not 

to be in too great a rush to dump this property onto the market.  

This is in many ways valuable property.  We have to remember 

it's owned not by the management of SEDCO but by the 

taxpayers of the province, and we have to try at every 

opportunity to maximize the return on that property as we 

dispose of it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I know that you've moved 

some of it, but it's primarily been little bits and pieces.  That a 

lot of those so-called industrial parks are . . . I mean that 

property in Saskatoon, I haven't seen much happen there.  

Those are very large chunks of land, and you've got a Titan 

Building up there right now that I understand you're in 

negotiations with people, but that's a very difficult property to 

move. 

 

And I mean I've heard people say that even for a dollar they're 

not sure they want to undertake owning some of that stuff 

because of the services and the ongoing tax load and everything 

that has to be provided there.  And I would think that it will be 

a very, very long time 



2454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

before you dispose of some of that property and perhaps even 

beyond the end of your government. 

 

So are you envisioning . . . if SEDCO were cleaned up, for 

instance -- all except the property division -- in a year's time, is 

there a place where you would put that?  Would you take that 

into Economic Development, or would you roll that into the 

new entity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- There's no opportunity for it to go 

into the new entity.  But I think, first of all, that there are plans 

in place that this property will not take a long, long time to 

dispose of.  You're right, some of it has not a great deal of 

value in its present form.  And you refer to some of the 

industrial parks and those we advertise.  And actually, some of 

those are being turned over at a very reasonable price to the 

local communities. 

 

On the other hand, a large percentage of the property is actually 

located in Regina and Saskatoon, and this property has a fair bit 

of value.  And we are going to be obviously cranking out as 

many dollars from that property as possible to try to keep the 

bottom line of SEDCO as solid as possible. 

 

When it comes to where this property could be disposed of in a 

larger bulk area, and actually disposed of if SEDCO were to be 

wound down quicker than we expect, Sask Property 

Management might be a logical place to turn it over to, to 

administer and dispose of because there are some certain 

similarities and some expertise in Sask Property Management 

that could do that service for us. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Will those disposal prices and the 

arrangements around them, will they become part of our yearly 

review in here of the new entity?  Are we going to have the 

details of those disposals made . . . I wouldn't expect maybe 

some company names to be bandied about, but the sale prices 

and that type of thing, will that be available to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes, obviously it will not be part of 

the new Opportunities Corporation, so it won't be here in the 

Assembly.  But in Crown corporations obviously there'll be an 

opportunity for members to ask questions about the disposal 

strategy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now I only have two questions left, Minister.  

Under clause 17(1)(f), I notice that SO Co can create and 

participate in investment funds and investment pools.  Is this 

allowing the new entity, for instance, to get into the growth 

fund business -- the Saskatchewan government growth fund, 

which I believe you administer and are able to dispense money 

out -- is this new entity going to have any inside track on that 

growth fund money that presently is there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- We'll continue to be one of four or 

five investment companies that work on behalf of the SGGF 

(Saskatchewan government growth fund), but this is the extent 

of the involvement and there's no anticipation of increased 

involvement in that area. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Would this provision in the Act allow you to 

exceed your investment limit, because you could roll 

investment . . . immigrant investment money, for instance, in 

along with your -- I believe you have a legislated cap of 2.5 

million.  Because you have access to this money, would that in 

effect allow you to exceed your limits? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, those are two separate approval 

processes, so there would be no impact or there could be no 

stacking, if you want to put it that way. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- On clause, I believe it's 17(2) through (4), SO 

Co cannot, under any circumstances, lend more than 2.5 

million even with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council.  Is that clear?  That's the absolute limit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, the legislation doesn't say that.  

Just to be clear, that is not a provision in section 17. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay.  If I've misread this then, could you tell 

me what the approval limit is?  Is there a top end number there 

that the corporation can lend, or is it open-ended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What the situation is of course is 

you're partly right and partly wrong.  There's a limit, but it 

would take order in council or cabinet approval to go over that 

limit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Is this any different than the provision that 

SEDCO had before as far as having to have a limit and then 

cabinet approval over that? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Under SEDCO it was 2.5 million; in 

Sask Opportunities it's 2 million on loans and 1 million on 

equity.  So you've got two levels in the new corporation -- 2 

million for loans, 1 million on equity.  In SEDCO it was 2.5 

million.  But as in SEDCO, if it was over 2.5 you could still, 

you still could go and get approval for a higher value, and that 

will be true on the equity side and the loan side in the new 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So you as chairman of the board, Minister, 

could go to cabinet with a proposal at any time and exceed 

those limits, and there would be no problem with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well as with SEDCO, as long as it 

didn't override the cap of, in this case 100 million; on the 

SEDCO side, I believe it was 300 million or 400 million in its 

final days.  But obviously when cabinet makes that decision, 

these decisions are made public within a short period of time, 

so there is also a clearing-house for the public to be aware of 

that expenditure.  And then also during Crown Corporations 

Committee, this could then be scrutinized again by members of 

the legislature. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  This is indeed 

going to be an interesting exercise that will be watched, I'm 

sure, with a degree of anticipation.  And the critics of SEDCO 

are long and many, and they will be watching this very closely 

as will members from this side, because if anything the former 

opposition loved to chew on was SEDCO.  And we'll see how 

son of SEDCO does out there with all of the commitments that 

it's made. 

 

And I appreciate your answers.  It's something new; its our job 

to let you have the opportunity.  So I'd like to thank you and 

your officials for the answers, and I guess we'll see what comes 

out in the wash. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In closing off the debate with the 

Leader of the Opposition, I want to thank him for his questions.  

And I want to say as well that in the consultation that went on 

leading up to the establishment of the corporation, he was good 

enough to attend my office once or twice to spend an hour 

chatting about some of the pitfalls of SEDCO.  And having 

been minister for some time, his views were more than helpful.  

And I want to thank him for his cooperation here in the House. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Environment and 

Resource Management to introduce his officials who are 

assisting him in this review for the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Joining me 

today for The Parks Amendment Act is deputy minister, 

Michael Shaw, on my right; assistant deputy minister in charge 

of management services division, Bob Blackwell, on my left; 

Don MacAulay, director of parks and facilities branch, behind 

Mr. Shaw; and Ken Lozinsky, the manager of park 

management services; and Nancy Cherney, on my left behind 

Mr. Blackwell. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just a short introductory statement.  I was 

prepared to do the next item but in the interests of expediency 

and since the officials are here, let's do this one.  And I 

understand that the member from Saskatoon Sutherland wants 

to have a few words, so I'll give the floor to him at this time. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  Today I 

would like to basically comment on Bill 38, since I didn't have 

an opportunity at second reading, and to pay particular tribute 

to one individual who was, in my estimation, very responsible 

for helping to protect the Clarence-Steepbank area which is 

included in this Bill. 

 

That individual is Hal Miller, who was a conservation 

officer with the department, and tragically died in December in 

an automobile accident, before he was able to see his work 

come to fruition in the form of this Bill. 

 

This afternoon I would like to read into the record what I 

regard as almost a poetic description of this park area that we 

are talking about.  This description was written by Hal Miller 

and formed a July 13 preliminary draft to the proposed 

provincial wilderness park for Clarence-Steepbank Lakes.  And 

in the introduction to his proposal he writes -- and I'm going to 

quote rather extensively: 

 

 The Clarence-Steepbank Lakes area is a wild space in 

Saskatchewan's boreal forest.  Pristine forests, a chain of 

lakes, streams, and a steep undulating landscape are natural 

features of this land which provide foundations for its 

character.  It is in some ways mysterious; it has strength and 

it features tranquility.  The Clarence-Steepbank Lakes area is 

a wild country with its own identity. 

 

 Unlike the surrounding areas, this country is relatively free of 

development.  Clear cuts and fire-killed timber are 

non-existent.  The absence of man-made disturbances makes 

this still a genuine wilderness.  Here forests have matured to 

climax stages of succession.  This forest environment 

provides critical habitat for a specific community of living 

things. 

 

 Beyond the mature forest there are also many other types of 

wild environments.  They provide habitat for diversity of 

plants and animals.  The presence of various soil types, a 

landscape that is steeply sloped to undulating, and the 

presence of water systems are all reasons why such a wide 

variety of environments do exist.  Nothing present seems to 

be out of place here.  There is a variety here, yet it all fits 

together.  Conflict is absent.  Tranquility is present. 

 

 This country's mysterious qualities originate from knowledge 

that suggests little is known about its cultural past, and that 

rare plant species may exist.  Many of the area's intricate 

environmental relationships are yet to be discovered. 

 

 Strength is quite apparent to those who view its steeply 

sloped landscape.  The presence of large mature spruce 

provide one with a similar sensation.  Strength in a more 

subtle form exists in the balanced relationships found among 

the various natural systems and communities that are present.  

These relationships have long-term stability and are therefore 

self-sustaining.  Strong when they are together, these 

systems, if fragmented, can lose that strength.  Once country 

is developed, it can never return to wilderness.  The 

Clarence-Steepbank Lakes area is a wilderness now, but if 

developed it will never be again. 



2456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

 Many local citizens, conservation enthusiasts, and 

recreationalists have now had access and have become aware 

of this wilderness area.  Each values this area, many for the 

reasons suggested.  These people share the opinion that 

economic values should not always be the overriding 

principle that controls land use decisions. 

 

 They support an ethic that views land as a common property; 

that it is  wrong to use land in a way that disrupts its present 

state when other alternatives are available.  The 

Clarence-Steepbank Lake area is a wild space that should be 

left in place. 

 

I think that this description of the Clarence-Steepbank area tells 

the story of what we are preserving.  I would just like to 

comment ever so briefly, having shared something of the 

natural history story of the area, as described by Hal; something 

of the human story of how this area came to be protected. 

 

Picnic tables were set up in the area back in 1966, 1977.  The 

active movement to protect this area began with people who are 

often denigrated in society, namely, government bureaucrats -- 

nameless, faceless government bureaucrats. But these are the 

people who are in a large measure responsible for protecting 

this area today.  People who are often the butt of criticism need 

to be applauded today for the steps that they took to preserve 

this area. 

 

I want to also say that there were politicians who at various 

junctures took steps to see that this area was preserved and 

protected.  I want to pay tribute to the cabin owners of the area 

who worked very, very hard to see this area protected. 

 

But I also want to compliment Weyerhaeuser corporation for 

their efforts to protect this area and to work with government 

officials to see that it's protected. 

 

So what we have here, in brief, is a very magnificent area of 

Saskatchewan being protected for future generations. 

 

(1630) 

 

It is now our fourth wilderness park, following the Athabasca 

Sand Dunes Park, Clearwater River, and Wildcat Hill.  And 

now we have a new wilderness park in Saskatchewan, thanks to 

this Act and thanks to the efforts of Hal Miller. 

 

So with those words, I would like to take my place and applaud 

the fact that Saskatchewan people for many generations will be 

able to enjoy this magnificent piece of our landscape. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, as I've stated before in second readings and so on, in 

total we do not really 

have any objections to this Bill; and it's not going to take us 

very long to pass the Bill, because I think we agree with you 

that parks are important. 

 

And actually what I would like to do, Minister, is commend 

you on some of the stuff and the work that you've done in the 

implementation of this amendment to The Parks Act.  And it's 

simply because we are very privileged citizens to be living in 

Saskatchewan.  We are very privileged to be able to have the 

vast outdoors and the wide spectrum of ecosystems that we 

have in our province and that they are there for us to enjoy. 

 

And I think it is only a prudent government and a prudent 

citizenry that is going to ensure that these kind of ecosystems 

and the beautiful spaces that we have are going to be there for 

the future generations to involve as well. 

 

And that poses the problem, I believe, because there is a great 

deal of pressure on you as minister, and me as a politician as 

well -- and all politicians -- because there's a great demand.  

There's a great demand, first of all, for keeping the pristine 

outdoors and at the same time recognizing the fact that the 

demographics of our population is beginning to apply a lot of 

pressure to our valued spaces.  And so there's that delicate 

balance that you and I must strive to achieve, whereby we can 

accomplish both of those objectives. 

 

And according to the information that I have, a lot of those 

objectives have been met by the amendments that you are 

proposing here. Because the communities apparently that are 

involved and are close to these areas have to a large degree lent 

you their support and are basically saying, right on.  And so if 

they have no objections and you're following and pursuing that 

greater objective that we all have of maintaining these pristine 

ecosystems for future generations, then I certainly have no 

problem as well. 

 

However, and there's always a however when we do these 

kinds of things, but I'm going to surprise you because today I'm 

not going to pick on the topic that you may be anticipating; 

we'll save that for your estimates. 

 

So what I would want to do, Mr. Minister, is give you the 

opportunity . . . the member from Saskatoon was talking about 

the Clarence-Steepbank Lake recreation reserve which is, as I 

understand it, about 90 miles north of Prince Albert, north-east 

of Prince Albert, actually.  And it's a fairly substantial 

wilderness park that you've created there . . . I'm trying to find 

it while I'm talking.  There it is -- 17,549 hectares.  That's a 

fairly large addition. 

 

Now we have on a previous occasion already discussed your 

effort to arrive and achieve the 12 per cent and the numbers of 

different ecosystems on the endangered spaces worldwide that 

we talked about before. That is . . . a worldwide objective, let's 

put it that way.  And apparently we were only around 6 per cent 

at the time.  So we have a ways to go, Mr. Minister. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

So really and essentially, instead of breaking down the 

Cannington Manor Provincial Park and the Fort Pitt Provincial 

Park and talking about each one in turn, and the minute aspects 

thereof, I think I'm going to resist the temptation to do that, but 

however give you an opportunity to rise to your feet, respond to 

your own member across the road, some of the comments that 

I've been making.  And if I'm satisfied with your remarks, then 

that is essentially all that I'm proposing to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 

want to commend the member opposite and the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland for their remarks about the 

responsibilities we share in looking after the earth, and their 

supportive words to the work of myself and our department in 

this regard.  I can only say in conclusion that with that kind of 

spirit, it does show an encouraging path to the kind of 

cooperative future we all need to generate with each other in 

order that we do have a planet that is safe and a happy, exciting 

place for our children, as it's been for us. 

 

So I thank the member for his commendations, and I want to 

put my remarks fully in support of the comments of my 

colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland with respect to the work 

of our public servants who serve us very well and very often go 

without recognition; and especially the words in memory of 

Hal Miller and the work he's done in this regard.  So with that, 

I'd like to thank the member opposite and take my seat. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to thank the officials who have 

joined us for this discussion and welcome the new ones who 

will here in a minute. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I would be remiss if I did not 

join with the minister in acknowledging the officials.  They 

were silent today; they didn't do too much toward our 

discussion.  But if the minister will permit me to say, it is 

because of their background work and groundwork that made 

him look good here today.  So I appreciate the work of the 

officials. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting Fisheries 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll just introduce the new 

officials who have joined us. Behind my deputy minister is 

Dave Phillips, the manager of the fisheries branch;  behind me 

is Joe Muldoon, manager of policy and partnerships branch;  

behind the associate deputy, Mr. Blackwell, is Dave Harvey, 

the provincial enforcement coordinator. 

 

The Chair: -- Welcome to the officials. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, not quite, Mr. Chairman, not 

quite agreed yet.  This will take a little longer than the others 

have done so far.  Specifically because I notice that the minister 

just graced me with House amendments that he's going to be 

pursuing, and there's at least four of those; and I have eight 

amendments of my own that I would trust the minister has in 

his possession now.  And that while I'm talking perhaps his 

officials could peruse them and hopefully see the light of day in 

terms of what we are proposing to make this Act a little bit 

better. 

 

We've done a fair amount of consultation on this Act, Mr. 

Chairman, and have had a fair response as well, although it'd be 

fair to say the greatest amount of response was from the 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association. 

 

And I agree with them that the ultimate goal of bringing home, 

as it were, jurisdiction of the fisheries from Ottawa into 

Saskatchewan, is an admiral goal, because it simply means that 

we will have less bureaucracy to work with.  Right now if we 

wanted to make amendments that were good to Saskatchewan, 

that fitted what our needs were, we first of all had to go through 

the Saskatchewan bureaucracy, than the federal bureaucracy, 

and then back into Saskatchewan.  And anything to reduce that 

type of a situation is something that we would certainly 

support. 

 

However, concern has been expressed by certain individuals on 

particular sections.  And sections 20, 22, 24, and 26 are 

considered by many people to be contrary to the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms simply because of their invasive nature.  

And we'll be taking a look at those. 

 

And then we have sections 33 and section 5 which . . . the 

concern there is that we are now going to be responsible for the 

actions of others over whom we really have no control and that 

is a concern.  And then section 36 specifically exempts the 

Crown and its employees from the same responsibility.  In 

other words, Mr. Minister, the concern here is that the governed 

do not get the same protection that the government has.  And 

that's a concern that we want to take a little bit of a look at. 

 

Then there is the reverse onus of sections 34 and section 35 that 

could well be considered to violate one's right to be considered 

innocent until proven guilty.  And so we could continue on, Mr. 

Chairman, on those, and we intend to do that. 

 

And generally speaking I guess there's a support for the Bill in 

general, even though the individuals I have talked to feel that 

the Bill does more to . . . the negative tone of the Bill is 

pervasive throughout the Bill rather than the positives. 

 

And the summation of this Donna Lawson as chairman of the 

outfitters association, sums it up by saying:  I guess it is up to 

the people to do good things and up to the government to stop 

them from doing bad things; however we do not all agree on 

what the bad things are and what means we should take to 

alleviate 



2458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

or to stop those bad things. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what I'm going to do now is give you the 

opportunity to react to some of my comments, and then 

essentially I have eight amendments that I want to bring 

forward, and then we can take it on a clause-by-clause perusal 

of the Bill as we go through, of course depending on what your 

remarks are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concerns 

expressed by the member opposite.  We've been discussing 

actively this Bill with the people concerned, and as a result 

have brought in a few technical amendments and a more 

substantive but clarifying amendment rather than change in the 

intent of the Act with respect to first nations' rights. 

 

I can say with respect to our interaction with the outfitters 

whose input you had discussed, that we have just recently 

signed a partnership agreement, a memorandum of 

understanding, with them to work together on all matters with 

respect to the management of the resources that affect them.  

And generally in those discussions, we have had positive 

responses. 

 

At the end of the day there may be differences of opinion on 

detail as you've identified, and I support the member opposite 

in asking for explanations of areas of concern where he's 

mentioned them, in particular with specific sections of the Bill. 

 

But I won't comment on those now until they are raised by the 

member as we go clause by clause, but I thank the member for 

his attention to this Bill and to the interest of Saskatchewan 

people in good management in the fisheries.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

 

Clause 2 

 

The Chair: -- The minister has indicated an intention to move 

an amendment to clause 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, need I read the amendment 

as outlined here? Then I would: 

 

 Amend section 2 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by striking out clauses (1)(n) and (o) and substituting the 

following: 

 

  "(n) 'Saskatchewan waters' means any body of water or 

portion of any body of water, including any stream, river, 

lake, pond, or reservoir: 

 

   (i) where the bed is owned by the Crown; or 

 

   (ii) for which there is an agreement between the owner 

and the minister for the maintenance and 

enhancement of 

fish populations and for the licensing of fishing; 

 

  "(o) 'sport fishing' means fishing for non-commercial 

purposes by angling or underwater spear fishing"; 

 

 (b) by striking out clause (1)(q) and substituting the following: 

 

  "(q)'wild fish' means any fish that is wild by nature in 

Saskatchewan waters or any fish that has been introduced 

into Saskatchewan waters"; 

 

 (c) by striking out "(1)(o)(ii)" in clause (4)(c) and substituting 

"(1)(n)(ii)"; and 

 

 (d) by adding the following subsection after subsection (4): 

 

  "(5) Nothing in this Act abrogates, derogates or adds to 

existing Indian Treaty rights". 

 

That is the amendment as proposed, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I would appreciate, Mr. Minister, having just 

been given what appears to be a fairly complicated set of 

amendments, if you could highlight any significant changes 

that might be included in what you have just said.  And one of 

the questions that you could answer as you rise to your feet is 

the wild fish, which means any fish that is wild by nature in 

Saskatchewan waters.  Perhaps to elucidate that situation for 

me, name some fish that are in Saskatchewan waters right now 

that would not be considered wild.  I think that would be a 

faster way of going about it than the other way.  So could you 

do that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the issues in the first case, 

the first amendment on that long list of things I read has simply 

to do with something that was numbered out of alphabetical 

order, and that was corrected in the first amendment. 

 

The second one has to do with the issue of Saskatchewan 

waters.  And that is only to ensure that we are only are talking 

about fish in Saskatchewan waters as opposed to other waters -- 

for example, Indian reserves, private waters, or national parks.  

So we're only referring to Saskatchewan waters in the 

definition where Saskatchewan waters is used. 

 

Now the item which the member didn't ask me to comment on 

but which is the more substantive issue in here that I referred to 

earlier, was the concern that was raised by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, that even though the Act was not 

intended to have any impact on treaty rights, and there was 

nothing in the drafting that was believed by our officials to 

have any impact on treaty rights, because of their experience 

they have learned to be cautious, and wish to have that 

assurance placed into this Act, that in fact nothing in this Act 

abrogates, derogates, or adds to existing treaty rights. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

So that was the reason that was added. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, I understand that last part about nothing 

abrogates, derogates, or adds to existing . . . But I hope the 

FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) does not 

necessarily put too much stock in even the inclusion of this, 

because you have been known to change Acts from time to 

time, and rules, and so on, without too much concern at times it 

seems. 

 

You didn't answer my other question which was the wild fish.  

And what I would want you to do now is give me examples of 

fish that are in Saskatchewan waters now that are not 

considered wild.  And the goldfish in the fish-bowl, is that 

right?  Yes, answer that first.  I have one more question on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The member opposite may be surprised at 

the answer.  If he'd only thought of it for a moment, I wouldn't 

have had to search for the answer. 

 

But the definition is predictable if one thinks of agriculture, that 

that which is wild is not farmed or domesticated, and that 

which is wild in fisheries is that which is swimming in 

Saskatchewan waters; but that which is in fish farming, for 

example, is not wild.  So this is not an attempt to control, 

there's no attempt to control, fish that are being farmed in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 3 and 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Right, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm glad 

to see that I tax you and some of your officials there with some 

of the questions that we're asking here that sometimes defy the 

simple answer that really does exist. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on clause 5, I'm going to be moving the 

amendment that reads like this: 

 

 Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by deleting clause (a) and 

substituting the following therefor: 

 

 "(a) a person has possession of any thing: 

 

  (i) when it is in that person's personal possession or 

custody; or 

  (ii) when, with that person's knowledge and consent, it is: 

 

   (A) in the actual possession or custody of another person; 

or 

   (B) in any place, whether or not that place belongs to or is 

occupied by that person, 

 

  for the use or benefit of that person; and". 

That's the end of the amendment. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, this addresses concerns by 

outfitters that they may be held liable for fisheries infractions 

committed by their clients or their employees.  The original 

intent of the clause was that a person can be charged with an 

offence no matter who else happens to be holding the evidence 

and no matter where it happens to be stored.  And, for instance, 

if someone catches too many fish and leaves them in 

possession of another person or in a different place, this is fair 

and has been preserved. 

 

However, the amendment places a new onus on the Crown to 

prove that the offending object is for the use and benefit of the 

person charged.  Example: you actually intended to keep those 

fish for yourself. 

 

And that is the reason for the amendment as I am proposing, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Strike out section 6 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "Application of the Act 

  6(1) Subject to subsection (2), this Act applies to all fish, 

fishing and fisheries in Saskatchewan. 

 

  (2) The provisions of this Act respecting fishing apply to 

fishing in Saskatchewan waters only". 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I suppose what I 

am going to be saying here is that the section previous to this 

that has just been passed, I did make an amendment to it, and I 

did give reasons for the amendment, courtesy mostly of the 

outfitters association, and the government chose to reject that 

amendment with no explanation. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Minister, that to help matters along, that I'm 

going to be having seven more amendments, and I will be 

having seven more rational reasons for making that 

amendment.  And certainly it is within your prerogative to 

choose to reject them, but I think out of courtesy we should be 

able to hear your reasons why you are not in support of those 

amendments. 

 

And I think that would just be more of a class act on your part, 

sir, if you could do that and supply some of the reasons why 

not, so that your rationale can be further understood.  And that 

is my response to clause 5.  I really have no response or 

question on this particular clause. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the remarks of 

the member opposite and I may have done 



2460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

. . . I didn't believe there was a direct response required because 

I think the amendment was based on the false assumption that 

someone could be held responsible for the actions of others 

over whom they exercise no control. 

 

In fact for someone to be charged under the Act, they must be 

connected with the commitment of the offence.  And this 

section is intended to prevent someone who has illegally 

obtained fish from avoiding prosecution by storing the fish 

with another person.  So the section of the Act as stated there, 

simply requires that responsibility be exercised in the taking 

and management of the wildlife resource. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 7 and 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would move 

an amendment to section 9: 

 

 Strike out clause 9(d) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "(d) allocate the fish resources in any or all of Saskatchewan 

waters to any persons or class of persons if the number, types 

or classes of licences are limited." 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, can you indicate the reason for 

that?  Are we talking commercial fishing, sport fishing, both? -- 

what? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the only significant point 

of this amendment is the Saskatchewan waters clarification 

again, that we've been making earlier in a number of sections of 

the Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- If I might be so bold as to suggest, Mr. 

Chairman, we might include all sections from section 10 to 

section 19 as one. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 20 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I would propose an 

amendment to clause 20: 

 

 Amend clause 20 to read: 

 

 (a) by deleting clause (2)(f) as being enacted therein and by 

re-lettering clause (2)(g) as clause (2)(f); and 

 

 (b) by deleting clause (3)(b) as being enacted therein and 

substituting the following therefor: 

"(b) the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the 

delay necessary to obtain a warrant would result in danger 

to human life or safety." 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the rationale for that amendment 

is that this responds to a concern, again by outfitters and by 

ordinary fishermen, that the Act gives too much broad powers 

to Fisheries officers operating with search and seizure warrants. 

 

The original clause gave the officer the power to seize anything 

that could be remotely construed as being involved in an 

offence, no matter how minor.  In essence, an outfitter's entire 

operation could be seized at the whim of an officer if he were 

caught with one fish over limit. 

 

The clause also allows the officer to act in this way without a 

warrant if he believes that delay would result in destruction of 

evidence.  Since this is a fairly easy contention for an officer to 

hold, because who's to question him, the clause essentially 

makes a warrant unnecessary. 

 

Under the amendment the officer's warrant powers would no 

longer include the ability to seize related equipment, and the 

officers could only act without a warrant in instances where he 

justifiably believed -- justifiably believed that human life or 

safety were indeed in jeopardy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to respond to the 

question.  I appreciate the member opposite requesting that 

earlier -- that it's not possible to seize any and all equipment of 

an outfitter unless that were to be . . . unless it were all to have 

been involved in the committing of the offence; that only 

equipment which is used directly in the committing of an 

offence can be seized. 

 

And with respect to the warrant issue the member opposite 

raises, simply limiting to issues of life and safety would 

preclude any ability of officers to actually do wildlife 

management because, as is listed in other Acts with respect to 

the management of our natural resources in this regard, because 

of the disposability of the evidence, by the time one were to get 

a warrant the case would often have disappeared from the 

scene. 

 

So it's important that those kinds of arrests are possible, but all 

of the conditions applicable to obtaining a warrant must be 

proven before such arrests without warrant and warrantless 

searches can be used in court proceedings.  So that the 

protection for people accused or arrested under those 

circumstances is that all of the conditions that would have been 

required in order to receive a warrant must be in place before . . 

. must have been in place.  Those tests must be met before that 

evidence can be used or before that arrest is valid. 

 

So what it is, is it provides the opportunity for officers to 

respond to a situation where they find an offence 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

being committed, so they can act immediately, but the test is 

later required that it's fair. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Minister.  I think this dialogue is 

useful, because in rejection of our amendments you are being 

forced to put your thoughts and your rationale on record, which 

can then be used against you when you become a defendant 

later on down the road. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's reserved for Justice ministers. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, that's not just reserved for Justice 

ministers, no. 

 

Just give me a what-for quickly here.  A man goes out . . . or a 

person goes out, fishes in a motor boat, comes back, has got 20 

fish in his possession.  What is the evidence now that is going 

to be confiscated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in that example, only the 

fish would be taken because it's sufficient evidence of fishing 

over limit. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Does this then apply, Mr. Minister, to a 

hunting situation where an illegal game has been shot?  The 

game would be the only thing confiscated and not the rifle and 

the vehicle and all those things, according to what you just said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, while it's possible to take 

the gun as evidence, it would only be done in a case where it 

was necessary to link the gun to the shooting.  Often simply the 

illegally shot wildlife would be sufficient evidence.  Vehicles 

would rarely be seized. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well link the gun as evidence to the shooting 

of the animal, does this mean that you then take a ballistics . . . 

go through the whole ballistics situation?  If that's the case, 

what about when that illegal fish that was caught?  Do you then 

link the spoon that caught it with it?  I'm trying not to be 

facetious, but I'm trying to link the two to understand the whole 

procedure here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, they've not yet invented a 

ballistics test for the hook, for the fish-hook; until such time, it 

won't be required to be taking that as evidence. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 20 agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, we're making progress here 

where the minister has to change his mind; first he agrees and 

then he disagrees.  So one of these times . . . 

 

On clause 22, Mr. Minister, I'm proposing that we: 

Amend clause 22 by deleting subsection (2) as being enacted 

therein and substituting the following therefor: 

 

 "(2) Every person required to keep any books, records, papers 

or documents pursuant to this Act shall, within a reasonable 

time, produce them on the written request of the officer 

specifying the documents sought." 

 

That is the amendment.  And the original clause, Mr. Minister, 

required outfitters to hand over immediately any records 

requested by an officer at any time.  The amendment changes 

"immediately" to read "within a reasonable time". 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, just to answer the concern 

raised by the proposed amendment. The advice that's given by 

our officials in Justice is that actually putting in place a 

condition like reasonable time may then include having that 

reasonable time prescribed, which could be more limiting than 

the practice which would be required within the Act, that a 

reasonable time be a condition of fair application of justice.  So 

that the condition of reasonable time is implicit in the Act and 

to state it could actually be more restrictive because it could 

then be actually determined in a specific time frame with the 

legislation and regulation. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 22 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 23 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

clause 26 of the printed Bill should, I believe, be amended: 

 

 (a) By adding immediately after the words "in a manner 

prescribed in the regulations" where they occur in 

subclause (1)(b)(ii) as being enacted therein the 

following: 

 

  "; provided that its fair market value does not exceed 

$100,000 and is a just and suitable penalty relative to the 

offence in question." 

 

 and 

 

 (b) By deleting subsection (4) as being enacted therein. 

 

The rationale, Mr. Minister, for those proposed amendments is 

that it responds to a concern by the outfitters that if an 

outfitter's equipment was seized as part of an investigation of 

an offence and if the outfitter were subsequently found guilty 

of an offence, any equipment seized could be kept by the 

Crown as penalty, and the Crown and its agents could not be 

held liable for any damages done to equipment that 



2462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

was returned. 

 

The latter is obviously patently unfair.  The former is unfair in 

that there are no apparent restrictions placed on this action, in 

spite of the fact that the maximum fine is $100,000.  The 

amendment makes clear that the Crown can only keep 

equipment that reflects the suitable penalty for the offence and 

only up to the maximum fine amount of $100,000.  In other 

words, the Crown could not decide to keep an outfitter's 

airplane, for example, if it was worth more than the $100,000 -- 

and a lot of them are. 

 

The amendment also removes the section that exempts the 

Crown from liability for equipment damaged while it was being 

held or is being held as evidence. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to take the 

opportunity to answer the concern raised in the proposed 

amendment before we vote on it. 

 

The member opposite will be aware that the condition he 

describes and wants to amend is one that is the alternative to 

another condition stated in the Act, which is that within 60 days 

of the final conclusion of the proceedings be returned to the 

person from whom it is seized or be declared forfeited to the 

Crown.  So that there is an alternative there that provides 

protection. 

 

With respect to the question of whether or not it is then 

forfeited, it becomes the question of the judge's ruling in the 

case.  And I think it's safe to say that the judge would take into 

consideration all of the concerns the member opposite raises 

with respect to the fairness of that kind of forfeiture.  So I think 

it's necessary to have that jurisdiction left within the judicial 

system. 

 

(1715) 

 

The other issue the member raises is with respect to the 

question of the depreciation of the value of materials or 

equipment seized.  The department remains liable for that 

deterioration if it's caused by negligent handling or storage of 

the seized items.  But the department can't be liable for the 

diminution of value of equipment seized that is necessary to be 

maintained as evidence during a legal proceeding just because 

it takes a long time to conclude.  So that if the proceeding 

happens to take a long time and in the period of time that the 

necessary evidence is seized, it diminishes in value, this cannot 

be a liability of the department.  Only those things for which 

they are responsible by negligent handling or storage can they 

be held liable. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 26 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 27 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I would 

move that we: 

 

 Delete clause 33 of the printed Bill and substitute this: 

 

 "33  In any prosecution of a defendant employer for an offence, 

it must be proven that, where it was committed by an employer, 

helper or agent of the defendant employer, whether or not the 

employer, helper or agent is identified or has been prosecuted 

or convicted for the offence, that the offence was committed 

with the knowledge of the defendant employer." 

 

Mr. Minister, the reason for that particular amendment is that 

the original clause placed a reverse onus on the outfitter to 

prove that he had no knowledge of an offence committed by an 

employee.  This amendment shifts the onus to the Crown to 

prove that the owner had knowledge. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate the 

concerns raised by the member opposite.  The reality however, 

and what makes this clause necessary, is that we can correct 

situations where a licensed commercial fisherman can avoid 

conviction for offences committed by their employees under 

their direction.  Without this kind of a responsibility on the part 

of the employer, any offence could be slipped away from by 

simply attributing it to an employee in that situation. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So in other words, Mr. Speaker, innocent until 

proven guilty does not apply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would only say that the employer is 

responsible for the legal operation of his business or her 

business. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 33 agreed to. 

 

Clause 34 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

clause 34 should be amended like this: 

 

 Delete clause 34 of the printed Bill and then substitute this 

clause instead: 

 

 "34  The fact that a licence or notice has or has not been issued 

or given pursuant to this Act shall be proven in evidence by the 

party so alleging, and the contents of the licence or notice shall 

also be proven in evidence by the party relying on such 

contents." 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm going to make a brief remark that relates to 

clause 34 and clause 35, because again these amendments fix 

the problems of reverse onus that we were just referring to in 

the previous one. 

 

In clause 34, an officer bearing a certificate maintaining that a 

licence was invalid was not 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

required to prove the validity of such a certificate.  On the other 

hand, under clause 35, if an officer questioned the validity of a 

licence held by an outfitter, the onus was on the outfitter to 

prove that the licence was valid. 

 

The amendments place the onus on the officer both to prove the 

validity of certificates of the director and to also disprove an 

apparently valid licence.  So the onus is where it belongs, in my 

opinion, and these amendments will take care of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to make sure I 

understand the question.  If I don't answer it in the light in 

which it's raised, please correct me. 

 

The issue, as I believe you've raised it, is that the question of 

the person who holds a licence demonstrating that they have 

one, it seems like a simple and reasonable request when the 

alternative is that we would have to search through the records 

of 300,000 licences in the province in probably 500 different 

vendors' locations in the province as the alternative. 

 

As I understand the member's question, it's why should a 

person have to demonstrate that they have a licence.  It's simply 

a matter of practicality.  The question at the end of the day then 

can be resolved on those grounds.  It's a way of reasonably 

regulating a system. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- No, that's not really the case, Mr. Minister.  

Not only the individual prove that he has a licence -- I agree 

with you that he should be able to put his hand in his pocket 

and pull out a licence -- we're talking about not just doing that, 

but the officer saying, hey, I don't think that licence is valid, I 

don't think you're that guy, or whatever the reason may happen 

to be. 

 

Right now the way your Act is standing, it's up to that 

individual to prove that his licence is valid.  It's a reverse onus 

that I've been talking about all along.  And what we're saying 

is, we don't believe that that is constitutional.  We believe that 

it is up to the officer to say: hey this licence is not valid.  And 

there's a big distinction here.  And that's what I'm trying to get 

at, is that the onus is on the officer to prove the invalidity of 

that licence as opposed to the man carrying the licence proving 

that the licence is valid. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, while you're on your feet answering that, 

here's another question that I would like you to respond to.  Do 

you and does your legal advice actually indicate that judges are 

going to accept that type of premiss where you're guilty until 

you prove yourself innocent?  Is the judge not just simply 

going to throw that out of the court if this is the procedure that 

has been used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for that 

clarification.  The issue of demonstrating that the licence is 

valid, which may extend to identifying that you are the person 

that also is the holder of the licence, is not an unusual 

circumstance either in the 

hunting area, or fishing, or driver's licences, or other areas.  

That simply gets the matter to court. 

 

I think, as I understand it, then when you are in court the 

officials still need to prove their case that the accused person 

did not have a valid licence if they want to have it stand up and 

achieve a conviction. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Your answer, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 

Chairman, reminds me of another comment that you made to a 

previous answer; that because we have thousands of licences, 

it's difficult for us to check whether they're valid or not.  And I 

would submit to you, Mr. Minister, that laws do not exist for 

the ease of administration.  That's what I used to say in school 

when everything was done to make it easier for the principal to 

run the school. 

 

Laws do not exist for the ease of administration.  So are you 

suggesting that you're willing to trample upon something that is 

sacrosanct in our society, that you're innocent till you're proven 

guilty, simply because you have so many licences that you 

would have to check?  I don't think that's quite valid, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think this is a 

trampling on at all.  The reason for which we have agreed upon 

some rules according to how we function in society is so that 

society can function in our total, collective mutual benefit.  

And if we want to spend the money paying resource officers to 

be checking on the proper practices of people out fishing, then 

the resource officers need to have a way of achieving the 

purpose.  And if you're out there with a licence and can't 

identify yourself as the person that holds the licence, they are 

incapable of doing their job and therefore they have to be able 

to lay a charge in that circumstance.  But then they have to 

follow up by another set of rules by being able to demonstrate 

in court that you in fact didn't have a valid licence and that the 

charge is legitimate. 

 

So it is a question of those things we commonly agree on in 

order that we can manage our resources and our lives generally 

to our mutual benefit. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 34 agreed to. 

 

Clause 35 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this clause 

should be changed to read: 

 

 "35  In any prosecution pursuant to this Act in which the 

validity or existence of a licence is in question, the onus is on 

the party as alleging the validity or existence, or the invalidity 

or non-existence, as the case may be, to prove that such is the 

case." 

 

Same rationale, same arguments.  I believe I'm right; I believe 

you are wrong. 

 

(1730) 



2464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it is the same issue, and 

they are the same arguments, and the reasons I gave why a 

society benefits from having the rules constructed in the 

fashion in which they're proposed apply in this case as well. 

And we'll be voting against the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 35 agreed to. 

 

Clause 36 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- One last kick at the cat, Mr. Chairman.  My 

batting average is not very good this afternoon.  But clause 36, 

we believe, and a lot of people in the province believe that we 

should: 

 

 Amend clause 36 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "No action lies against" where they occur 

therein the words: "any person,". 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the original clause 

exempted the Crown and its agents from any action brought 

against them if it could be shown that they were acting in good 

faith according to their duties.  Now this amendment extends 

this same good faith protection to the outfitters or anyone else 

involved in a proceeding covered by this Act.  And it's a simple 

case, Mr. Minister, of democratic fairness, and I think you 

would agree with that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't . . . I think I'm 

aware of the purpose for which the amendment is being moved, 

but I think it is outside of the purpose of the clause which is 

attached. 

 

The clause which is here is a standard clause that says that the 

Crown cannot be sued for acts made in good faith.  It is the 

purpose of the law with respect to inclusion of the less related 

matter the member introduces in the amendment, it is the 

purpose of courts to determine the degree of good faith that a 

person had in allegedly breaking the law. 

 

So if I've understood the point correctly, one would be taking 

away the purposes of the courts if one were to include that 

amendment as stated.  It is the purpose of this clause, as a 

standard clause in legislation, to protect the Crown when it is 

acting in good faith. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 36 agreed to. 

 

Clause 37 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to: 

 

 Amend Clause 37 (gg) of the printed Bill by adding "in 

Saskatchewan waters" after the word "resources". 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, does this mean that any waters 

that had their bed in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The Saskatchewan waters refers to any 

waters within the bounds of Saskatchewan that aren't in one of 

the other categories I described earlier, i.e., federal lands, 

Indian reserves, or national parks, are kind of examples. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Does that include private waters or does that 

include waters whose bed is Crown land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this does not include 

waters that are totally enclosed on private lands. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 37 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 38 to 40 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to acknowledge the 

work of the officials but I'd like to also acknowledge the work 

the opposition has done in raising the questions they've raised.  

There's no need to keep score on these issues.  They are issues 

of significance to people and the answers are deserved and this 

is the appropriate place to raise them.  I thank the member 

opposite for the spirit in which he's raised the issues here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, it's 

easy for you to say not to keep score when you're on that side.  

But at any rate, we have done our best and we've raised the 

concerns and we just hope that the Bill is going to actually 

promote and be better.  In a large part it's going to be, simply 

because . . . And I think I indicated to you at the beginning, that 

we were, in large measure, supporting the Bill, but we had 

these concerns that we brought to your attention today.  And 

I'm glad that your officials were there to help assist you and to 

assist us and we thank them for that as well. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Natural 

Resources Act and to enact a Consequential 

Amendment to The Forest Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to create, Encourage and 

Facilitate Business Opportunities in Saskatchewan 

through the Establishment of the Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 



May 19, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting Fisheries 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I move that the amendments be now read 

the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that the Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:42 p.m. 

 


