




















































Hansard: June 02, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2833 

 June 2, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Clerk: -- I would like to inform the Assembly that Mr. Speaker 

will not be present to open today's sitting. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm so glad 

that we are here and we are still able to welcome the students 

from Cut Knife Elementary School.  Mr. Len Dupuis usually 

brings a group of students down and I think it is very important 

that he does this every year. 

 

We have teachers Len and Michelle Ramsay; and we have 

three chaperons -- Louise Wismer, Glen Blackstock, and 

Joanne Maze.  I'd like to welcome the students and the teachers 

and the chaperons to the legislature, and I will be meeting with 

them for questions and for drinks.  Welcome here, and I'd like 

my colleagues to welcome them also. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly, a close friend of mine in the east gallery.  Her 

name is Barbara Riegle.  We've been friends for many years 

and she's passing through on her way to Ottawa.  And I'd like to 

ask all members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming her 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the members of 

the Legislative Assembly today 35 grade 9 students from 

Robert Southey School seated in the Speaker's gallery.  With 

them today is Mrs. Ritter, Mrs. Schultz, and Mrs. Dollah. 

 

They've had to alter their schedule today to allow them to sit in 

and watch a little bit of question period.  So I'm hoping that we 

can meet with them after if they have time.  If not, we certainly 

appreciate them coming out and hopefully enjoy their day in 

Regina today.  And I would ask all the members to please join 

with me in welcoming them here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Canada Ranked as Best Country by United Nations Report 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There are more 

things separating Canada from the rest of the world than three 

oceans and the 49th parallel.  Canada is also distinct because of 

its record on human development, and I want to note that 

according to the recent United Nations human development 

report, 

Canada ranks first among all other countries in terms of life 

expectancy, education, and purchasing power.  It means that we 

all have both a secure and a high quality lifestyle. 

 

The United Nations listed many factors that make Canada a 

better place to live.  These include such facts as: 35 per cent of 

our national budget goes toward social spending, making for an 

enviable safety net; our school enrolment rate is 89 per cent, 

the highest in the world; expenditure on education is 67 per 

cent, second only to Norway in the world. 

 

Now there's always room for improvement and that is what we 

legislators should try to work for.  But I think it's good to know 

that the basis upon which our country operates is respected the 

world over. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in this country are very lucky and 

privileged, and not only do we live in the finest province on the 

face of this earth, but we also live in the finest country.  Thank 

you. 

 

Thanks to Legislative Assembly Staff 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure today to say some thanks which I'm sure reflect the 

sentiment of all members of the Assembly.  A legislative 

session is meaningful because of the efforts of many more than 

elected members. 

 

On day 81 of this session, I'd like to thank the Clerks on the 

floor of the Assembly for their consistency and patience when 

advising on procedure.  To the pages, thanks for your service, 

always provided with a smile.  Thanks as well to the staff of 

Hansard for excellent work, processing our words sometimes 

late into the night.  Thanks to the Legislative Assembly and 

Speaker's office staff for your excellent administrative support, 

to library and legal staff for your prompt research support, to 

cafeteria staff for food with friendliness, to maintenance staff 

for keeping this place looking good inside and out, to the guide 

and security staff for treating both the public and us with 

professional friendliness and respect.  And finally, we thank 

our own support staff for bearing with us through all kinds of 

days. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most meaningful word in the English 

language is thanks, and that is what we feel for all the people 

who work in this building in support of the operations of 

government and the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Media Services 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, contrary to the prophecies of the Government House 

Leader back in February, this session has been anything but 

quiet.  In fact most of the noise that has been created is by the 

government side, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And this is after simply 

two and a 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

half years.  It shows us how lost . . . how much touch has been 

lost by this government with the people they're supposed to 

serve. 

 

We have heard shouts of anger, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from rural 

Saskatchewan over health care, from taxpayers over tax hikes, 

utility rate increases, from small-business people over labour 

laws, from welfare recipients, from the unemployed.  No, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this Assembly has not been quiet. 

 

And perhaps it's fitting that one of the last issues to be 

uncovered by the official opposition is the one which is 

indicative of a government out of touch and out of control, an 

issue which brings disquiet to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

My question today is to the Premier.  Yesterday in estimates, 

Mr. Premier,  you admitted that you had six -- and I emphasize 

the word six -- people on government payroll whose sole 

purpose is to clip newspapers, watch TV, and listen to the radio 

for the Premier, this at a cost to the taxpayer of $360,000, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, stand in your place, look at the camera so 

that your personal clipping service can get a good view, and tell 

the taxpayer what value they get for their $360,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to look 

into the camera and address that question because I think it 

gives me an opportunity to show how much progress this 

government has made from the time that the former 

government was in office and how this government is doing 

much more with a lot less of expenditures. 

 

Let me just provide the House this information.  The 

department of Executive Council in 1990-1991 spent . . . let me 

just read it as it is so I don't make a mistake.  In comparing the 

1990-1991 expenditures to 1994-1995 there is a saving of 

$1.005 million over that period of time in the expenditures that 

the Executive Council provides for those services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In 1990-1991 under the last year of 

the former administration, $8.18 million was spent.  In 

1994-1995, $7.14 million are going to be spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is more efficient.  We have done 

away with unnecessary services, we're only providing essential 

services, and that's why the people of Saskatchewan are saying 

it's about time.  They're pleased with the way the government 

has brought some rhyme and reason and efficiency to the 

processes of government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I guess what the assistant premier is telling us 

today that he's trying to defend his government's spending and 

the spending of the Premier and the Premier's office of 

$360,000 just to gather information to make sure the Premier is 

kept up to date on what's happening in the media. 

 

Maybe I could just help the Premier out, or the Deputy Premier, 

by informing him about what the media has been saying about 

your Minister of Justice.  And what have they been saying?  

Well apparently what they have been telling you is that it hasn't 

been a very good year for the Minister of Justice. 

 

Certainly the people of Saskatchewan are not satisfied with the 

way your minister has handled the Martensville trial; your 

minister has been named as the defendant for breaking a 

binding agreement with the Provincial Court judges; some of 

the media have even suggested that the minister should resign. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Premier has spent $360,000 to let you know 

that your minister has been having a lousy year, and I'm just 

doing that for free. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you do nothing in this legislative session 

to address the dissatisfaction that so many people have with 

your Justice department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me add some 

additional information to which I added when I addressed the 

first question.  Let me specifically speak to media services 

alone.  The budget has been reduced over the last four years by 

-- or the last two years -- by 178,000 or 33 per cent from the 

budget that the members opposite had provided. 

 

And let me tell you and the House, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of 

things that this government is not spending on:  a clipping 

service that the former government had in which they expended 

$32,000 . . . $632,650 or $3,000 a month for just a clipping 

service -- we've done away with that; $5,000 a month retainer 

for a Corporate Strategy Group out of Toronto, I believe it was, 

in 1991 -- $73,952 for the year; we've done away with that. 

 

And all that service did, Mr. Speaker, was to advise a former 

premier on how to deal with the media. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, a contract that used to exist with 

Dome Advertising that provided the premier with a travelling 

sound system for his speaking engagements costing $16,977 a 

year.  That has been eliminated. 

 

That's the example, Mr. Speaker, of this government doing 

away with unnecessary things -- and this is being a good 

example -- and providing only those . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  If there's 

one person that this $360,000 clipping service is really wasted 

on, it's the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've had 

months and months of 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

news coverage telling him how destructive his Labour 

legislation is and yet he hasn't listened at all. 

 

In today's paper, an article about the Dube family of Saskatoon 

with the headlines: "Long-time Sask. business forced to 

consider moving", due to your labour legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, you're not making very good use of this $360,000 

the Premier is spending on having your newspapers read to 

you.  Why didn't you listen, Minister?  After all that you heard, 

why did you plough ahead with this very destructive legislation 

anyway? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I neglected to point 

out one other expenditure that the former government had 

which we eliminated, and that was the services of one Nancy 

McLean who did things like tell the premier how to dress, how 

to respond to media, all of these kind of things, Mr. Speaker.  

That was an unnecessary expenditure under the former 

administration which we have managed to do with. 

 

The media services that exists in Executive Council now 

performs some very important functions.  True, they prepare 

news releases, but there's nothing wrong with that; that's an 

important part of informing the public.  They distribute news 

releases.  They operate the radio and television room for news 

conferences and provide assistance to departments and agencies 

and Crown corporations and commissions. 

 

But all of those services that they do are also available to the 

Leader of the Official Opposition and to the Leader of the 

Third Party, Mr. Speaker, because those facilities in the news 

room that we have are available to them.  So it's a service that 

we provide which is as good as was provided . . . in fact better 

than was provided under the former administration but cost a 

considerable amount of less money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I direct 

my question to the Minister of Health whom I think, Madam 

Minister, who requires the clipping service probably even more 

than the Minister of Labour.  And what the clipping service 

should be telling you, Madam Minister, is about the destructive 

things you're doing with health care reform in this province, 

particularly in constituencies like mine and other rural areas. 

 

Madam Minister, local papers are saying that your reforms are 

destroying health care.  Emergency service is insufficient, 

hospital closures have caused tremendous hardship in dozens of 

Saskatchewan communities and families, and still you refuse to 

listen.  Local residents are demanding accountability through 

health board elections and you refuse them as well. 

 

Madam Minister, your government has spent $360,000 to tell 

you health care reform is a mess, and 

your one-man election commission is another high-priced joke.  

Madam Minister, why don't you just hold the health board 

elections this fall, or at the very least, this afternoon would you 

commit to holding health board elections before the next 

provincial general election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, there are some 

interesting revelations that come forward through the 

information that is provided to the press.  I'm just going to 

bring to the attention of the House one or two. 

 

I look at one here, I believe it's from an Alberta newspaper and 

it says: Klein gives green light for profit-sharing health care.  I 

think the people of Saskatchewan should know that, because I 

think the people of Saskatchewan should know that the 

alternative to the health reform that is being done in 

Saskatchewan today is profit for health care which is proposed 

by the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party.  So I think's a 

very valuable service. 

 

But it doesn't only do that, Mr. Speaker. I'm reading an article 

from the Star-Phoenix, May 31, 1994, referring to our 

Minister of Health who spent a worthwhile time in Washington 

talking about our health care system.  And when it was all over 

and during that conference, the clipping reports that: 

 

 But when health policy experts from Britain, the U. S. and 

Canada met in Washington this month, they wanted to hear 

from just one Canadian province -- Saskatchewan. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Why, Mr. Speaker? Because 

everywhere in this country and even beyond this country, 

people who know anything about health care policy know that 

what is happening in Saskatchewan is breaking new ground; it's 

revolutionary, it's the right way to go, and they are looking at 

us once again as a model to change their systems to meet their 

needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

My media review is for the Minister of Agriculture.  And 

unfortunately I don't have too much to report since your 

government has done absolutely nothing to help farmers in this 

province. 

 

That's quite a bit different than all the newspaper clippings that 

there were before the last election, telling us how the Premier 

was going to get billions of dollars out of Ottawa to help those 

people out on the farms.  The truth is, Mr. Minister, you aren't 

getting very much use out of the Premier's $360,000 clipping 

service since you have done nothing to help farm families in 

this province. 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

Mr. Minister, why have we gone through an entire legislative 

session and you have done nothing to help farm families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the opposite to what 

the member says is the truth.  This session saw many changes 

in our budget to agriculture.  There is the hog stabilization 

fund, a beef stabilization fund, the changes to crop insurance, 

many other improvements.  We have a hog strategy. 

 

The agriculture scene in this province is improving very much.  

The strategy that the former administration had was to play 

politics with farmers.  And the farmers are in a much better 

situation and much better shape than they were when we took 

over office, and we work very hard with farmers.  We don't 

play politics with farm policy, as the former administration did, 

but we do work hard and we have made improvements for the 

farmers in this province and we are proud of our record in 

agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

my report, my media report will be to the Deputy Premier.  Mr. 

Deputy Premier, I'm a little bit hurt.  I've been providing you 

with newspaper clippings all through the session and I haven't 

got no credit for it, let alone $360,000. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're not worth that much, John. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well the member says I'm not worth that much.  

That's a very good observation.  I would suggest neither is the 

Premier and his staff worth $360,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Deputy Premier, I showed your Premier a 

clipping and the clipping said: Romanow vows to end poverty.  

I showed you that clipping.  Then I showed you another one 

and it said: one in ten using Saskatoon food bank.  Then, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, I showed you another one, and it said: over 

80,000 people on welfare.  And 30 homes in your own 

constituency not fit to live in -- not even fit to live in.  I showed 

you those for nothing. 

 

Then, Mr. Premier, apparently you were not paying attention.  

Because after all of the clippings that I showed you, you 

haven't showed us one thing that you've done to lower these 

figures either in the welfare numbers or the unemployment 

numbers or those houses that people can't live in.  Can you 

explain that, after spending $360,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I welcome the question 

from the critic.  And I have a newspaper 

article here, in fact a whole page of newspaper; it hasn't been 

clipped yet.  And what this newspaper article says is: "Job 

picture brightens"; "Oil, gas firm promising"; "Golden 

opportunity for Cameco . . ."; "Farm cash flow improves."  A 

full page full of positive headlines that speak of this 

government and its ability to brighten the future and the job 

opportunities for the people of this province.  And we do not 

recall those headlines emanating from the Conservative Party 

when they were in . . . or were in government from 1981, or 

1982 to 1991. 

 

So we think that things in this province are on the rebound, 

people are going to have jobs, and the future looks very bright 

according to this newspaper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Energy or his designate.  I would also like to provide the 

minister with a little media report and, I add, free of charge.  In 

today's paper the headlines read, "Majority back nuclear energy 

. . .".  It says that 58 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan 

want to see the NDP (New Democratic Party) government 

develop nuclear energy and that industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that's how you can create thousands of jobs in the 

province.  Earlier this year, the headlines also said, Mr. 

Minister, the Saskatchewan people wanted to go ahead with 

co-generation.  But you stopped that, wouldn't listen, despite 

the clipping service. 

 

Mr. Minister, your NDP Premier spent $360,000 on a media 

clipping service to let you know the Saskatchewan people want 

alternative energy sources developed in the province.  Why 

didn't you listen to the people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, according to many 

clippings in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Regina 

Leader-Post, the government is listening. 

 

We are moving quickly with the expansion of uranium mines in 

northern Saskatchewan following a number of environmental 

studies that are done in order to make sure that there is safety 

involved in the expansion of the mining industry.  We've 

established a commission authority in Saskatoon to review the 

next major power generation in the province, which includes 

the review of a nuclear energy-driven project, along with other 

alternatives such as thermal and hydro.  And so the member 

may have, had he stayed in government after 1991, started the 

construction of a nuclear reactor which would have added 

another billion or billion and a half to the deficit of the 

province, for power which isn't needed.  We intend to review 

all the options, choose the best one, and when it's needed, build 

the proper power station. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

Election Promises 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Premier, we just want you to know that the concerns we've 

raised in this session are not only coming from our opposition 

benches; they've been echoed in every corner of this province 

by concerned citizens. 

 

And we thought it fitting that we would close this session the 

way we started it, with a question from a person in 

Saskatchewan who says, and this is from Mr. Al Chalmers of 

Carnduff, Saskatchewan:  Mr. Premier, what right do you and 

your ministers sit . . . to sit as the government of 

Saskatchewan?  You were elected because of the promises you 

made during your election campaign.  You have proven time 

after time that these promises were untrue.  It must follow then 

that you are sitting under false pretences.  Please don't say that 

you've had to change your plans because the last government 

left such a financial mess.  Parties have passed that buck since 

time began.  From Mr. Al Chalmers of Carnduff, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me, Mr. Speaker, respond to the 

question from the member from Thunder Creek because I think 

. . . who asks on behalf of Mr. Chalmers.  And I respect Mr. 

Chalmers' question, and I really appreciate the opportunity to 

be able to respond to him. 

 

And I want to say to Mr. Chalmers that this government has 

kept the commitments which it made in the last provincial 

election.  I can say unequivocally, Mr. Speaker, that we will be 

able to go to the next provincial election with the program card 

which this government as a political party campaigned on and 

say to all of those promises that they have been delivered -- 

promises, Mr. Speaker, to get the deficit under control.  That's 

on track.  Promises to bring about health reform -- I just read 

you a story from Washington which praises what Saskatchewan 

is doing.  Promises for economic development and job creation; 

that's on track -- promises to bring about many other changes, 

Mr. Speaker, which are on that program card. 

 

I want to assure Mr. Chalmers that that program card's 

promises are being delivered.  I appreciate his question.  And 

during the next election, we will be able to tell Mr. Chalmers 

on every one of those promises that we have kept them, and 

that people of Saskatchewan will judge us on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Saskatchewan Economy 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  My 

question this afternoon is for the Minister of Economic 

Development.  Mr. Minister, the success of Saskatchewan 

depends on our healthy economy, both in and outside of our 

major populated areas.  We've seen zero evidence of your 

government's 

commitment to rebuilding the economies of rural Saskatchewan 

which have suffered through years and years of agricultural 

crisis.  Commodity prices are coming back exactly like the 

member has just crossed the floor to show you.  Interest rates 

are down.  And this, Mr. Minister, is the window of 

opportunity, the chance for you to plug those positive factors 

into a real strategy for rural revitalization. 

 

Mr. Minister, we've just spent months dealing with legislation 

that addresses the priorities of the New Democrats -- gambling, 

digging up fuel tanks, and labour legislation. 

 

What have you done this session, specifically, that will produce 

any economic activity in rural Saskatchewan communities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, to answer the member 

opposite who echoes the words of her Conservative friends and 

colleagues next to her, I want to say that part of our platform 

card -- if you were to pick it up and read it -- was to reform the 

labour laws of Saskatchewan which hadn't been touched in 

terms of The Trade Union Act for about 11 years and labour 

standards for 17 years.  That was a promise we made, and it's a 

promise kept and a very important one to the working people of 

this province. 

 

I want to say as well, when it comes to jobs in Saskatchewan, 

you may want to look at the Leader-Post from yesterday 

which talks about "Job Picture brightens" in Saskatchewan.  

And with almost every sector of the economy, with the 

exception of agriculture because of the restructuring occurring 

there, there are many more jobs than there were when we came 

into government in 1991, especially in the area of trade and 

export -- up by 7,000.  Even in manufacturing we have 2,000 

more jobs than we had in 1991. 

 

Now the member can preach gloom and doom, and she can go 

around the province saying how terrible this province is and 

how terrible a place it is to live, but I say you would have much 

more luck with the people of the province if you were to take a 

positive attitude. 

 

Even the Leader-Post, even the Leader-Post . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, let's put newspaper clippings 

aside; you may simply want to listen to the real people in 

Saskatchewan.  The NDP SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) legislation will increase municipal costs.  

The NDP health reform will close facilities and reduce 

employment.  The NDP labour legislation is causing investors 

to think twice about Saskatchewan.  And the NDP Partnership 

for Renewal has not delivered any tangible results in rural 

Saskatchewan at all. 

 

Now my question to you, sir, has been about rural 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

revitalization.  The only economic activity that is directly 

linked to your government policies is the sound of loonies 

plinking into thousands of VLTs (video lottery terminal). 

 

And yesterday an owner of a rural hotel -- a community, sir, of 

527 people -- said your government raked in more than 

$500,000 from VLT machines in his small community.  That's 

more than $1,000 for every man, woman and child. 

 

Mr. Minister, a piece of legislation your government passes, 

every piece, every policy that you have followed, has helped to 

drain the life out of rural Saskatchewan.  I ask you again, what 

are your plans to revitalize rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say again that there are a great 

number of things happening in rural Saskatchewan.  And to the 

member, Mr. Speaker, she should travel to Humboldt or to 

Nipawin or to Meadow Lake, to name just three communities 

that are prospering and doing very well. 

 

In yesterday's Leader-Post under the heading "Farm cash flow 

improves" I want to quote to the minister . . . to the member: 

 

 Saskatchewan farmers pulled in record amounts of cash from 

sale of farm products and government programs last year. 

 

 But they also . . . 

 

and it goes on to talk about how the farm economy is 

improving in Saskatchewan -- far away from what you are 

saying about the gloom and doom in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

You are the biggest part of the problem of the recovery of 

Saskatchewan when you put yourself forward as a potential 

leader in this province with all the gloom and doom. In light of 

the fact that there is so much positive good news around about 

the economy, the only reason you can be doing that is for your 

own, self-serving political agenda.  That can be the only reason 

and I would like you to stand up and explain to the people of 

the province why you're carrying on in that manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Let's talk about self-serving political 

agendas when your Premier and you, sir, went across Canada 

telling everybody we were the worst fiscal basket case in all of 

the country. 

 

You did that for self-serving political reasons, to not have to 

put yourselves in positions of performance but blame the 

previous administration.  Your smokescreen, sir, is quickly 

drifting away and you can use all the glossy pamphlets you 

want, the news conferences that don't really announce anything.  

Now that the smoke is clearing, the real people are looking for 

real evidence that your government knows how to create a 

healthy economy, that your 

government knows how to not stand in the way of one, and that 

they are not finding it, sir. 

 

Instead, I'll tell you what the real people are talking about.  

They're talking about vacant properties on their main streets.  

They're talking about the closing of their schools and the 

closing of their hospitals.  They're talking about the decaying of 

their highways.  And these are real concerns.  These are 

tangible pieces of evidence that whatever strategy you have, if 

one at all, isn't really working despite what it is you're saying. 

 

Before you escape the scrutiny of this legislature, tell us how 

you plan to stem the horrendous flow, the outflow of cash from 

rural Saskatchewan, rural communities, and how are you going 

to build a new economy for rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this possibly 

being the last question of the session, I say that never before 

have I seen the princess of darkness use so much gloom and 

doom when it comes to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What I have heard come from this member as she travels 

around the province, travels around the province preaching 

gloom and doom, while literally tens of thousands of people in 

rural Saskatchewan are sitting around coffee shops and around 

kitchen tables talking about regional economic development 

authorities, how they're going to get their economy going again 

after nine disastrous years because of the farm economy and 

the previous administration. 

 

Here you are today, defending the actions of the previous 

administration, and trying to create gloom and doom to try to 

do what?  To get yourself elected so you can sit possibly as 

next premier based on your gloom and doom. 

 

I say again to the princess of darkness, try a little optimism.  

Saskatchewan is a good place to live, things are going well, 

getting better.  Get on that bandwagon and I think you might 

have a chance of doing a little better.  You might even win your 

seat in the next election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 47 grade 5 and 6 students from the Foam Lake 

Elementary School, who are seated in the west gallery.  They 

are with teachers today, Wayne Bugera, Ruth Nichol, Shirley 

Korpatniski, and Jim Hack.  The bus driver is Melody 

Chaikowski.  And I would like all members of the Assembly to 

welcome them here today. 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And to 

the minister, I want to spend a little bit of time on a topic that 

we were on last night during consideration of Bill 72, which 

sets up a corporation to legalize your gambling initiative in this 

province. 

 

And during the course of that discussion, after much persuasion 

I was able to get, from the minister responsible for Gaming, a 

copy of the agreement that your government has made with the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Indian Nations.  And I want you to 

take a look at the page 1 of that agreement -- and I want to get 

your reaction to it -- which says that the government agrees to 

place expeditiously before the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, either at its present session or its next session, 

legislative proposals creating the corporation, Mr. Minister.  

Now I want you to please inform the Assembly of the rationale 

that you had when you included that particular portion of this 

agreement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

Certainly I would love to explain to the member the rationale.  

In the process of arriving at an agreement, which is an 

historical agreement involving first nations in the casino policy 

and the organization of casino development in this province, 

which I happen to believe is probably the more appropriate and 

progressive way of approaching this issue then has happened in 

most other provinces, it was decided during those negotiations 

that it was important, since there was an agreement, to proceed. 

 

And I think that that is one of the reasons why that was written 

into the agreement, because that was part of the agreement.  I 

think that was appropriate.  The legislature has had a 

considerable amount of time that they'd spent on the Bill. 

 

I was here in the House and I watched some of it on television 

in my office.  And I think that the exchange and the explanation 

by the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan liquor and 

gaming commission and the members in the opposition during 

some, a little over six hours, I think is an indication that the Bill 

received the appropriate kind of attention. 

 

The agreement was a good one.  It was agreed in the agreement 

that we should proceed with implementing it soon and that's 

why the Bill was before the House, in order to carry that out. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well let's do this properly, Mr. 

Minister.  I'll ask the questions and I would appreciate it if you 

would answer them.  Would you answer my question: why in 

this particular section do you say, that either at its present 

session or its next session?  No sense of urgency there.  Would 

you comment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, there's certainly a 

good explanation for that.  We did not know at the time of the 

agreement when the agreement would be signed.  And 

therefore there were provisions in the agreement that made it 

possible to have the legislation in this session or, if it happened 

to be signed later, it would come later at another session. 

 

In the end, because of the ability for all parties to agree, the 

agreement was signed earlier rather than later.  The session was 

still in progress.  There was every indication that the session 

was going to be longer than some of us, at least, thought it was 

going to be.  And it was therefore quite appropriate to introduce 

the Bill as it was introduced, and proceed with the agreement 

and establish the casinos as are outlined in the Bill, establish 

the corporation as is outlined in the Bill, so that we could get 

on with this important initiative and have the casinos up and 

running before the Grey Cup that is coming next summer here 

in Regina. 

 

(1415) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what it does is just 

underscores and underlines once more for the people of this 

province, your penchant for gambling dollars.  Your last 

statement there just fortifies what I've been saying all along -- 

the be-all and the end-all is money in your coffers, be it through 

gambling or whatever it happens to be. 

 

At the same time it is quite obvious that you were prepared to 

wait until next session.  Why then, Mr. Minister, were you not 

able to do that, so that in fact and indeed there could be proper 

consultation about this whole issue? 

 

You do not have a mandate for what you're doing right now, 

because it's a fundamental shift in the values of this province 

that you're embarked upon.  And you justify it by the means . . . 

you justify this means that the end is that you need money. 

 

There could have been public consultation.  And don't get up 

and tell me there was a lot of consultation; there was not.  Any 

consultation you did was with the vested . . . the parties that 

had a vested interest in it, not open, rural-urban meetings 

asking for input from the general public.  That's what I'm 

talking about consultations.  The general public have never had 

a voice in this issue.  Vested parties, yes, no doubt -- no doubt, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

What I want you to do now is turn to page 5, section 11 of that 

agreement.  Section 11 states, and I'll read it into the record, 

Mr. Chairman: 

 

 It is the intention of the parties that within six weeks after the 

end of the first full year of 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

operation of the casinos, the corporation shall commence a 

review of the operation of casinos, their impact on other 

gaming operations in Saskatchewan, and the potential for 

additional permanent  casinos in Saskatchewan; and shall 

provide a report and recommendations to the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority upon completion of the review. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to underscore that you are going to be 

reviewing the potential for additional permanent casinos in 

Saskatchewan.  Is it not just all fluff what has been going on so 

far, Mr. Minister, that you're going to piecemeal this thing in a 

ramming fashion upon the people of Saskatchewan; that all 

along your full intention has been, as is demonstrated by this 

article, to have full-scale casino gambling in every outlet within 

Saskatchewan that can possibly have one? 

 

Saskatchewan and Regina are the tip of the iceberg.  Next year 

your full intention is to institute it across the province so that 

the proliferation of gambling opportunities will be complete, 

literally on every street corner throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

As I said yesterday to the minister of gambling, we have a 

finite sum of money that's available and it will not support that 

kind of thing.  But in your greed, you are fully confident in the 

ability of the minister of gambling to promote gambling, not 

only on the racetrack as he's doing, but throughout our entire 

society.  There will be promos.  There will be promos going out 

that will do precisely that, Mr. Minister. 

 

And you know why I say that?  You know why I say that?  

Because I want the public and I want the minister of liquor to 

be aware of what I am aware, of a news release that came out 

this morning. 

 

You know back when we were discussing the Horse Racing 

Commission and the amalgamation of it, the minister went out 

in public and he said: the problem is there are not enough 

people betting and we've got to promote betting to get more 

people out to the racetrack.  Well that's great for those folks, 

and I grant them whatever they get out of it. 

 

Then I followed that up and I said: well, Mr. Minister, you're 

promoting gambling at the racetrack because it'll mean more 

money in your coffers.  What's next?  The promotion of liquor? 

 

And you know, what do we find out today, Mr. Minister, and 

Mr. Chairman?  I understand now that what you have instituted 

is the ability of people now to purchase liquor, beer, and 

coolers on golf courses.  Now I can see a lot of golfers out there 

saying, hey, good for that, I didn't know that.  They will now be 

able to purchase liquor in the form of beer and coolers on golf 

courses.  That's a public, that's an open, arena for beer and 

coolers to be consumed in public. 

 

And I suppose, Mr. Minister, that begs the next question: 

what's next?  What's next?  Our beaches, our parks, our 

playgrounds?  There's no end, Mr. Minister, 

to what your government is not prepared to do . . . or is 

prepared to do, in order to get money in your coffers.  

Gambling -- oh, we're going to expand it, they're going to 

expand it.  Liquor -- my predictions have come to fruition.  

That's precisely what's going to happen. 

 

And are you going to get up and say, well that's what the public 

is demanding of us?  I don't think the public is.  And I think the 

direction that you're heading is going to be the way future 

generations will look back upon your government.  That's the 

legacy that you are creating for yourselves.  And it's not a 

legacy, my dear friend, that your friend, Tommy Douglas, 

would be very proud of, I can assure you of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I want to just . . . Because I 

don't often have an opportunity to speak to this, I want to say 

quite proudly that one of the reasons I'm here today was 

because of my friend, Tommy Douglas, who encouraged me to 

get involved. 

 

And I'm quite confident that were Tommy Douglas still here 

with us, Tommy Douglas would approve with the process and 

the decisions and the directions of this government because in 

many ways what we're doing in Saskatchewan today is much 

the same as what his government had to do in 1944 when it was 

elected after another government had destroyed the economy of 

this province, ran up huge debts.  And one of the things about 

Tommy Douglas which I think members opposite don't 

understand is that he learned from year to year what the issues 

of the year and into the future were going to be because he saw 

into the future. 

 

But I want to address the comments, Mr. Chairman . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . As soon as the member from 

Shaunavon settles down so that I can be heard, Mr. Chairman, I 

want to address the comments made by the member from 

Rosthern, who talks about the promotion of liquor. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the promotion of liquor in 

Saskatchewan began under his administration.  It was his 

administration in the 1980s that allowed the advertising of 

liquor for the first time over the resistance of the then NDP 

opposition, the resistance of many people in the public.  Now 

that's here now, but I just wanted to make it clear for the record 

where the promotion of liquor began. 

 

The concept of allowing coolers and some forms of liquor at 

golf clubs and on golf courses is a means not to promote but to 

control and regulate.  I don't know whether the member golfs 

now, but I do.  I do when I do have time, and that's not much, 

but sometimes I do.  And I can say to the member opposite that 

I'd rather have a means by which it can be controlled because 

it's visible and it's regulated, than simply what the process is 

now where it is all over the golf course in golf bags secretly, 

and on the 9th hole they open up whatever they do with it in a 

big hurry.  So it's a means in which I think you can find a better 

system to control and regulate than the system that is there 

now. 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

I want to also address the comments the members made about 

the expansion of casinos.  We have clearly said as a policy of 

this government that there will not be an expansion of casinos 

except and unless there is a market that shows that it's worth 

while to expand them.  The reason there are two casinos 

established under this legislation and this agreement, Mr. 

Chairman, is because all of the market research shows that 

there should be two casinos in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now over time, because the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Commission will be monitoring on a weekly and a monthly 

basis what is happening with this new venture, and there will 

be after six months a further review, government -- and it 

would be this government or any government who would do 

the same -- will look at what is out there and what should be 

the next step, if any, on making sure that the policy is being 

implemented appropriately.  But at the present time there is no 

plan to expand those casinos and certainly won't be unless there 

was a good reason shown by good market research that that's 

something that should be done. 

 

I want to also address the question, and I will use the word of 

the member opposite when he talked about the end-all -- the 

be-all and the end-all of this agreement and the legislation and 

this approach.  I want to say that the most important be-all and 

end-all of the process we have gone through is to make sure 

that there is complete accountability for the operations of this 

corporation and for the casino operations that will be 

established in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Chairman, legislation was introduced, 

because that's one way in which one can be sure, from a policy 

perspective, a legislature perspective -- and I'm talking about 

all the members of this House -- to make sure that there's 

accountability, and that's to make sure it's in the legislation, 

with all the appropriate rules that are written in that the 

government or the people who administer have got to follow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's the same kind of mandate that this 

government has had to proceed with this as the former 

administration had between 1982 and 1991, when the amount 

of money wagered in bingos increased from 4.5 million to 

$112.4 million.  I didn't see that published in anybody's 

election platform. 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, that would represent an increase of 

2,500 per cent over an eight-year period.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that's pretty illustrative that the argument that has just 

been made about mandate is an irrelevant argument. 

 

The point of the discussion is that there is a policy decision, 

with all wide consultation with all of the stakeholders, to 

establish two casinos in Saskatchewan.  There is an agreement 

that has been put together between the FSIN and the 

Government of Saskatchewan which provides assurances to 

other sectors as well. 

And most important, there is legislation to make sure that it is 

appropriately done and that there is accountability to members 

of this legislature, to the auditor, and through that process, to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I thought I was finished 

with you, but obviously all you're doing is egging me on, and 

then we shall accommodate you. 

 

You talk about consultation with all the stakeholders.  That's 

exactly the problem.  The only people that you have consulted 

are the people that can get gains from it directly.  That's the 

stakeholders.  You have failed utterly to consult the largest 

stakeholder in this province which is the general population.  

You have never consulted with them.  All you've done is 

consulted with the people whose pockets could have money 

jingling in them.  That's the only ones that you have consulted 

with. 

 

Now don't give me this nonsense about your concern about 

accountability.  I went through that yesterday with the minister.  

The only reason this is in here is because you couldn't find any 

loophole to get away from it.  That's your sense of 

accountability. 

 

Why in the world did you come on with the 76th day of this 

legislation? Because that's the only day that you could have the 

agreement signed?  That's also nonsense, because that's what 

took your agreement so long.  You wanted to make sure that 

you could do this in any other way than bring it out into the 

light of day in this Legislative Assembly.  You wanted to do it 

through cabinet, that's all you wanted to do.  So let's not get 

sanctimonious here and say your concern is accountability. 

 

Your concern is that your lawyers have told you, left and right, 

that the only way that you can do this is to set up a Crown 

corporation.  And now what do you do?  You set up a Crown 

corporation in this legislature, and the very Act that sets it up 

says cabinet has the right to do away with it.  Cabinet can do 

what it wants.  Well, Mr. Minister, that is not flying out there at 

all. 

 

And also don't give me the nonsense about the increase in 

gambling expenditures and bingos from '81 to '92.  There was a 

big, big difference there, Mr. Minister, because that money 

went directly to charities.  They are the ones that mostly 

benefited from that.  And when I say that, Mr. Minister, when I 

say that, I am saying that there was not government 

involvement in that.  The money did not flow directly into the 

Minister of Finance's pockets to do with what he wants, as it 

will do under your legislation here. 

 

The difference, Mr. Minister, is that gambling in this province 

now is being promoted by the government.  You are promoting 

gambling.  Why are you promoting gambling just like you're 

promoting liquor?  Because you have a vested interest.  The 

more money people spend, the more money they take out of 

their milk pockets and out of their bread pockets and out of 

their shoe pockets, the more money you make.  That's the 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

bottom line, Mr. Minister.  We're running a 

government-promoted gambling industry.  And don't you try to 

compare that with what has happened previously. 

 

Now if we want to get into the political aspects like we have 

been doing, then we are going to be in here, Mr. Minister, for a 

long, long time -- for a long, long time because the issues that 

you are bringing up are side issues to deflect from the main, 

major issue, which is that you are using gambling as a means to 

the end.  That is all.  You're motivated by that one end, and you 

will do anything to accomplish that end. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Deputy 

Premier, yesterday I didn't have the opportunity to bring this up 

with the Premier.  As you know we have received a lot of 

correspondence from around the province from people with the 

"Mr. Premier I want to know . . ." questionnaires.  We bring 

them up each week in this Assembly.  I have a whole pack of 

them here which I would like to send across to you.  As we 

have done with other ministers, rather than taking the time to 

enter them all in the record, what I would like from you is a 

commitment to respond in writing to all of these individuals 

who have taken the time to write us questions.  And we also 

would like a carbon copy to my office on the responses that are 

sent out.  Can I have that assurance from you, Mr. Deputy 

Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Absolutely I can give the member 

from Thunder Creek that assurance, Mr. Chairman.  I have to 

admit that when the members of the official opposition first 

announced this process, I was somewhat sceptical.  And I have 

to say now that every Monday opportunities to have those 

questions presented in the House, it actually worked quite well.  

And I have to assume that the members, and I'm sure they are, 

are good at their word and that they're mailing the answers that 

are provided.  I'm sure that that's happening. 

 

And any time a citizen of this province has a question of their 

government or any of us in this legislature, we should be 

responding.  And so I can certainly give the undertaking to the 

member from Thunder Creek, the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, that if he provides us with those questions, we will 

make sure that a response is prepared under the Premier's 

signature.  And they will get a letter from the Premier 

providing the answer as expeditiously as possible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Premier.  We even go 

so far as to send them the verbatim of little exercises like you 

and I are just going through because they find it . . . it's 

important to a lot of people to understand that this place has 

some realness for them.  And I appreciate your response today 

and I believe that this exercise will grow in the future. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

Item 6 -- authorized by law. 

 

Vote 10 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Electoral Expenses 

Vote 34 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 165 

 

Item 1 -- authorized by law. 

 

The Chair: -- That concludes estimates for the Department of 

Executive Council and I would ask the minister at this time to 

thank the officials who have joined us here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  Indeed I want to, on behalf of the Premier, on 

whose behalf I'm acting here today, and myself, to express our 

appreciation to the staff from Executive Council who have 

assisted us and members of the opposition in responding to the 

questions that have been asked here. 

 

I think it's been a very good debate.  It's an opportunity for the 

public to know what the issues are as they are thought to be the 

issues by members of this House and what the responses are to 

the questions here. 

 

So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the officials for all of 

the assistance that they have provided here in the last several 

days. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like 

to thank the officials for coming in and helping us out in 

sessions and I would ask the Deputy Premier to pass on my 

thanks to the Premier for the time that he spent in here.  I found 

the discussion very enlightening and look forward to next year. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. 

Deputy Premier, I'm very pleased that you were able to arrange 

your schedule to be present for this important component of 

estimates review, and I am disappointed that we won't have the 

opportunity to question the Premier any further. 

 

I agree that the opposition does control, to some extent, the 

length of the session, but I think it is incumbent upon the chief 

executive of government -- the Premier of the province -- to be 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's done, the estimate is done. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Pardon? 

 

The Chair: -- I'm not sure what it is the member's debating, but 

we've concluded estimates for the 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

Executive Council. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chair, I would like to take this 

opportunity . . . I didn't think that 20 minutes out with the 

media would result in this being finished, so I will at this point 

thank, on behalf of the third party, the officials of Executive 

Council and the Deputy Premier for their attendance here 

today. 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman, I move that it be: 

 

 Resolved toward making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public service 

for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1994, the sum of 

$150,565,000 be granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to Her 

Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public service 

for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1995, the sum of 

$3,219,639,000 be granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions now be read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Name Substitution on Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 

members opposite would mind if we were to, by leave of the 

Assembly, move a couple of motions that would change some 

of the members represented on committees from our side of the 

House. 

 

By leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Kowalsky be substituted for that of Mr. 

Lyons on the Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs.  

I so move, seconded by the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Cline be substituted for that of Mr. 

Solomon on the Standing Committee on Privileges and 

Elections.  I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs, that by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Ms. Bradley be substituted for that of Mr. 

Lyons on the Standing Committee of Crown Corporations. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1445) 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 73, An Act to grant to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years 

ending respectively on March 31, 1994 and on March 31, 

1995, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, under rule 51(2), I move the Bill be now read a 

second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, 

Minister, you and I have spent a lot of time over this issue.  I 

have stood in my place and brought before you and your 

government, the very real concerns of small business in our 

business community here in Saskatchewan.  I have brought 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

to you hundreds of letters.  I have delivered to you hundreds of 

faxes.  I have introduced petitions.  I have reported to you on 

the resolutions from an emergency meeting of 500 business 

people and their employers.  I have brought forward dozens of 

suggestions for amendments and changes to this Act which 

would help to alleviate the concerns of the business people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It has all fallen, apparently, on deaf ears.  But I would like, 

because I'm an eternal optimist, Minister, I would like to try 

just one more time, Minister.  And I'm wondering if you would 

be willing to consider amendments to this piece of legislation 

yet at this very last hour.  This the 11th hour of this Assembly I 

ask to you, as I did a few weeks ago; I asked you in question 

period whether you would be willing to include a provision 

which would allow for the prepublication of the regulations to 

this Act.  At that time, of course, you flatly rejected it.  I'm 

prepared to move that amendment this afternoon in one last try. 

 

And it would read: 

 

 That no regulations made pursuant to this section comes into 

force until a period of not less than 90 days has elapsed after 

it is published in the Saskatchewan Gazette. 

 

And I ask you very simply, Minister, for a yes or no.  Will you 

accept such an amendment here today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No one would fault the member from 

Maple Creek for lack of tenacity.  By our count, this Bill has 

been before Committee of the Whole on 14 different occasions.  

If that's not a record for any Bill, I think it must be a very, very 

close to it -- there can't be many in that rarified atmosphere. 

 

Having said that and having in some ways enjoyed the 

relatively high level of debate actually, which I think has gone 

on over this Bill -- I think those people who have listened to it 

have come probably . . . I think have come away with a better 

understanding of the two sides of the issue.  Having said that 

and having given serious consideration to this amendment that 

you're proposing some time ago, I regret to inform you that we, 

as a caucus, have decided that we are not prepared to accept 

that. 

 

While in the long run it is not the most noxious amendment 

which I could conceive of, neither does it contribute very 

much.  There has been and will be ample consultation with 

these amendments, and we think the additional 90 days is 

simply, figuratively speaking, is carrying coals to Newcastle.  

So I regret to inform the member that as much as I'd like to 

return some of the civility which I think he's shown in this 

debate and accept the amendment, we are of the view this 

would not be an appropriate occasion to do so.  So my words 

will have to suffice. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that response doesn't 

surprise me, and so much for good faith and so much for 

building partnerships.  A small amendment that would allow 

business time to review the regulations is nixed by the minister 

as being too onerous.  And that simply, sir, is unconscionable.  

One can only wonder what disastrous regulations you plan on 

proposing, given your refusal to allow for a very short review 

period.  It's simply frightening. I would 

have offered dozens of amendments, Minister, but it appears 

that this would be a waste of time. 

 

There's an old adage that says, if it ain't broken, don't fix it.  It 

simply means that if there's nothing wrong with a particular 

thing, then don't mess with it because you'll screw it up.  Well 

this is precisely what has happened with the labour laws here in 

Saskatchewan during this session.  There was basically nothing 

broken.  There was really nothing very much wrong with our 

labour laws, nothing that a few minor technical changes 

couldn't have corrected.  In fact unions and labour enjoyed the 

most accommodating legislation in the country, as was 

evidenced by the fact of the statistical reports that showed we 

had the least amount of labour unrest in the past 10 years than 

we've had in a very, very long time before that. 

 

The only thing broken around here was the political 

relationship between you and your union friends.  And that's 

what you have fixed.  You've fixed a political problem.  Your 

reward for your actions will be continued political support for 

you from your unions, both financially, I expect, and on the 

campaign trails in whatever elections ensue.  You have bought 

their support on the backs of business people and with 

taxpayers' dollars. 

 

And for this political support you are more than willing to 

watch jobs and investment leave this province.  This kind of 

ideological favouritism goes against your campaign promises.  

It goes against your Partnership for Renewal plan.  And it 

goes against the common decency that the people of 

Saskatchewan expect from their governments. 

 

Your government's initiative in this area is proof positive that 

communism may not be as dead as everyone had hoped it is.  

And I for one am grateful that there are still those who will take 

a stand against it for the good of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- As one businessman put it in Saskatoon, the 

Russian people have experimented with this kind of left-wing 

radicalism for the past 70 years.  And now they are trying 

everything possible to get away from it, while we reintroduce it 

into Saskatchewan -- the only place in North America where it 

will exist. 

 

The business community stood up against you.  The employer 

communities stood up against you.  Part-time workers stood up 

against you.  The native community stood up against you.  And 

the taxpayers of this province stood up against you.  The only 

leader who refused to take a definitive stand was the Leader of 

the Third Party, who couldn't muster the courage to sign a 

petition asking you to delay this Draconian legislation. 

 

Well I and this caucus will stand for job creation and economic 

development over and above union interests at every turn.  And 

the business employers and workers of this community -- the 

community of 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

Saskatchewan -- can count on that. 

 

It is with a mixture, Minister, of frustration and dismay that I 

will take my seat today and watch an NDP government -- your 

government opposite -- force these Bills through onto the 

people of Saskatchewan.  But I guarantee you, Minister, that 

you will not have the last word on this issue.  The voting public 

of Saskatchewan will not forget this kind of legislation. 

 

The impact of this kind of legislation is not the kind that hits 

you over the head like a hammer, even though the business 

community has recognized it as such.  It is an onerous thing 

that creeps up on you over time.  And if your Premier is sincere 

and honest when he says that he's going to hold an election in 

two years' time, some of the full force of this legislation will in 

fact have had an opportunity to show its impact to the voters of 

Saskatchewan.  And on the basis of these two pieces of 

legislation, I predict to you your government's downfall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  After 

many months of extensive discussion and debate, Bill 32 is in 

the final stages of process.  In developing this legislation the 

New Democratic government of Saskatchewan began with a 

conclusion and then set about to, I think, support its conclusion 

through selective listening and consultation. 

 

From the outset the government has tried to convince people 

that this Bill was necessary, that somebody somewhere was 

actually asking for it.  And to date I want us to be on record 

again for saying that we did not receive one letter - 

_ not one letter was sent to my office supporting this 

legislation.  None of our caucus has had as much as one 

telephone call from a constituent asking us to vote in favour of 

this Bill, although we had had literally hundreds of letters, 

faxes, and meetings with people who see its dangers. 

 

(1500) 

 

So if nobody in the general public, in the vast group of women 

and part-time workers the government would have us believe 

our demanding this Bill, if nobody except the people that you 

indicate, union lobbyists, have spoken in defence of it, perhaps 

we haven't answered the most important question -- why are we 

changing this legislation at all? 

 

Saskatchewan already has labour standards that compare 

favourably with anywhere in this nation, and in fact the 

Minister of Labour has alluded to this.  Indeed they compare 

favourably throughout the world.  So why in these tenuous 

economic times are we tinkering with this legislation? 

 

I am disappointed to observe that Bill 32 was intended from the 

outset to be a tool for organized labour to achieve through 

legislation what its negotiators had been unable to achieve 

through the time-honoured collective bargaining process.  I've 

listened to the 

government rail on about its commitment to part-time workers 

and women.  I only wish there was evidence of that 

commitment where it really counts -- in the results of a 

thoughtful and productive economic development strategy. 

 

As society moves ahead, as the labour force changes and 

evolves, as people discover job-sharing, career change, and the 

freedom of being self-employed, it is incumbent upon 

government to provide policies which enhance rather than 

restrict the evolution of our workforce. 

 

I know what the government is trying to accomplish with this 

legislation, and I know that is different from what they would 

like the public to believe.  I think the government will shore up 

its failing political support to some extent.  I do.  However I 

flatly disagree that the women and students the government 

would like us to believe are the reason for this Bill will see any 

measurable improvement in their take-home pay, any 

measurable improvement in their employment opportunities or 

their quality of life as the result of this legislation. 

 

And when the dust settles, the women, the part-time workers, 

the young people, will come to understand that any change that 

makes employers less competitive and makes job creation more 

expensive will hurt all of us and hurt them far more than it 

helps. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chair, there is no particular value in trying to 

fix bad legislation.  I give tremendous credit to the willingness 

of public and private sector employers who spent endless hours 

and invested precious resources trying to convince government 

to modify its original proposals for Bill 32.  And I compliment 

those people who have worked so diligently to steer the 

government towards a more acceptable piece of legislation. 

 

This Bill 32 is more acceptable than the original proposal put 

forward by the government.  But regardless of that, it should 

not be passed into law without the accompanying regulations 

and the vital costing analysis that we have pressed the 

government for time and time again during the course of this 

debate.  People simply wanted time, and we didn't need to have 

to go through the antics in this legislature to try to provide them 

with time.  They should have been given time. 

 

I want to stress the point that Bill 32 by itself is virtually 

meaningless.  Until the regulations are drafted, it will be 

impossible to measure the true impact of this legislation.  We 

can only hope that the government will finally do the right 

thing when it creates its blue-chip panel -- blue-ribbon panel I 

think it was called -- to have input into the regulations. 

 

We will be watching and hoping that this panel can finally 

return to the original challenge of building an employer-worker 

consensus about how to have amended The Labour Standards 

Act function in such a manner that it will protect the interests 

of workers without creating unsupportable pressures on the 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

competitiveness and validity of public and private sector 

employers. 

 

I wish to say a word of acknowledgement to all of the people, 

the employers, even the labourers, aboriginal leaders, union 

representatives and Saskatchewan taxpayers in general who 

took valuable time to convey their points of view to our caucus, 

to meet with us and to offer their input when we sought to 

better understand the implications of this Bill. 

 

My greatest regret with respect to this legislation is that the 

government was not more diligent in gathering and digesting 

that information at the outset of the process, rather than as an 

afterthought when the Bill was past the point of no return. 

 

Mr. Chair, I do want to make comment as well on some of the 

statements made by the member from Maple Creek.  I find it 

quite unacceptable that any members of this Assembly would 

sign a petition coming before this Assembly, and I think that 

should give them some pause, if we're talking about their roles 

as representatives of their constituencies.  They're here to 

represent their constituencies. 

 

Mr. Chair, I conclude my remarks with the sincere hope that 

the government will be respectful of Saskatchewan's position in 

the global economy when drafting the regulations of this Bill, 

that ultimately consensus will somehow be achieved in the 

process. 

 

I remain committed to the belief that the way to better 

employment conditions, more choice and more flexibility and 

job opportunities, will not come at the hands of government 

through legislative improvements, but through a vibrant, 

healthy economy which is made possible, much more possible, 

when government does things differently and usually happens 

when there's . . . less possible when they do it through more 

regulation. 

 

With that, I'm sure that the minister does have some final 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I thank the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone very much for that. 

 

Before beginning I want to tell the member from Greystone 

that in an earlier session you had asked for the background 

material which went to make up our decision.  I'm told by my 

staff that that is ready.  It is not physically here, but it will be 

delivered to your office within a very short period of time. 

 

I think when the final comments on this, certainly the final 

session . . . While I was waiting, absorbing the gems of wisdom 

which were being spilled upon the floor in the Executive 

Council estimates, I was cleaning out my desk.  One of the 

things I found in my desk was something that I had completely 

forgotten about. 

 

It was a book entitled Labour-Management Innovation in 

Canada.  It speaks of two competing visions for the Canadian 

labour force.  I thought it was 

very useful.  I thought, this is our view of these two competing 

visions I accept.  Members opposite will have a different 

formulation of the two competing views of the labour force. 

 

This, I thought, was an excellent formulation of our view of 

these two views.  The author of the idea is the International 

Institute for Labour Studies, an affiliate of the International 

Labour Organization.  The analysts of the International Labour 

Organization speak of the low road and the high road in 

industrial restructuring.  From here on I'm going to read two 

paragraphs: 

 

 The low road is the strategy that relies on low cost and a 

deregulated labour market.  While it may result in short-lived 

improvements in competitive performance on the part of 

individual firms, over time it is likely that the consequences 

are union avoidance, little investment in the employees, 

heightened labour-management hostility, reduced wages, 

reduced living standards for workers.  It's hardly a 

trust-building strategy. 

 

 The high road to industrial restructuring is the strategy of 

high labour standards, worker empowerment, and promotion 

of joint problem solving and of high trust relations.  It's the 

strategy that enables all parties to share in the benefits and the 

burdens of change at the firm and industry levels.  It's the 

course being followed by a number of organizations cited in 

this report.  For these organizations the workforce is not 

regarded as just another cost to be cut but as an asset in which 

to invest.  They know that workers on the front lines have 

detailed knowledge of production processes, the customers, 

the markets, and that if a high quality, high value added 

model is to be pursued, partnerships between labour and 

management or at least a more cooperative and trusting 

relationship between labour and management must be 

formed.  That is how we describe the two competing visions. 

 

I may not have shared with the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone the author.  The document is published under the 

name of the Hon. David Dingwall, the current Liberal minister 

of supply and services in the federal government. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Well I found that 

most interesting, Mr. Minister, and I don't know why you 

would think that that was inconsistent with anything that had 

been said about Bill 32.  Part of what had been raised as a 

concern by people who had worked on your occupational 

health and safety group to come up with the legislation that I 

indeed stood in this House and supported last year . . . although 

you keep claiming I did not, so I assume that what you had 

done since and subsequently is to look at the record. 

 

What happened was people worked on that particular panel to 

work out a consensus, a consensus between those who are 

employers and those who are employees.  And I could not 

agree more with the 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

analysis that was just made in a way to ensure that things are 

done in the best interest of people, all people. 

 

I don't know why it is you're making the assumption that 

anyone would want to support employers who simply want to 

fire people or treat them in a poor manner.  That doesn't do 

anything for an economy.  It doesn't do anything for 

well-being.  It doesn't do anything to do anything for economic 

recovery or it wouldn't be an intelligent way to be dealing with 

anything. 

 

So I not only support what you've indicated; we have never not 

concurred with it.  What we've indicated in these two pieces of 

legislation and primarily with the one that we're discussing 

right now, is that a consensus was not reached.  And the people 

who in fact were working on that as employers and employees, 

the concern was that you did not . . . you did not bring forward 

proposals that were the result of consensus between employers 

and employees at all. 

 

So do I take it then, do I take it, Mr. Minister, that as much as 

you're saying that employees should have great consideration 

and we should ensure that employees are consulted and that 

they are brought onside, can you say similarly for employers?  

Do you think that it's necessary to reach the right kind of 

management-labour relationships by ensuring that employers 

are involved in the process and they too are involved in helping 

to reach a consensus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This will remain the subject of 

disagreement between the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

and I because it is a . . . I do not have statistical evidence to 

prove this.  It is my view that the majority of employers, the 

majority of employers who are moderates, the majority of trade 

unionists who are moderates, support our centralist approach -- 

it has been centralist. 

 

I recognize that there are people on both sides of the argument 

whom I could never get on board; it is definitionally impossible 

to get the extremes of both sides on board.  But it is our view 

that the majority of moderates on both sides of the equation do 

support the approach we have taken.  And I will predict that 

next year, whatever controversies the Department of Labour 

stirs up -- and it seems to be our lot in life to carry this baggage 

along the road . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You won't be here too much longer.  

Don't worry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And the member from Kindersley 

may be correct in that as well. 

 

But whatever is the subject of controversy next year, I'll make 

the prediction -- and if I'm here, I will remind the member of it 

-- that this legislation will not be the subject of controversy at 

the next session.  At the next session, the members opposite 

will find some new horrors to complain about. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- The minister has given notice of House 

amendments -- three amendments to clause 8 -- and I'll ask the 

minister to move them separately. 

 

(1515) 

 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move: 

 

 That the Bill, section 8 of the printed Bill, be amended by 

amending section 13.1 of the Act as being enacted by 

section 8 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) By striking out subsection (2) and substituting the 

following: 

 

  "(2) Subject to subsection (2.1), the notice required by 

subsection (1): 

 

   (a) shall be in writing; and 

 

   (b) may be given by posting notices in conspicuous places 

where employees have ready access to read the 

notices. 

 

  "(2.1) The notice required by subsection (1) need not be in 

writing or posted: 

 

   (a) where posting the notice is impractical due to the small 

size of the employer's operation; or 

 

   (b) in other cases, where written notice is impractical"; 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: -- I think if the minister will want to continue 

through (b), (c), and (d). 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I think I was a little premature in 

ending. 

 

 (b) By striking out "unless the change results in the 

employee working hours that entitle the employee to wages 

at the rate of time and one-half" in subsection (3); 

 

 (c) By adding the following subsection after subsection (4): 

 

  "(5) The director may permit a variation from the 

requirements of subsection (1) or (3) where the employer 

seeks and obtains the written consent to the variation from 

the trade union representing the employees"; and 

 

 (d) By striking out existing subsection (5) and substituting 

the following: 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

 

  "(6) Subsections (1) and (3) do not apply where any sudden 

or unusual occurrence or condition arises that could not, by 

the exercise of reasonable judgment, have been foreseen by 

the employer". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I further move . . . the member's 

standing. No, I guess not; I guess the member can make any 

comments you want.  Oh, just stretching, okay.  I further move 

that section 8 of the printed Bill be amended by: 

 

 Amending subsection 13.3(1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 8 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) By striking out the portion that precedes clause (a) and 

substituting "An employer shall not grant to each employee 

who works six hours or more an unpaid meal break of at 

least 30 minutes within every five consecutive hours of 

work except"; 

 

 (b) By striking out the portion of the clause that precedes 

subsection (i) and substituting "where the director is 

satisfied that the employer and a majority of the employees 

agree that the employees may"; 

 

 (c) By adding the following clause after clause (b): 

 

  "(c) where the employer seeks and obtains the written 

consent of the trade union representing the employees"; and 

 

 (d) By renumbering existing clauses (c) and (d) as clauses 

(d) and (e). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- 

 

 Amend clause 13.4 of the Act as being enacted by section 8 

of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) In subsection (1): 

 

  (i) By striking out "Except as otherwise provided in the 

regulations" and substitute "Where required to do so by the 

regulations"; and 

 

  (ii) by striking out "seniority" and substituting "length of 

service"; 

 

 (b) by striking out subsection (2); and 

 

 (c) by renumbering subsection (3) as subsection (2). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

Clause 9 agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I move: 

 

 That section 10 of the printed Bill be amended by striking 

out subsection 10(1) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "10(1) Clauses 22(1)(a) and (b) are repealed and the 

following substituted: 

 

  '(a) subject to clause (a), to a fine of not more than $2,000 

for an offence; and 

 

  '(b) in the case of an offence that is committed within six 

years after the person is convicted of any offence: 

 

   (i) to a fine of not more than $5,000 for a second offence; 

and 

 

   (ii) to a fine of not more than $10,000 for a third or 

subsequent offence'". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson. I move: 

 

 That section 24 of the printed Bill be amended by amending 

section 39 of the Bill as being enacted by section 24 of the 

printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by striking out subsection (1) and substituting the 

following: 

 

  "(1) The minimum sum of money to be paid for a public 

holiday or for any other day designated for observance of 

the public holiday by an employer to any employee who 

does not work on that day: 

 

   (a) where the employer pays to the employee the 

employee's regular wages for that period that includes 

that day, is equal to those wages; and 

 

   (b) in any other case, is the amount A calculated in 

accordance with the following formula:  A = W/20 

 

   where W is the total of the wages earned by the employee 

during the four weeks immediately preceding the 

public holiday, exclusive of overtime"; and 

 

 (b) by striking out subsection (3) and 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

substituting the following: 

 

  "(3) For the purposes of this section, where an employee 

takes an annual holiday during the four weeks immediately 

preceding a public holiday, 'wages' includes the amount of 

annual holiday pay that is payable with respect to any 

annual holidays actually taken during that period". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 25 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move: 

 

 That section 28 of the printed Bill be amended in the 

following manner: 

 

 Amend section 44.1 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

28 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by adding "but subject to subsection (3)" after "sections 

43 and 43.1" in subsection (1); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (2): 

 

  "(3) The notice required by subsection (1) may be given 

concurrently with the notice required by section 43 or 

43.1". 

 

Amending section . . . I don't know if the chairperson wants to 

vote on these individually or in mass.  I suspect you want to 

vote on them individually.  I will halt there. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: --  

 

 Amend existing section 44.2 of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 28 of the printed Bill: 

 

In the following fashion; that is to say: 

 

 (a) by striking out clause (1)(b) and substituting the 

following: 

 

  "(b) either 

 

   (i) in the case of serious illness or injury, the absence does 

not exceed 12 weeks in a period of 52 weeks; or 

 

   (ii) in the case of illness or injury that is not serious, the 

absences do not exceed a total of 12 days in a 

calendar year, except where it can be demonstrated 

that the employee has a record of chronic absenteeism 

and there is no 

reasonable expectation of improved attendance"; and 

 

 (b) by adding "or pursuant to The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code" after "at common law" in subsection (3). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 29 agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson.  I move that section 30 of the printed Bill be 

amended in the following fashion.  That is to say by: 

 

 Strike out section 45.1 of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 30 of the printed Bill, and substitute the following: 

 

 "Provision of benefits 

  45.1  Where an employer provides a benefit to employees 

who work at least 30 hours per week or any other number 

of hours prescribed in the regulations, the employer shall 

provide benefits in accordance with the regulations to all 

eligible employees". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 31 and 32 agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 33 of the printed 

Bill . . . once again I've got to do this, I suppose, in two halves, 

in two parts since they're different actual sections of the Act -- 

33 of the printed Bill be amended in the following fashion, that 

is to say by: 

 

 Amending section 60 of the Act as being enacted by section 

33 of the printed Bill by striking out "14" in subclause 

(5)(b)(i) and substituting "21". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 33 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Amending section 62.4 of the Act as being enacted by 

section 33 of the printed Bill, by striking out clause "14" in 

clause (1)(a) and substituting "21". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 as amended agreed to. 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

Clauses 34 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1530) 

 

Clause 40 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move: 

 

 That section 40 of the printed Bill be amended in the 

following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Amend section 72 of the Act as being enacted by section 40 

of the printed Bill by adding the following subsection after 

subsection (2): 

 

  "(3) Where a collective bargaining agreement entered into 

before the coming into force of this section contains a 

provision setting out a requirement that is less than a 

minimum requirement imposed by The Labour Standards 

Amendment Act, 1994, the collective bargaining 

agreement is deemed to be amended to provide for the 

minimum requirement imposed by The Labour Standards 

Amendment Act, 1994". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 40 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 41 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 45 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Once again this is in two parts, and I 

will move them . . . No, it's not.  This is a single amendment.  I 

move that section 45 of the printed Bill be amended in the 

following fashion.  That is to say: 

 

 Amend clause 45(d) of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering clauses 84(1)(e.2), (e.3) and (e.4) of the 

Act, as being enacted by section 45 of the printed Bill, as 

clauses 84(1)(e.11), (e.2) and (e.21); 

 

 (b) by striking out "seniority" in renumbered clause 

84(1)(e.2)(iii) of the Act, as being enacted by section 45 of 

the printed Bill, and substituting "length of service"; 

 

 (c) by enacting the following clauses after renumbered 

clause 84(1)(e.21) of the Act, as being enacted by section 

45 of the printed Bill: 

 

  "(e.3) for the purposes of Part VI, requiring the observance 

of a public holiday on a day other than the calendar day on 

which it would otherwise fall; 

 

  "(e.4) authorizing the establishment by an employer of a 

uniform entitlement date for the annual holidays of 

employees and modifying the requirements of Part VII to 

accommodate the use of a uniform 

entitlement date"; and 

 

 (d) by striking out clause 84(1)(e.8) of the Act, as being 

enacted by section 45 of the printed Bill, and substituting 

the following: 

 

  "(e.8) governing the provision of benefits to eligible 

employees pursuant to section 45.1". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 45 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 46 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move Section 46 of the printed Bill, 

the amendment in the following fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Strike out clauses 85(1.1)(a), (b) and (c) of the Act, as being 

enacted by section 46 of the printed Bill, and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "(a) subject to clause (b), to a fine of not more than $2,000 

for an offence; and 

 

 "(b) in the case of an offence that is committed within six 

years after the person is convicted of any offence: 

 

  (i) to a fine of not more than $5,000 for a second offence; 

and 

 

  (ii) to a fine of not more than $10,000 for a third or 

subsequent  

offence". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 46 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 47 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister would like to move that the Bill 

be reported with amendment . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will do so.  But before doing so, I 

am remiss in overlooking one thing.  While this is the 14th 

appearance before Committee of the Whole with this Bill, I do 

think this is the first time we've had our head of planning and 

priorities, our head of planning department here.  John Boyd is 

with us today, has assisted us ably.  Although his role today 

was somewhat minimal, his role in the preparing of this 

legislation was not.  I publicly want to thank him.  I also want 

to thank all of the officials who gave such valuable service to 

the Government of Saskatchewan in achieving this goal. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think first of all 

I should join with the minister in welcoming the addition of his 

officials here today.  Obviously you've all done a lot of work, 

those of you who have been here through the whole stretch as 

well as the new member.  It has been, without question, a heavy 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

load of work for you people and for your department.  I can 

attest to that by the amount in volumes of work that have hit 

my desk. 

 

And I want to say that I'm happy to have done this.  It wasn't 

easy, and certainly we have been somewhat torn at times as an 

official opposition as to the stand to take because we're not 

against the concept of labour standards for working people. 

 

We obviously believe that people who work need some 

protection in society.  What we have objected to, quite simply, 

has been the approach that was taken in process and the 

extremes to which you went. 

 

And just to comfort, Mr. Chairman, my remarks will be short, 

but they are timely and appropriate.  I want to take this 

opportunity to thank some folks who helped us.  Obviously the 

minister's officials are visible, and everyone knows who did a 

lot of the work, and they will know that there will be a large 

team behind them. 

 

But we too have had a large contingent of people working very 

hard on this extremely long and difficult piece of legislation.  I 

want to thank our research team for all of the work that they 

have done.  Much of the work that I have displayed here was a 

result of their efforts.  Much more of it was a result of the 

contribution by the business community itself and the people 

through the province who have contributed, and I want to thank 

them. 

 

I also want to thank the workers of Saskatchewan who have 

taken the time to report to me their views, and while the third 

party says that they haven't had any input on the other side of 

this issue, I will admit freely that I have had some 

representation on the opposite side of the coin to the business 

community.  I believe that that came to me, Mr. Chairman, 

because the working people of this province felt that we would 

be fair and understanding and try to find the balance needed 

between workers and labour, and I am committed to that as my 

party is. 

 

And even if we were to form government next time, the 

workers of this province can be assured that we would not 

radically destroy this piece of legislation in one fell swoop.  We 

would certainly bring it back for examination and try to bring 

in a balance that will allow our business community to thrive so 

that we can in fact build a job base and a tax base with 

confidence in our province. 

 

And that commitment, Mr. Chairman, I give to the people of 

this province today.  As we watch this legislation enacted, we 

will certainly pledge to watch how it works and we certainly do 

believe that there will be changes needed.  And I wouldn't 

really be surprised if this minister ends up bringing this 

particular piece of legislation back before the next election in 

order to try to save the day at the polls.  I thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Rather 

than to try to get into this obvious collusion of somehow 

always pointing out the third party as being 

remiss in something, I would like to simply take this 

opportunity to acknowledge that I know that the deputy 

minister of Labour has done tremendous amounts of work on 

this.  I have heard that on many occasions that you've been 

meeting with people throughout the night.  And I know that 

there must be other officials who accompanied you.  That 

means that there was a strong commitment in wanting to work 

through what you believed in.  And I think that that should be 

acknowledged. 

 

Simply because we have a difference of opinion does not mean 

that I should not respect what it is you believe in.  And I want 

to commend you and the people who have worked with you to 

defend and uphold what you think is in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So with that I would like to also acknowledge the hard work of 

many other people who were fighting diligently on behalf of 

their beliefs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to thank the member from 

Greystone for those very gracious remarks. 

 

And in conclusion . . . just one comment in conclusion.  People 

have seen me coming into the legislature virtually every day 

with this enormous briefcase.  To fill a briefcase that full of 

paper, and it's heavy, that has been almost exclusively mail to 

be signed.  And it'll come as no surprise to members of this 

Assembly to know that I don't answer those letters; it's done by 

the department.  Virtually every day we filled that briefcase up 

with mail and I bring it in here and sign it.  These are the 

people who have done all the letter writing; I've just got to put 

my name at the bottom. 

 

That's the tip of the iceberg, of the work this department has 

done on these Bills.  This has been an enormous workload.  

This is the smallest Department of Labour in any province west 

of the Maritimes and to have brought before this legislature two 

Bills of this controversial nature truly is a remarkable feat for 

this department.  I do want to acknowledge it before I sit down. 

 

With that, Mr. Chairperson, I shall move that the Bill be 

reported with amendments. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Enjoy it because this is by far the 

shortest of the amendments.  I move section 3 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Amending section 3 of the printed Bill: 



2852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

 (a) by striking out clause (a); and 

 

 (b) by renumbering clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) as clauses (a), 

(b), (c) and (d). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I move that 

section 4 of the printed Bill be amended in the following 

fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Amending section 4 of the printed Bill by adding the 

following subsection after subsection (9): 

 

 "(10) The following subsection is added after subsection 

4(12): 

 

  '(13)  Notwithstanding subsection (1.1): 

 

If anybody in the audience is still following me after those 

series of numbers, I'm sure they'll be fascinated to know the 

amendment reads as follows: 

 

  (a) persons who are members of the board immediately 

before the coming into force of this subsection are 

continued as members of the board on an acting basis until 

new appointments are made pursuant to subsection (1.1); 

 

  (b) persons who are alternate members immediately before 

the coming into force of this subsection: 

 

   (i) are deemed to have been members on and from the 

dates of their appointments as alternate members; and 

 

   (ii) are continued as members of the board on an acting 

basis until new appointments are made pursuant to 

subsection (1.1); and 

 

  (c) all matters pending before the board as it was 

constituted immediately before the coming into force of 

subsection (1.1) are continued before the board as 

constituted pursuant to clauses (a) and (b)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

(1545) 

 

Clause 7 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 7 of the 

printed Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Strike out sections 10.1 and 10.2 of the Act, as being enacted 

by section 7 of the printed Bill, and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "Certification after unfair labour practice 

  10.1  On an application pursuant to clause 5(a), (b) or (c), 

the board shall make an order directing a vote to be taken 

by secret ballot of all employees eligible to vote, and may 

make an order pursuant to clause 5(g), where: 

 

   (a)  the board finds that the employer or the employer's 

agent has committed an unfair labour practice or has 

otherwise violated this Act; 

 

   (b)  there is no evidence before the board that shows that a 

majority of the employees in the appropriate unit 

support the application; and 

 

   (c)  the board finds that evidence of majority support 

would have been obtained but for the unfair labour 

practice or violation of this Act. 

 

 "Decertification after unfair labour practice 

  10.2  On an application pursuant to clause 5(k) for an order 

rescinding an order made pursuant to clause 5(a), (b) or (c), 

the board shall make an order directing a vote to be taken 

by secret ballot of all employees eligible to vote, and may 

make an order pursuant to clause 5(g), where: 

 

   (a)  the board finds that the trade union or an employee has 

committed an unfair labour practice or has otherwise 

violated this Act; 

 

   (b)  there is no evidence before the board that shows that a 

majority of the employees in the appropriate unit 

support the application; and 

 

   (c)  the board finds that evidence of majority support 

would have been obtained but for the unfair labour 

practice or violation of this Act". 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Does this in any way -- the changes that 

you've proposed here -- does this in any way change the 

circumstance as was evident at the Moose Jaw Woolco store?  

What you're proposing here has a little bit different connotation 

as far as the ordering of votes.  Does it change it in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- This clause deals with automatic 

certification and decertification.  I do not believe that there 

were any grounds in Moose Jaw which would have given rise 

to such a thing.  So I think the answer is no. 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2853 

I'm not, however, intimately familiar with all of the details of 

that dispute.  But if you want an opinion, I think the answer is 

no.  This would not have affected that matter because I don't 

think there were any grounds for automatic certification.  There 

were no grounds for automatic decertification there. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, as I understand the situation the 

reason the application for a vote was denied was because of an 

unfair labour practice against the employer in that situation, 

and it just sat in limbo. 

 

Now what you're saying here is that either the employer or the 

bargaining unit, if there's something, that you can force a vote. 

Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well, you have to meet both . . . you 

have to meet all the tests.  These things are cumulative and 

they're very high.  And the experience of other provinces has 

been, in Manitoba and B.C.(British Columbia) where they have 

them, is they are very rarely met. 

 

There has to be an unfair labour practice.  It also has to be such 

that it prohibited the free expression of the will of the 

employees, and on decertifications that's extremely rare.  And 

it's my understanding, and I put it on no better basis than that, 

my understanding is there were no such grounds in Moose Jaw. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairperson.  Again, one of the shorter ones.  I move that 

section 8 of the printed Bill be amended in the following 

fashion. That is to say: 

 

 Amend subsection 8(1) of the printed Bill: 

 

  (a)  by adding "and" after clause (a); 

 

  (b)  by striking out "and" after clause (b); and 

 

  (c)  by striking out clause 2. 

 

The Chair: -- That final line is by striking out clause (c). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 13 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I want to get the attention of 

members.  It's kind of tricky.  This amendment is that we're 

going to strike out the clause, so I will be asking all members -- 

opposition and government -- I will be urging all members to 

vote against clause 13.  It will 

then be struck out, and that is the amendment we're proposing. 

 

So I will ask all members of the Assembly, government and 

opposition, to vote against clause 13. 

 

Clause 13 negatived. 

 

Clause 14 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 14 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion; that is to say by; 

 

 Renumber section 14 of the printed Bill as section 13. 

 

 Amend subsection 25(3.5) of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 13 of the printed Bill, by striking out 

"Subject to subsections (3.6) and 26.1(11)" and substituting 

"Subject to subsections (3.6), 26.1(11) and 26.1(12)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move section 15 of the printed Bill 

be amended in the following fashion; that is to say by; 

 

 Renumber section 15 of the printed Bill as section 14. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 16 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion.  There are three 

different sections affected, so I will read these in three parts.  I 

move that 16 of the printed Bill be amended in the following 

fashion; that is to say, by; 

 

 Renumber section 16 of the printed Bill as section 15. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 16 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion; that is to say by: 

 

 Strike out subsection 26.1(11) of the Act, as being enacted 

by renumbered section 15 of the printed Bill, and substitute 

the following: 

 

  "(11) Where the chairperson of the Labour Relations Board 

appoints a member of his arbitration board pursuant to 

subsection (7), 



2854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

the party who failed to make the appointment shall pay the 

remuneration and expenses of the person so appointed." 

 

  "(12) Each of the parties shall pay an equal share of the 

remuneration and expenses of a person appointed pursuant 

to subsection (6) or (8) as the third party of an arbitration 

board". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- 

 

 Amend section 26.5 of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 15 of the printed Bill, by adding the 

following subsections after subsection (7): 

 

  "(8) Notwithstanding section 33 but subject to subsections 

(9) and (10), the expiry date of a collective bargaining 

agreement concluded pursuant to this section is deemed to 

be two years from its effective date or any other date that 

the parties agree on. 

 

  "(9) Notwithstanding section 33, not less than 30 days or 

more than 60 days before the expiry date of a collective 

bargaining agreement concluded pursuant to this section, 

either party may give notice in writing to terminate the 

agreement or to negotiate a revision of the agreement. 

 

  "(10) Where a notice is given pursuant to subsection (9), 

the parties shall immediately bargain collectively with a 

view to the renewal or revision of the agreement or the 

conclusion of a new agreement". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 17 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 17 to 20 of the 

printed Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say 

by: 

 

 Renumbering sections 17 to 20 of the printed Bill as sections 

16 to 19. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The minister was talking awful fast.  He 

hasn't had a last-minute recantation on 33.4 on the terminations 

of agreements here, have we? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We've had no last-minute 

recantations. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I just wanted to make sure that that queasy 

feeling in the pit of your stomach didn't tell you to do 

something different at the last minute. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, it was my exuberation for finally 

enacting some of the finest labour legislation of this country. 

 

Clauses 17 to 20 inclusive as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Once again there are three parts to 

this.  I move that section 21 of the printed Bill be amended in 

the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Renumber section 21 of the printed Bill as section 20. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 21 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Strike out subsection 37.1(1) of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 20 of the printed Bill, and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "(1) In this section, 'services' means cafeteria or food 

services, janitorial or cleaning services or security services 

that are provided to: 

 

  (a) the owner or manager of a building owned by the 

Government of Saskatchewan or a municipal government; 

or 

 

  (b) a hospital, university or other public institution". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 21 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Strike out section 37.2 of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 20 of the printed Bill, and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "Application of section 37 to certain businesses 

  37.2 Unless the board orders otherwise, if collective 

bargaining relating to a business is governed by the laws of 

Canada, and the business or part of the business becomes 

subject to the laws of Saskatchewan, section 37 applies, 

with any necessary modification, of the person owning or 

acquiring the business or part of it is bound by any 

collective agreement in force when the business becomes 

subject to the laws of Saskatchewan". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 22 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2855 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move section 22 to 24 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Renumber sections 22 to 24 of the printed Bill as sections 21 

to 23. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clauses 22 to 24 inclusive as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again there are three parts to this, the 

first of which is as follows.  I move that section 25 of the 

printed Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say 

by: 

 

 Renumber section 25 of the printed Bill as section 24. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 25 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Amending subsection 46(3) of the Act, as being enacted by 

renumbered section 24 of the printed Bill, by striking out 

clause (b) and substituting the following: 

 

 "(b) provide to striking or lock-out employees who are not 

reinstated notice of lay-off or pay in lieu of notice: 

 

  (i) in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement; 

 

  (ii) in accordance with a back-to-work protocol agreed to 

by the employer and the trade union, notwithstanding The 

Labour Standards Act; or 

 

  (iii) where there is no collective bargaining agreement in 

force, in accordance with The Labour Standards Act". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move that section 25 of the printed 

Bill be amended in the following fashion, that is to say: 

 

 Amend section 47 of the Act, as being enacted by the 

renumbered section 24 of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering subsections (1), (2) and (3) as 

subsections (2), (3) and (4); 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection before renumbered 

subsection (2): 

 

  "(1) In this section, 'benefit plan' means a medical, dental, 

disability or life insurance  

plan or other similar plan"; 

 

 (c) in renumbered subsection (2): 

 

  (i) by striking out "normally payable to those employees" in 

the portion that precedes clause (a); and 

 

  (ii) by striking out "entitlements to benefits" in clauses (a) 

and substituting "membership in a benefit plan"; 

 

 (d) by striking out "subsection (1)" in renumbered subsection 

(3) wherever it appears and in each case substituting 

"subsection (2)"; 

 

 (e) in renumbered subsection (4): 

 

  (i) by striking out "benefits" and substituting "membership 

in benefit plans"; and 

 

  (ii) by striking out "subsection (1)" and substituting 

"subsection (2)"; and 

 

 (f) by adding the following subsection after renumbered 

subsection (4): 

 

  "(5) On the request of the trade union, the employer shall 

provide the trade union with any information required to 

enable the trade union to make the payments mentioned in 

subsection (1)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 25 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move section 26 of the printed Bill 

be amended in the following fashion, that is to say by: 

 

 Renumber section 26 of the printed Bill as section 25. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 26 as amended agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If there are no other comments which 

members opposite want to make, I will therefore move that this 

Bill be reported with amendments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well obviously 

there are a few words that have to be said as we waived our 

opportunity in first clause today in order to allow the 

amendments to be gone through so that the general public can 

hear them and understand something of what is happening. 

 

A couple of observations would have to be made.  First of all, 

when two Bills as serious as these two are to our province 

require some amendments, that's not surprising.  But when they 

require as many 



2856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

amendments as these two have seen, then you've got to 

seriously wonder about what kind of chaos this government and 

this province is heading into. 

 

We have said from the beginning -- and we will say again -- 

that this Trade Union Act is and will be the Achilles' heel of 

this government.  Because unlike The Labour Standards Act 

where there is some benefit to workers in protecting them, The 

Trade Union Act is nothing more nor less than a philosophical 

shift in direction for this government and for this province 

orchestrated by a government desperate to move back to its left 

wing in philosophy.  This is a philosophical power shift. 

 

This has nothing to do with good government.  It has nothing to 

do with building or creating the province, either in terms of 

jobs or tax base or fairness.  This is straight, cold-hearted 

politics.  This is left-wing philosophy at its absolute worst.  

This is a radical power shift.  It is a radical power shift of 

democracy to the trade unions, a power shift of the ability of 

the people to determine the destiny of the province, shifted to 

an organization that cannot be challenged at the polls as the 

government can be. 

 

Once you shift power through government legislation to the 

trade union bosses, who do they answer to?  They may answer 

to a few people who elect them originally as the leaders of the 

unions, but once they have achieved that power base, the 

general public of the province, the taxpayers of this province, 

have absolutely no say as to whether those people will be in 

charge or not. 

 

And this is the philosophical power shift, the shifting of the 

rights of the people of the province as a whole to have a say 

about what the trade union people do in our province.  In other 

words, we have stricken out the ability for democracy to work.  

We have taken away the ability of the people to determine who 

will do to them whatever is done to them. 

 

We have in fact orchestrated a left-wing dictatorship, the very 

substance of direction that Russia went to 70 years ago, the 

very substance of the way that they brought about the control of 

the people in the Soviet Union was through this kind of power 

shift away from the democratic base.  And that is what the 

people of Saskatchewan will have to learn to live with for the 

next two years.  That power shift of left-wing radicalism will 

certainly bring this government down because now they are 

coldly identified for what they truly are -- the left-wing 

government of extreme socialists that they are. 

 

Nothing like the kind of moderate compromise that we saw . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I would ask that all members 

allow the member for Maple Creek to make his statements.  

He's legitimately debating the motion before us.  And I ask 

members to come to order to allow him to make his statements. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will 

repeat.  There is nothing here like the kind of compromise that 

we saw demonstrated by some of the back-benchers of this 

very government.  The member from Indian Head-Wolseley 

very courageously stood up in this Assembly and helped us to 

orchestrate a change to the wildlife habitat Bill where the aims 

of the government were directly turned around to the aims of 

the people of this province -- a courageous man who stood up 

against the things that were wrong. 

 

And yet today we see a Bill that so dramatically and drastically 

changes the power shift in this province that every one of those 

back-benchers ought to have the courage to stand up and bolt 

this government and leave it once and for all behind them.  

There is absolutely no excuse for those of you in the back 

benches to allow this shift in democracy, especially when you 

take note of the fact that, when we pointed out that the 

democratic process to the right to vote in certification had been 

taken away, you stood up in your caucus and you fought for it 

and you got it back, and the amendment is here today to prove 

it.  You did have that courage when you understood what was 

going on. 

 

Once again I say to you that your front bench has snowed you.  

You have allowed them to do a power shift away from 

democracy, the very thing that you people believe in.  You've 

been snowed by the trade union bosses and you've been snowed 

by your front benches.  And this province will suffer serious 

repercussions as a result of this kind of legislation. 

 

No one will come to this province with any kind of a business 

investment without checking what the labour laws are.  It 

absolutely will not happen.  They will check these laws before 

they bring their money and themselves and their businesses 

here.  And they will pass it by, as quickly as a jet can fly to 

Alberta.  Absolutely without question. 

 

Having said that in frustration and despair for my province, I 

will have to say again that this Bill has been a tremendous lot 

of work and there are some people that I want to thank for the 

work that they have helped me to do to try to bring some sanity 

to this government, from the people of this province.  As the 

spokesman who was able to be here, I am proud to have done 

my role, but it was only as a result of the material that those 

people provided me with. 

 

I want to thank the research people who work in our offices and 

throughout the province.  In this situation this runs even further 

abroad and goes to each of the constituencies where members 

of our party work diligently to gather the information 

necessary.  The business community obviously contributed and 

we thank them. 

 

And we thank the umbrella groups, the business leaders, and 

we also particularly thank the individuals who had the courage 

to stand up on their own and put into jeopardy their very own 

business existences in this province to voice their concerns 

publicly.  That took a lot of courage, because some of them 

may now have to move as a result of pressure that this 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2857 

government will put on them. 

 

I again will thank the workers of this province who have come 

through with an understanding, an understanding of how this 

kind of legislation will destroy the very job base that they 

require in order to live in this province.  They have understood 

that and they have begged for some compromise so that the job 

base and the tax base of this province can remain.  Because 

they do believe that this is a beautiful and productive and 

wonderful province to live in if you allow that to happen 

without such onerous legislation. 

 

You cannot expect people to stay here just for the beauty of the 

province or for the opportunities that you shut down.  The 

vastest natural resource base in all of this country, and you are 

destroying the ability of the people themselves to develop it 

and to enjoy it, and they will have to, reluctantly, leave it 

behind.  Not you, not I, but our children and our grandchildren 

will have to find opportunities somewhere else as we take this 

province into this dark, dismal trail of left-wing politics, pure, 

crass politics.  No building, no creation, just philosophy, a need 

to satisfy your supporters at the polls and absolutely nothing 

else. 

 

But I do thank the officials who helped us, and I say to you that 

in spite of the very, very detrimental effects that this legislation 

will have.  Obviously you and your workers have done a lot of 

work and I congratulate them for the work that they did. 

 

There is some sanity in some of the amendments, but for the 

most part it leaves way, way too much undone and unsaid.  

And we will certainly have to fix this legislation, if not before 

the next election, immediately after.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Bill 54 is going to 

receive Royal Assent this afternoon.  And it is unfortunate, I 

believe, that the government chose to alter the course of the 

people's future in our province by changing the legislation 

without taking the responsibility to measure the possible 

consequences of those changes beforehand. 

 

The amendments that have just gone through this afternoon will 

potentially alter Saskatchewan's place in the economy.  And I 

don't think simply Saskatchewan's place in the economy of our 

province . . . or our country, but also the North American 

continent and potentially the globe.  Making changes to the 

direction of the economy is not like turning the steering wheel 

of a car, where the slight movement of the wheel is going to 

produce a dramatic change in the direction instantly. 

 

I actually believe, Mr. Chairman, that a more appropriate 

analogy is that changing the direction of an economy, which 

this particular government policy does, is like changing the 

direction of the Queen Mary.  In other words, steering the 

Queen Mary, a movement in labour legislation, a change in 

taxation 

policy, like a movement in the rudder of a giant ship, can take a 

long time before the change actually changes course -- the ship 

actually changes course. 

 

But once that course has been changed, it takes an equally long 

time and an equally significant change in direction to bring 

things back on course.  And that's really what we've been most 

concerned about, that there are changes here today that it won't 

have an immediate impact but it will have a long-term impact 

and then we won't be able to change that course readily. 

 

As of today, the New Democratic government has indeed 

plotted a different course for us in our province, different from 

where we were heading, different from where the rest of the 

competitive economies are heading.  And as other economies 

head toward less restrictive environments for business, 

committed to creating jobs and staying competitive, 

Saskatchewan's captain of Labour has caused us, I think, to 

steam off in a very different direction.  I hope they're good, 

they look very good actually. 

 

And perhaps he is right.  I give him that.  Perhaps our captain 

of Labour is right.  Maybe this is cutting-edge legislation.  But 

this is not the time in our economy when we can afford to be 

wrong and that's really the point that I was trying to make in 

our debates in this legislature, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I contend that the amending of The Trade Union Act has been a 

mistake and that it could well contribute to the Saskatchewan 

economy running aground under the stewardship of this 

government or one that follows it. 

 

And I regret that the government of the day has disrupted our 

economic recovery with what has been seen outside of the 

province as a negative signal.  It has sent shock waves 

resonating throughout the Canadian economic community, and 

it has diverted attention of the job creators in our province 

during a time when their focus should be squarely on doing 

business and creating work for people. 

 

I can only hope that the government will give pause and will 

give sober thought, sober second thought -- I don't know why 

I'm using sober as a word on a day like today -- to this 

legislation before the regulations are passed. 

 

I find it most intriguing with some of the people with whom 

I've met, the IBEW (International Brotherhood of Electrical 

Workers) and other unions are now recognizing a reality that it 

appears that the government has not recognized. 

 

And I do hope for the sake of the province and all of us that 

what has transpired here today will work in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan and not against it. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I join with the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone in expressing the wish that what 



2858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

we've done this afternoon will work in the best interests of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That, I think, is an appropriate note on which to move that I 

move that this Bill be reported with amendments. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:16 p.m. until 4:21 p.m. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended on the 

following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Simard Hamilton 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Johnson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Crofford 

Penner Stanger 

Cunningham Kluz 

Lorje Keeping 

Lautermilch Jess 

Renaud Langford 

-- 26 

Nays 

 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Devine Goohsen 

Neudorf Haverstock 

Boyd McPherson 

Toth Bergman 

-- 10 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, I move the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move the Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Leave granted. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Churchill Downs, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, it shall stand adjourned until the date and time set by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 

possible, of such date and time. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 4:31 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Public Health 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act respecting the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

Bill No. 52 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

and to enact a Consequential Amendment to 

The Forest Act 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to Create, Encourage and Facilitate 

Business Opportunities in Saskatchewan 

through the Establishment of the 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 

Bill No. 38 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting Fisheries 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Research Council Act 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Crown Corporations 

Act, 1993 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act respecting the Superannuation of 

Teachers and Disability Benefits for Teachers 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Act, 1980 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2859 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act(No. 6) 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation and to enact certain Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of 

this Act 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

His Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Years ending respectively on March 31, 

1994 and on March 31, 1995. 

 

His Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:35 p.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I adjourn the 

Assembly, I just want to take this opportunity to thank the 

many people in the building who helped make this legislative 

process work, starting with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 

staff surrounding your office, the Clerk and staff at the Table 

who on a daily basis work with us; obviously the staff of the 

official opposition and the third party, who work diligently 

preparing for question period and debate every day.  I notice 

Lorraine and her staff are in the gallery today.  I want to thank 

them for all the work they do in bringing groups through this 

Assembly.  That's a very important part of what happens, is 

learning by students who come here.  And all the other people 

who work here with us, the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff who 

do an excellent job of working with us as well. 

 

I want to say as well to all members of the Assembly, I think 

we had a very successful session, and I wish each and every 

one of you a pleasant summer and urge you all to take some 

time with family and friends in your constituency and have a 

good holiday.  And we would very much like, as minister of 

tourism, for you to spend it in Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm going 

to beg the House's indulgence for a moment.  This is sort of out 

of the ordinary, but I want to thank 

the Legislative Assembly staff, the Speaker's office, and people 

from the Assembly who do so much.  This will be my last 

session as the Leader of the Official Opposition, and over the 

last two sessions it has been very enjoyable working with 

everyone connected with this building, with the governing 

party, with the third party in the Assembly.  And it has truly 

been a privilege. 

 

And the process will unfold and my party will select a leader 

sometime this fall.  There will be a new leader of the 

opposition, I presume, come the next session.  But I did want to 

take the opportunity to say thank you to everyone, because that 

role is one that is necessary to the House, and people have been 

very cooperative in helping me fulfil it and I didn't want to miss 

the opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I want to take a few moments as well to say a word of 

thanks to all people behind the scenes whose hard work and 

dedication make our jobs easier. 

 

On behalf of my caucus, my staff, and myself, I want to express 

our sincere appreciation to the hundred or so people who work 

behind the scenes.  I mean they really do work so very hard 

during this past session and previous ones to ensure that things 

run smoothly and efficiently. 

 

And I'm personally grateful for the non-partisan, but valuable 

advice that these people have shared with me and our caucus on 

matters of procedure and protocol.  Without the benefit of their 

knowledge and their experience, I know that my job would 

have been far more difficult than I have found it. 

 

The Clerk and her staff, in particular, provide valuable advice 

and insight and assistance into many procedural matters, all of 

which is, I think, delivered with their traditional trademark of 

professionalism and cheerfulness.  And we are truly grateful, 

very fortunate in fact, to have such high-calibre individuals 

with us. 

 

The pages, Melissa and Lilia, Scott, Lesley, Daryl, and Troy 

have been especially helpful, and I want to thank them for all 

the tasks that they do for us, and for me in particular.  They 

keep in shape by running down to room 140. 

 

In the Legislative Assembly Office, directors Linda Kaminski 

and Marilyn Borowski, and their staff in administration and 

financial services are all very committed, very capable people 

who exemplify the very best in our public service.  And many 

thanks to them for their continued hard work. 

 

Our Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk, Bob Cosman -- I don't 

know if he's in today -- and his secretary, Allison, have been of 

great assistance to us as well in our attempts to keep up with 72 

Bills that have been before the Assembly in this session.  We're 

grateful for 



2860 Saskatchewan Hansard June 2, 1994 

their assistance in proposing amendments to legislation as well 

as giving advice and guidance. 

 

I want to make special mention of broadcast services. The staff 

in particular, director, Gary Ward, and technicians, Kerry and 

Ihor, provide the window on this Assembly for the many 

Saskatchewan people who watch us do our work.  And they 

spend as many hours as we do, except that they observe the 

proceedings from a space that's no larger than just a slightly 

more large closet than normal, and I thank those gentlemen 

very much.  The Legislative Library staff have been a great 

assistance to my office again this session.  Their expertise in 

locating news clippings, and books, and other research 

documents is really remarkable. 

 

A special word is owed to the staff and Hansard for their work 

in transcribing the procedures of this Assembly.  Why we 

would want it for posterity one often wonders, but they 

definitely do their work in an exemplary fashion. 

 

And finally a comment about our Sergeant-at-Arms for his due 

diligence always.  The security staff and visitor services, 

they're the ones who make the wonderful first impressions of 

the thousands of visitors, many of whom are school children 

who visit our Assembly every year, and it is their friendly 

manner and helpful nature that adds a great deal more in 

making our stay here, our long, arduous days much more 

pleasant. 

 

Now this building, as you know, is a world unto itself, but it 

does not go unnoticed that because of the demanding and also 

unpredictable hours that we work, that all of the people within 

these walls often give up spending time, precious time, with 

their families.  And I hope that as these days that are going to 

be following come before us, that some of them will be 

mosquito free and will be warm, and that we will be able to 

know that the people who work and go unnoticed here will be 

able to spend more precious moments with their family. 

 

Outside of this building there are thousands of public servants 

who work behind the scenes in departments, in agencies, and 

Crowns throughout the government to support the work that we 

do in this Chamber, and I want to applaud their commitment to 

the province of Saskatchewan, through the work that they do, 

and to say how fortunate we are to have within our ranks of our 

public service, so many dedicated and talented people. 

 

I'd be remiss if I did not indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that we very much appreciate the excellent work that you have 

done in this Chamber; and in particular to single out the 

Speaker who has, I believe, been most fair and has worked 

very, very hard. 

 

I do hope that he is going to enjoy his granddaughter's birthday 

next week as much as I'm going to enjoy my granddaughter's.  

He beat me the last time in having a grandchild born, and now 

he's all pumped up, being very proud that he's going to beat me 

to the second one. 

There's going to be even more time in between -- I think two 

months lapse for the second one. 

 

I do want to wish the Leader of the Official Opposition well.  I 

think that he has been a wonderful addition to this Chamber.  

And on behalf of the third party, I do want to thank our own 

staff in particular and acknowledge the hard work of people 

who work on the staffs of the official opposition caucus as well 

as the government caucus. 

 

So I give my personal best wishes to each and every one of 

you.  I hope you have a very restful, relaxing summer.  I think 

we've all earned it, and party down.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I wonder if the members would 

permit me to just make a few brief remarks -- brief.  I would be 

remiss if, on behalf of Mr. Speaker and the Deputy Chair, I did 

not convey our thanks to the Clerks at the Table.  I know that to 

the members and to those who view the proceedings that the 

proceedings always move smoothly and flawlessly.  That is 

because we have the expert and tremendous assistance of the 

Clerks at the Table. 

 

I also want to thank the Journals branch, the people who 

provide us with the blues and the Votes and Proceedings and 

who ensure that there is an accurate record of what it is that we 

do here; to Hansard, and broadcasting and the printers who 

convey our words to a much wider audience than in this 

Chamber; to the Law Clerk for helping us to separate our 

clauses from sections; to the Sergeant-at-Arms and the security 

staff, not only for the service to the members, but the very 

valuable service that they provide to the public who come to 

this building; to the guide service who provide an excellent 

service in helping our constituents to see us at at work; and 

finally to the pages who in a world of high-tech communication 

provide a wonderful, friendly, efficient, and effective low-tech 

communication service for the members.  We thank them all. 

 

Finally I want to, on behalf of Mr. Speaker and the Deputy 

Chair, thank the members for their cooperation and tremendous 

assistance.  Without that, it would be very difficult to have a 

smooth, functioning Legislative Assembly.  But because you 

have assisted and cooperated, we've worked tremendously well, 

and we thank you for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 

would not want to fail the tradition of the House of the 

Opposition House Leader having the opportunity to give his 

assessment of what the session was all about.  However, before 

I get into that, the barbecues are all going, I know, and 23 

minutes isn't that long, so please bear with me. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He's in the pool. 



June 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2861 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I am in the pool, yes I am, and I was looking 

at the time to make sure. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus and as the caucus chairman and House 

Leader, I want to also add my voice to the thanks of the people 

that have stood in their place.  And I've learned one thing in 

public life -- as soon as you get up to start thanking people, 

you're on dangerous ground.  So I got my staff to make me a 

list of everybody.  And I don't think I just want to say thanks to 

everybody; I want to make everyone cognizant of who these 

individuals are.  Most of them have already been mentioned by 

other members. 

 

But I would like to thank the employees of the legislature who 

have made our jobs in this Assembly so much easier.  And this 

includes the Speaker -- in his absence, the Deputy Speaker.  

And having had the position of the deputy chairman of 

committees, I would also like to thank all of this arbitrators of 

this Legislative Assembly for a job well done. 

 

I want to also thank the security staff, the library staff for very 

helpfully keeping all members informed.  And Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I can assure you that they provide free clippings to 

MLAs. 

 

In addition to that, the Dome Cafeteria staff, who keep our 

engines fueled for some of the fiery debate that we have in 

here; the hard-working pages, Sergeant-at-Arms, the Clerk's 

office, the broadcast services; the very hard-working Hansard 

staff, whom we always keep hopping trying to interpret our 

various speaking styles; the tour guides, the janitorial staff, who 

keep up the polished image of our Assembly; the maintenance 

staff; Bob Cosman and the Law Counsel staff; the clever and 

efficient research staff, particularly those working in the PC 

caucus office -- who added that line in here?  It must be the 

caucus staff.  And certainly, I think we would all agree that 

they're very important in the operation here. 

 

And simply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone who is involved in 

keeping this legislature running smoothly. 

 

Now what I want to do is just give a little bit of a brief 

overview of how this session started and I will go on from 

there.  I have already decided that I would not go through the 

17 pages that I have here but I want to give a synopsis of a 

couple of minutes, if that's all right. 

 

My feeling is, Mr. Speaker, that at the beginning of the session 

there was a particular media guru and I will maintain his 

anonymity.  I won't recognize the individual who said that this 

would be a stormy session.  It had to be a stormy session, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker; it simply didn't work any other way with guys 

like Link and Neudorf around.  These old-style politicians 

would not let it be any other way. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think quite frankly that we have proven 

him wrong.  I think that on behalf of all of the members of this 

legislature, we have had a reasonably productive session, albeit 

that we don't agree with 

what has happened here necessarily.  But I do think that the 

opposition -- if I can just blow our own horn here a little bit -- it 

is the opposition that sets the tone of the Legislature; and I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that that is reminiscent of what happened in 

previous times when we had some very raucous sessions. 

 

I think it also proves one thing.  I think that it proves that all 

legislators, in the province of Saskatchewan in particular, are 

beginning to listen to the people of the province.  And the 

people of this province are no longer content to have old-style 

politics running rampant in this area.  And I do think that we 

have given the people of this province some hope simply by the 

conduct of members present and the relatively docile 

proceedings as they have been. 

 

Now that does not mean, Mr. Speaker, that we have had not 

had eloquent debate, that does not mean that we had not had 

hard debate, but it was debate that was not filled with the 

rancour and the ill feelings that have been here in the past.  And 

I think, Mr. Speaker, in spite of all the bad things that are being 

said about politicians, that we have given the public of 

Saskatchewan a glimmer of hope. 

 

I think with that, I think all of us can leave from here, depart 

from here, with a sense of accomplishment and a sense that we 

have contributed to the democratic process within this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  And quite frankly, I'm proud to have 

been part of that process. 

 

And so just before I take my seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 

to wish all of the members in this Legislative Assembly here an 

enjoyable summer.  Get home to your families, enjoy 

yourselves, take a break, don't do anything until next Tuesday, 

and have a good summer.  We'll see you in the fall or in spring, 

depending on what the Premier decides.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:53 p.m. 

 


