




















































Hansard: May 31, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2739 

 May 31, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very 

pleased this afternoon to introduce to you and members of the 

Assembly, seated in your gallery, Mayor Ben Weber and his 

wife, Irene, who are here to witness some of the short 

proceedings first, and to participate in the installation of the 

new Lieutenant Governor. 

 

Mayor Weber and his wife, Irene, will be here for a reception, 

and I'm sure that most of you know the mayor as you've toured 

through the city and he'd be very pleased to meet with you and 

have a discussion. 

 

So I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming Mayor Weber and his wife, Irene, to the Assembly 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the legislature, Lieutenant Greg Girard from Nipawin.  

Maybe I'd ask you to stand, Lieutenant Girard, if I could. 

 

Lieutenant Girard and his wife and family came to Nipawin 

about four years ago, Mr. Speaker, from Ontario, and they've 

been a very valuable and productive contribution to our 

community in the short years they've been there.  Among other 

things, they've been able to build a brand-new church building 

on Main Street in our town that we're all very proud of. 

 

I'm very proud to have him in my constituency and proud to 

have him here today, and I want you to help me welcome him 

to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

honoured today to introduce to you and through you to 

members of this legislature two esteemed guests who have 

travelled a long ways to be here with us today -- Nadya Shestak 

and Mykola Svediuk are honoured guests from the Ukraine.  

And Nadya is from the capital of Ukraine, Kiev, where she is a 

senior musical director of the Ukrainian State Television and 

Radio Company.  She is a talented vocal soloist and very 

recognized in her homeland. 

 

Accompanying Nadya is another honoured artist from Ukraine, 

Mykola Svediuk.  Mykola is from the Ukraine city of Odessa 

where he is a recognized composer and arranger of Ukrainian 

songs, and is laureate at the Festival of Ukrainian Song. 

 

Both Nadya and Mykola are here in Regina to perform during 

Mosaic which begins on Thursday.  They will 

be performing at the Poltava Ukrainian Pavilion along with the 

Poltava orchestra and dancers.  And certainly all members are 

encouraged to participate in Mosaic.  It's a wonderful event. 

 

And I'd like to all of you to say in your applause, BITAEMO to 

our guests from the Ukraine, and give them a very special 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 

I want to draw the attention of the members to the west gallery 

-- some young people who are up there, dressed uniformly and 

looking very good.  These are the Meister Singers from the 

Swift Current Composite High School.  They are conducted by 

Marcia McLean, accompanist Janet Wittal, and they have 

chaperons with them -- Colleen Eliason and Sheila Wiebe. 

 

They are here and members will be impressed by their 

performance during the installation of the new Lieutenant 

Governor this afternoon.  I'd also like to ask you, Mr. Speaker, 

and members of the House, to join me in extending our 

welcome and appreciation for the fact that they will be here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

would like to add greetings to the Meister Singers this 

afternoon.  I was a proud member of the Meister Singers when 

I lived in Swift Current, and we were so thrilled when we put 

together a record of our performances at one point, of which I 

still have a copy. 

 

So we would like to warmly welcome you again to Regina and 

the legislature for your performance today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Meadow Lake Stampede 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to take this 

time to inform the Assembly of Meadow Lake's biggest event 

of the year.  Yes, even bigger than the water boiling contest at 

the winter festival and still bigger than the dunking the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) at the dunk tank at the 

jaywalkers' jamboree. 

 

It's the Meadow Lake Stampede and it's taking place June 30 to 

July 3.  The Meadow Lake Stampede, one of Canada's longest 

running, is enjoying its 74th year this year.  This occasion 

attracts both talent and tourists from literally around the world.  

Participants come from all over Canada, the United States, and 

we often have participants from as far away as Australia and 

New Zealand. 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

Every year tourists from all four western provinces come to 

Meadow Lake to enjoy this fantastic weekend.  Events planned 

for this year's stampede include the pancake breakfast, the 

queen contest, dancing, bullfighting, bucking broncs, 

horse-racing, corral events, and chuck-wagon racing.  Things 

will get started June 30 with a stampede parade and the opening 

ceremony is set for July 1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the Meadow Lake 

Stampede is the busiest time of the year, excluding Christmas. 

 

I want to close by congratulating the stampede committee for 

another fantastic effort, and I urge everyone to come and enjoy 

the fun and excitement of the Meadow Lake Stampede June 30 

to July 3. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mainline Rural Development Corporation 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

announce to the Assembly that the Mainline Rural 

Development Corporation has recently completed the 

processing and packaging of maple syrup, harvested from the 

first run of tapping into local maple trees in the Broadview 

area. 

 

The Mainline Rural Development Corporation, in conjunction 

with four participating landowners, were able to tap 400 litres 

this season.  The corporation joined forces this year to test the 

feasibility of producing maple syrup in the valley. 

 

The harvest this year did not do as well as expected, but this 

was due to undesirable weather conditions -- a very cold March 

and warm April hindered tapping.  For ideal tapping, 

temperatures must fluctuate around the freezing level.  In spite 

of this, interest in maple syrup harvesting and production has 

risen considerably.  There is some serious talk in the 

Broadview area about expanding for the next season. 

 

Marketing of the syrup has begun and is now available 

throughout local markets, and it's also been sold at local trade 

fairs, including Grenfell, where I was able to purchase a bottle.  

Packaging for the product varies from traditional containers to 

limited edition bottles which were etched by a local artisan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to see a promising . . . a new industry 

beginning in the Broadview area and some more good 

economic news coming from rural Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mosaic '94 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Where is it that 

you can taste haggis from Scotland, jerk chicken from the 

Caribbean, Ukrainian cabbage rolls, tostados from Latin 

America, and some good old German bratwurst, topped off 

with desserts of mango ice cream from India and Austrian 

apple strudel and so 

much more? 

 

No, not at the Dome cafeteria.  This array of international 

cuisine can only be had at Mosaic, Regina's three-day 

celebration of its multicultural heritage.  Mosaic '94 kicks off 

this Thursday and runs until Saturday in what is guaranteed to 

be four quarters of great folk fun. 

 

Only $8 buys you a ticket to 24 of the most exotic cultural 

stops in the city.  In a matter of minutes, you can travel from 

India to Africa, to the Caribbean, to the Phillipines, in a 

whirlwind tour that even Jules Verne never thought possible. 

 

As usual, the three days will leave you breathless from travel, 

bedazzled by the glitter of folk dancing, bemused by music, 

and absolutely beaming from the aroma and taste of great 

foods. 

 

I'd like to recognize and congratulate the work of the thousands 

of volunteers that make this festival such a success.  I could not 

think of a better way to spend three days, and I invite all 

members to come and join in the fun that we call Mosaic.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or perhaps in the spirit of Mosaic, I 

should say, danke schön, Herr Vorsitzender. 

 

 Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Environment Week 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to inform my colleagues that next week, June 5-11, 

is Environment Week.  This is a time for us to work together 

and find new ways to help our environment, in our homes, in 

our neighbourhoods, cities and towns, and throughout Canada 

and the world. 

 

It is a time for us, as well, to renew our commitment to 

sustaining our environment and ensuring that we continue the 

many positive things that we have already done, such as 

composting, recycling, and reusing.  We must act now and 

work together to reduce, reuse, recycle, and recover to ensure 

that our children can enjoy a healthy world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to encouraging Saskatchewan 

residents to help keep our environment clean, this week is an 

opportunity for us to go out and enjoy our natural surroundings 

and teach our children to be good stewards of their 

environment. 

 

At Nicolle Flats in Buffalo Pound Provincial Park the annual 

nature festival takes place at the end of Environment Week on 

June 11 and 12.  Everything from a songbird hike and pond 

dipping to Project Wild's children's activities and the Clean Cat 

Show can be enjoyed that weekend.  In addition, free family 

fishing weekend also takes place then.  This weekend gives 

families the opportunity to fish anywhere in the province 

without a licence, with the exception of national park areas. 

 

I hope all the people of our province will join me in 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

celebrating Environment Week, June 5 to 11.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Casino Agreement 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the minister of Gaming.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 

getting straight answers from the government opposite is nearly 

impossible at the best of times.  But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 

government gave us a real treat.  The minister of gambling 

gave us four answers to one question. 

 

Why did you give nearly $2 million up front to the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations), was the question, 

Mr. Speaker.  The answer was either: (a) to develop the 

partnership with the government; (b) to defray costs already 

incurred by the FSIN; (c) to provide the FSIN with their share 

of profits from the current casinos; or (d) to prevent another 

Oka. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, four answers for the price of one.  Now 

rather than risking getting four answers to my next question, 

this is what I'm going to do, Mr. Minister.  I'm simply going to 

ask you: will you table in this Assembly a complete accounting 

of that $1.75 million that you have given to the FSIN in front 

money?  Will you table that now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me thank the 

member from Rosthern for his question.  With respect to the 

four answers that I gave yesterday, the answer is yes to each 

and every one of them.  Because those are all part and parcel of 

what we're trying to achieve within the partnership.  With 

respect to an accounting, it is actually at this very time quite 

difficult because the money has not been spent nor has it been 

disbursed. 

 

But what I want to suggest to the member from Rosthern and 

explain to him is how this process will take place.  The money 

will be paid from casino profits in the interim casinos to the 

tune of $1.75 million.  It is in lieu of a share of the temporary 

casino revenue, and it will be paid to the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations for them to distribute to the band 

level to be used partly for administrative costs.  And it will be 

accountable to the Legislative Assembly through the normal 

process, that being Public Accounts, and I'm sure the member 

is quite aware of how that accounting takes place as he sat on 

that particular board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I guess in a way that's a good 

answer, Mr. Speaker, because we're back to the status quo and 

back to the old ways, and perhaps that's better than four 

answers. 

 

Mr. Minister, from what you've been saying so far, I get the 

clear impression that you have no intention of 

telling us what is really behind that $1.75 million.  Everything 

is going on behind closed doors; it's going on in secret. 

 

Your legislation, Mr. Minister, to set up a super Crown 

corporation for casinos, is really no different.  In announcing 

the deal, you said that 25 per cent would go to the FSIN and 25 

per cent would go to the charities, to the Metis, and the 

exhibition associations.  Yet, Mr. Minister, note what I'm going 

to say now.  That is clearly not in your legislation.  It is not in 

your legislation.  The only ones that are guaranteed anything 

are you, the government, and the FSIN.  The charities and 

exhibition associations only get a prescribed percentage set by 

cabinet ministers.  And that could mean nothing.  If you so 

choose, you could pay them nothing. 

 

Mr. Minister, why have you not guaranteed the charities, the 

Metis, and the exhibition association the percentage of profits 

that you have promised them, just as you did for the FSIN? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Well if the member is not clear, let 

me make it clear in this legislature, and let me say to the 

charities and to the exhibitions and to the Metis that this 

government in policy has committed to 25 per cent of the net 

revenue to be established through a fund, through the 

Consolidated Fund, for their purposes. 

 

Now if the member isn't clear on that, I can repeat that when he 

stands up and asks me again and I certainly will attempt to do 

this. 

 

What this legislation does, member from Rosthern, is it 

establishes the Crown corporation to conduct the development 

and to oversee the operations of the casinos, the expanded 

casinos.  It sets up a board of directors that will allow for four 

government appointees and three by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislature needs to be . . . the corporation will 

be accountable to the legislature, and I'm sure the member is 

aware of that.  What the Bill does is outlines the arrangement, 

the agreement that we have made with the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Indian Nations.  And I don't know how much 

more clear we can be.  The Bill is before him; he can clearly 

read what's in it. 

 

And I say to the three parties that we've mentioned -- the Metis, 

the charity, and the exhibitions -- that there will be 25 per cent 

of the profits of these expanded casinos that will be shared by 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I want to indicate to the 

member from Rosthern that when the minister is on his feet, 

he's not to arise on his feet.  And just for his edification, the 

minister had taken less time in answering than he had taken in 

asking the question. 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, an answer like that seems like 

forever because, Mr. Minister . . . You listen to me and I'll tell 

you what's not in that legislation: there is no guarantee of 25 

per cent -- nothing.  It's up to you, a cabinet minister, to decide 

what's to going to be put into that fund, and then it will be 25 

per cent.  There is no guarantee, Mr. Minister, none at all. 

 

Now the only thing that it guarantees is that you and your 

colleagues will be able to do with that money what you want.  

And I'm going to quote.  It says:  to any person, organization, 

or association in Saskatchewan, for any purpose prescribed by 

cabinet. 

 

That's what your legislation reads, Mr. Minister.  And that 

means that the profits are at the whim of you and your cabinet 

-- you and your cabinet and anybody else that runs cabinet, 

whether you want to have the proceeds go towards buying Mr. 

Messer an island up in northern Saskatchewan, as the Minister 

of Energy will know what I'm talking about.  That means that 

charities and associations will get less than the 25 per cent that 

you have promised. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, is this part of the game that you are playing 

to ensure charities, Metis, and exhibition associations do not 

mount an opposition to your initiative?  Are you telling them to 

cooperate, or you will not get a penny from gambling?  Isn't 

that your real motivation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the 

member is that on behalf of the Premier and the Deputy 

Premier and the other members of cabinet and the members of 

caucus, we commit to those three entities 25 per cent of the net 

casino revenues. 

 

Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it is quite clearly day 77 

of this legislature and time that we adjourned because if the 

member from Rosthern can only muster that in the line of 

questioning, it's time he goes back to the farm and does some 

spraying or seeding or whatever he does at this time of the year. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well fortunately for the member opposite, I 

don't go spraying and I don't go seeding, so I'm prepared to be 

here for a long time on this issue, Mr. Minister.  Because what 

you're doing is you're playing games -- you're playing games.  

Everybody, and I mean that, everybody that we have talked to, 

from exhibition associations to small-business people, have 

privately said that your hand-picked officials have acted like 

muscle-men in your so 

_called round of consultation.  That's what they're telling us, 

Mr. Minister.  It's not my words -- those are their words. 

 

You have used threats, you have used strong-arm tactics, and 

you have even issued gag orders to make sure that your 

gambling empire toes the line.  Mr. Minister, you and your 

government are slowly sinking into a pit.  That's what you are 

doing.  So, Mr. Minister, what I'm going to ask you once more, 

as I did 

yesterday and as I did the day before, will you table this Bill to 

allow all of the partners in this endeavour to have a say, not 

only where and how the casino gambling should be allowed but 

for some basic, fundamental, democratic input into the Bill of 

this magnitude?  Will you table the Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member again that this is . . . and this Bill establishes a Crown 

corporation that deals with the accountability of casino 

revenues.  And I want to say to the member opposite that that is 

the way this government will function.  It is important for us 

that public accountability, which is the hallmark of this 

government, be established in this as well as in other areas. 

 

Now I can't say to the member opposite that he hasn't got the 

opportunity to discuss this, because that's what this legislative 

forum is for and we'll go through it clause by clause, I'm sure, 

and I anticipate the questions and I'm looking forward to the 

questions. 

 

But the basis of this legislation is to establish accountability for 

the revenue from the casinos.  It's also the basis to establish the 

partnership with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, and I think that those are what we set out to achieve 

and that is what this Bill will accomplish.  And if the member 

is not satisfied with that we can certainly discuss it on a 

clause-by-clause basis when we go into third reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Legal Costs 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for 

SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have often criticized your government for 

failing to create any new jobs in this province.  I just wanted to 

note that you have managed to create quite a bit of work for at 

least one sector however -- the legal community.  You have 

lawyers defending your breaking of personal contracts, lawyers 

defending your breaking of GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) contracts, lawyers defending you against the 

Provincial Court judges, and now lawyers defending against . . 

. defending Jack Messer, at a cost to the taxpayers of over 

$7,200. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would provide this House with a 

complete breakdown of the $7,200 legal bill that the taxpayers 

spent in defending Jack Messer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, I'd be happy to do that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in 

addition to the $7,200 bill, several hundreds of dollars were 

also spent in preparing affidavits from the two unfortunate 

bureaucrats that you and Jack Messer decided to hang the goat 

horns on. 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

What's interesting, Mr. Minister, is for all the money you spent 

on this matter you never bothered to get an affidavit or any 

kind of statement from Jack Messer himself.  So what we have 

here is two SaskPower employees swearing that, to the best of 

their knowledge, Jack Messer knew nothing about his son's 

activities, but Jack Messer himself never made any statement to 

that effect. 

 

Mr. Minister, you spent all of this money to get people to 

vouch for Jack Messer.  Why didn't you get Jack Messer to sign 

a statement as to whether or not he knew about his son bidding 

on these contracts?  How can we be sure that Jack Messer's not 

using his considerable political influence to help his son's 

company get further government contracts, either through 

SaskPower or any other government agency? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes a 

number of points that I think I need to respond to.  First off, the 

member is correct -- the dollar amount in terms of providing 

independent evidence by the people involved to answer 

allegations by the member from Kindersley cost us several 

thousands of dollars.  He launched a character assassination on 

an honourable individual from the province of Saskatchewan 

over a contract that was less than $50,000.  And although we 

had to pay out $7,207 in legal fees, if you add up the people's 

time within Crown Investments Corporation, also within the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the amount would be 

thousands of dollars higher beyond that, to have very clearly 

that the accusations made by the member of Kindersley were 

completely false. 

 

In regard to the declaration or affidavit from Mr. Messer, Mr. 

Messer offered me an affidavit which I decided that we did not 

require because of the information that was already there.  

Because it could be construed as me constructively dismissing 

Jack Messer by doing that, I'm not prepared to do that on false 

evidence put forward and accusations by the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investigations of MLAs 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question this afternoon is for the Minister of Justice.  Mr. 

Minister, your government has avoided addressing some very 

serious issues, and the official opposition has been deafeningly 

silent. 

 

In January 1993 it was announced that at least three MLAs 

were under police investigation.  As well there have been two 

other members accused of misusing their communications 

allowances for partisan purposes.  The people of Saskatchewan 

are looking to you and to the Premier for leadership in getting 

rid of the black cloud of suspicion that hangs over the 

Assembly until these kinds of issues are resolved. 

Mr. Minister, why are these investigations taking so long and 

when can we expect some results? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, you and the member, 

indeed all members, will know the delicacy with which these 

questions must be answered.  The matter is the subject of an 

investigation, as has been reported in the media, and has been 

confirmed.  The investigation is ongoing.  It is in the hands of 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police).  I have no report 

as to when it may lead to a conclusion, and I am just not in a 

position to report to it on the House.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

fact of the matter is that it is really quite improper for any 

Minister of Justice to comment on an investigation, or even to 

comment that there is or is not an investigation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

people of Saskatchewan are the ones who are asking questions 

here.  And what they're concerned about is the extraordinary 

length of time it seems to be that these investigations are going 

on.  An equally serious issue, the allegations have actually been 

levelled against the Premier, against in fact the Minister of 

Justice during the Milgaard trial, and there is an implication 

that evidence has been deliberately suppressed.  As long as the 

investigations continue without any form of resolution, there 

are going to be doubts about integrity of people in public 

office. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you advise us today of the current status of 

the Alberta Attorney General's investigation into this matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm really, really shocked that this line 

of questioning is taking place.  All members know that the 

supervision of this investigation was given to the Government 

of Alberta.  They will report when they report.  They don't tell 

us when they're reporting; they don't tell us how their 

investigation is going today.  They're conducting it, and they 

will report to us in due course.  And I would have thought that 

the member would know that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, your government's attempt at reform is undermined 

when scandals loom large.  These are things that continue to be 

asked of my office.  Why is it that there doesn't seem to be 

anything happening as far as investigations are concerned?  

And there is suspicion surrounding this, so we might as well 

bring it out in the open that there indeed are concerns about 

this. 

 

Last fall the police believed that $564,000 were allegedly 

diverted from Conservative caucus allowances for political 

purposes.  No charges at all have been laid to date. 

 

As with any situation of this kind of seriousness, people are 

anxious to have this issue resolved, so that those who are being 

implicated by suspicion will either be exonerated or they will 

be charged. 

 

Mr. Minister, can we expect some resolution to these grave 

issues so that public trust may be restored? 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member puts herself 

forward, I would assume, as a potential premier of this 

province, having accepted the leadership of a party.  And I'm 

really shocked that these questions are being asked. 

 

I have already dealt with this in response to her first question 

by saying that the matter is in the hands of the RCMP and that 

is public knowledge.  They are proceeding with the 

investigation on their own, and it will come to a conclusion 

when it comes to a conclusion.  We don't do anything to slow it 

up and we don't do anything to slow it down or hurry it up. 

 

We keep our hands free of these investigations.  These 

investigations must be conducted with integrity and free from 

any kind of political interference at all.  And that includes 

publicly commenting on the investigations as to how they're 

going or whether there is one or whether there isn't.  And I 

would think that the member would know that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

are acknowledging the indignance of you in attempting to not 

address some of these issues.  In the spring of 1993, charges 

were laid against 13 people.  Five of those individuals have 

pleaded guilty in the collapse of the Saskatchewan Trust 

Company.  There are now some suspicions that lawyers who 

handled these questionable mortgages must accept some 

responsibility.  And one law firm involved indeed is the former 

firm of yourself and the Premier of the province. 

 

Now an article in the Western Report suggests that the actions 

of one of the lawyers involved happens to be being shielded 

from charges by the Saskatchewan Department of Justice.  This 

is what was reported in Western Report, Mr. Minister; and the 

lawyer was indeed a partner to which I was referring at the time 

of the incident. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like you to assure the people of the 

province today that the Department of Justice has initiated an 

independent investigation into this matter and that this is being 

done outside of the Saskatchewan Department of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm controlling my anger 

with some difficulty, with some difficulty.  That scurrilous 

report in the Western Report was the subject of a newspaper 

article and it was responded to myself . . . by myself, and the 

member knows my response. 

 

Now if the member wants to make any allegations against me 

or against the Premier or against the deputy minister of Justice, 

then get outside that door and find yourself a television camera 

and make the statement, because I would love to deal with it. 

 

I can tell the member that the matter of Sask Trust, because of 

my former connection with the law firm that she refers to, is 

not an investigation that is reported on to me.  It wouldn't be 

anyway because 

nvestigations are not conducted by the Attorney General and 

Minister of Justice; the investigations are conducted by the 

police.  Sometimes they get advice on legal points from the 

Department of Justice, sometimes they don't.  But it has 

nothing whatever to do with my office and the member knows 

that -- the member knows that.  She is raising these matters for 

political purposes and political purposes only, and that is not 

acceptable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Legal Costs 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My question is going to be directed to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, we've just witnessed 

some, I think, appalling questions from the Leader of the Third 

Party who is following the normal pattern of taking over 

question period and then not being able to fulfil her 

responsibility of completing question period.  So again the 

official opposition is now in the position to . . . in a situation 

where we have to pull up the slack and make sure that things 

operate accordingly. 

 

My question to you, Mr. Minister, before we were so rudely 

interrupted in our sequence, going back to the Minister of 

Energy and Mines and the court case and the numbers of 

dollars of taxpayers' money that are going to be spent by this 

government in legitimatizing some of your actions, Mr. 

Minister, I want to pick up again on that theme.  And I'm going 

to ask you as minister of Crop Insurance that you are also 

spending thousands of taxpayers dollars in an indefensible 

scheme.  Your government has just filed statement of defence 

in the GRIP lawsuit caused by your breaking of legal contracts 

with 60,000 of Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much taxpayers' money has already been 

spent on legal fees defending your government's illegal actions 

on GRIP, and how much do you expect to spend in total before 

this matter is finally resolved?  Could you inform us of that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously I 

don't have the numbers with me today.  We can certainly get 

those numbers for the opposition if they so desire, and could 

have gotten them in estimates had they asked for them at that 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again this is allegations and we think we're going 

to win the court case.  However, again that's another case that's 

before the court and when a government is taken to court they, 

like other bodies and citizens, have to defend themselves and 

there is a cost to it.  Whether you are in the right or wrong there 

is a cost and that's what's happening.  Hopefully this case will 

not go far, but it's certainly impossible to predict how far a case 

will go or what the cost will be in the future. 

 

Lawsuits Against Government 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, a 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

question to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, a while back the 

Department of Agriculture was forced to spend thousands of 

dollars on legal bills fighting Jack Messer and his frivolous 

lawsuit.  Now SaskPower has spent over $7,200 defending Jack 

Messer.  Of course this all pales by comparison to the 

half-million dollars the taxpayers are going to shell out 

defending the Minister of Justice's legal activities and the 

similar costs which you will incur fighting the GRIP case. 

 

Mr. Premier, why should Saskatchewan taxpayers always wind 

up footing the bill for the illegal activities of your ministers and 

the highly questionable activities of high-ranking NDP (New 

Democratic Party) officials like Jack Messer?  How come? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the question included the 

words, illegal activities of ministers, and I invite the hon. 

member to carefully consider that word and to repeat it outside 

the legislature.  Will you do that?  As the Leader of the Liberal 

Party will say it outside today. 

 

We are introducing legislation partly because of the activities 

of your administration.  We had to make the changes to GRIP, 

we had to made the changes to the NewGrade legislation; we 

had to make the changes which are attached largely because of 

the fiscal mismanagement which is brought about as a result of 

nine years of total fiscal irresponsibility. 

 

Now when you make those kinds of allegations, you have an 

obligation to tell the legislature what you mean by them.  I say 

that we are acting in the interest of the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, doing it properly and correctly, and 

unfortunately we are still cleaning up and will be for many 

years the mess created by you and you cohorts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the House 

recess until 4 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 4 

 

Mr. Neudorf: --  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

what we have experienced over the last couple of minutes here 

is something more than we would normally be amenable to and 

that is passing by an opportunity to engage in some debate on 

issues that we feel are quite important and quite significant and 

certainly as it has been indicated by the Government House 

Leader that these issues will be on the order paper tomorrow 

and I'm assuming that also means then that we will have the 

opportunity to pursue them at some depth and at some length. 

 

As far as the motions for returns (debatable) Mr. Speaker, the 

particular issue that we have in front of us 

now is this motion and I will read it into the record.  This 

regards the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission and the 

questions that I asked originally have not been answered and 

they have rather been turned into motions for returns 

(debatable), Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And therefore that gives us 

the opportunity now to give the government a second chance at 

answering these questions rather than simply putting them off 

into never never land where indeed we do not get an answer to 

questions that we think are quite significant. 

 

Now we are talking about this issue and this was the question: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission:  we have 

asked (1) that the total amount paid for purchasing video 

lottery terminals for distribution in Saskatchewan; (2) the 

amount that was provided for travel, lodging, 

communications, and all other costs incurred with any 

meetings regarding the implementation of VLTs and/or 

casinos in the province of Saskatchewan, and; (3) a list of all 

organizations, individuals, and corporations consulted with 

regarding the implementation of VLTs and/or casinos in the 

province. 

 

That is the motion, Mr. Speaker, as it is in the blues.  Now it's 

obvious that what we are requesting as an opposition, as the 

official opposition, is answers to some of the questions that are 

on the minds of many people in this province, with the 

government embarking upon their gaming strategy as a panacea 

for all of the financial and fiscal woes of the province, is 

something that people are just saying, this is not right. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are asking some 

fairly detailed questions.  And the government already has had, 

I would say, at least a minimum of six weeks if not two months 

since this question was asked.  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

time element is certainly not there. 

 

If it is the will of this government to be open and to be 

accountable and to tell the people of this province in their 

openness exactly what they're getting the province into, what 

the costs have been, who the people are that are involved in the 

running of these VLTs (video lottery terminals), then, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I will give the opportunity for the government 

now . . . no fancy shenanigans; we don't want anything to 

detract from the intent of the question.  The intent of the 

question is to hold the government accountable in so far as its 

gaming strategy is concerned. 

 

Now I know what tends to be the practice is that the 

Government House Leader will get up and make an amendment 

to this motion, which in turn will pretty well neuter it, where 

there will be no response, no answers.  And I trust and I hope 

that the Government House Leader has more sense than the 

minister of Gaming who, not all that skilfully, dodges and darts 

hither and yon in every question period and basically refuses to 

answer the very pertinent questions that are 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

on the minds of the people of this province. 

 

So there is the motion.  Originally it was a question.  Now I 

pose that again to a question to the government members, and 

we expect to have a fairly good answer outlined for us at this 

time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member should move his motion 

with the seconder. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that therefore 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 4 showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Gaming Commission:  (1) the 

total amount paid for purchasing video lottery terminals for 

distribution in Saskatchewan; (2) the amount that was 

provided for travel, lodging, communications, and all other 

costs incurred with any meetings regarding the 

implementation of VLTs and/or casinos in the province of 

Saskatchewan; (3) a list of all organizations, individuals, and 

corporations consulted with regarding the implementation of 

VLTs and/or casinos in the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member for 

Moosomin. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 6 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

question that I asked here was: 

 

 With regards to the Department of Agriculture's '92-93 

expenditure for ministers' travel, please provide details on 

trips taken by Minister Cunningham, Ron L. Harper, Eric 

M.T. Upshall, Grant D.G. Whitmore, and Minister Bernard 

H. Wiens, including the following information: (1) the date of 

trip; (2) destination; (3) purpose of trip; (4) persons 

accompanying minister or MLA; and (5) cost of each trip. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to indicate at this time that if 

it is the will of the province and the government of this 

province to answer questions, they can do so.  And I'm very, 

very disappointed that the members opposite did not get up on 

the first resolution that we had here, and indeed give the answer 

because they have the answer. 

 

I see the Minister of Economic Development is sitting on the 

answer right now.  And it would be so simple for him to get up 

and expose that answer to the view of the public.  And I 

mention that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right now because this 

question that I have asked now and that we are debating as a 

resolution has been answered, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We got the 

answer from the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

And you know, Government House Leader, there's nothing 

wrong with answering a question.  This 

question was answered fully; it was answered to my 

satisfaction.  And I just want to take off my hat to you in doing 

a good job.  But at the same time I ask you, why will you not 

do that to other relevant questions as well?  Not just when it 

suits your fancy, when it suits your need.  But let's do it all. 

 

You purport to be an open, honest, forthright government.  You 

could have proved that in the first resolution.  You gave 

indications of that in the second resolution in which you saw fit 

to answer.  So because this one has been answered, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and because I've been able to make the point that I 

wanted to make, I withdraw this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- No motion has been moved by the 

member for him to withdraw, and if the member sits down then 

we'll just leave it at that and proceed to the next one.  Having 

said that, I would caution the member, if it's not his intent to 

move a motion, then he ought not to move remarks in 

anticipation of moving a motion. 

 

Return No. 20 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me state 

unequivocally at the initiation of my remarks that I do intend to 

move a motion and that I will be moving this particular motion.  

And the motion that I will be moving is thus: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 

please provide information on special warrant no. 64/94 

authorizing an additional expenditure of $83,902,000 for the 

corporation including: (1) what area the deficiency occurred; 

(2) why the deficiency occurred; (3) where the deficiency 

will be accounted for in Public Accounts; (4) and when the 

deficiency will be accounted for in Public Accounts. 

 

This question, Mr. Minister, was also asked, oh, I would say in 

rough terms, a month ago and we were not given an answer.  

And for the life of me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not know why 

we were not given an answer, why we were not given a formal 

answer, because indirectly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in another set 

of questions during question period, the Minister of Agriculture 

did in fact give most of the answer. 

 

So we're playing games here, that's all we're doing.  I think the 

government in it's old-style politics is doing precisely that, and 

that is playing politics.  And sometimes it's just within me to 

say no, says the Government House Leader.  I can't help 

myself; I'm so used to it; I'm not used to this newfangled way 

of doing politics, where we indeed do cooperate and give out 

the information. 

 

So I will be again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very, very 

disappointed if that member does not, or if the Minister of 

Agriculture does not, get up and give us a precise answer.  

Because this is what this is all about -- before an open 

government. 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

So once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I promised you, I now 

move that an order of the Assembly be issued for return no. 20 

showing: 

 

 Regarding the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, 

please provide information on special warrant no. 64/94 

authorizing an additional expenditure of $83,902,000 for the 

corporation including: (1) what area the deficiency occurred; 

(2) why the deficiency occurred; (3) where the deficiency 

will be accounted for in Public Accounts; and (4) when the 

deficiency will be accounted for in Public Accounts. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I find it interesting 

that the member would be opposed to this money going out to 

farmers.  It seems strange, coming from a rural part of 

Saskatchewan, that the member from Rosthern would have 

some opposition to this money going forward.  But I want to 

say to him that as part of our rural strategy, obviously farming 

and agriculture is very important, and this was seen as 

important money to be going out to farmers. 

 

And as to the deficiency and the questions that he has asked 

here, within the next couple of days we will be answering this 

question in an unamended form, which is quite unusual from 

the days when you were in government and used to amend 

every question put out of existence in order to avoid answering. 

 

So on all these questions you've put today, we'll be giving you 

the full response, as we tend to do in the House. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I believe 

it's appropriate that we just take a moment to address this issue 

and bring it to the minister's attention again.  The minister has 

indicated that in a few days we'll have a response.  The 

unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that possibly 

in a few days this House may adjourn, and there may be some 

further questions that would arise from the question we have 

before us that would be appropriate to bring to this Assembly.  

And I would think that if the minister is in a position of 

possibly responding in a day or two, either the Minister of 

Agriculture or the Government House Leader could give us the 

question . . . give us the answer to this question right now. 

 

Because I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at farmers 

across the province of Saskatchewan and the number of 

concerns that individuals have, producers have with regards to 

the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, certainly when 

you see an expenditure of this amount, of 83,902,000, people 

want to know where the money went, how was the money 

spent, what was the money used for.  And it's only fitting that 

as an opposition that we would raise 

this question, that we would bring it before the Assembly, that 

we would bring it to the attention of the minister responsible 

and we would bring it to the attention of the government. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, these are taxpayers' funds and these are 

funds when we look at the agricultural sector . . . And certainly, 

we enjoyed a beautiful day today, we actually had . . . the 

spring has been quite a great spring, Mr. Speaker, in fact a 

terrific spring in the eyes of most people working on the land.  

And certainly at the present time, crop insurance may not be 

their major concern -- their concern is putting the crop in the 

ground. 

 

But at the end of the day, a crop was never made just by putting 

it in the ground.  There are a number of conditions that will 

affect that crop and the eventual outcome regarding the type of 

harvest that's going to come off. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people look to Crop Insurance 

and have looked to Crop Insurance over the years to provide 

insurance for crop loss.  Now unfortunately, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have had a program that has provided insurance 

for crop loss, but we've neglected through the years to provide 

any kind of substantive guaranteed amount, or at least a price 

on that product that a person would lose. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's one of the major concerns that's been 

with us for the past decade.  Certainly through the '80s we saw 

a number of . . . we had a number of years where people were 

hit not only with drought, but hit with frost, and hit with other 

many types of weather and environmental conditions that were 

beyond their control.  And at the end of the day, they may have 

had some protection under crop insurance, but the amount of 

protection they had didn't quite meet the need of the expenses 

that they were facing. 

 

And $83 million is a fair chunk of money when you look at the 

number of producers and the amount of acres that are insured 

across this province.  And to some people it may not seem like 

a lot of money, but to most producers any amount of cash 

injection at the end of the harvest is certainly something that is 

welcomed by most people. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it's just fitting that the 

government take the time and not wait two or three days.  

Who's to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this two- or three-day 

wait may not turn into two or three months or maybe even next 

year. 

 

Now it seems to me that the Minister of Agriculture's probably 

sitting with the answer, has the answer in his back pocket right 

now ready to give it to us.  And the Government House Leader, 

I'm not sure why he just doesn't allow the Minister of 

Agriculture the opportunity to stand up and give us the answer, 

provide the answer so that the people of Saskatchewan, the 

producers who have paid the insurance premiums to maintain 

this corporation, will have an understanding of what is being 

done and how 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

their dollars and finances are being expended, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm asking the Government House Leader 

again if he will take a moment, instead of doing it tomorrow or 

the next day or the following week or maybe three months 

down the road, if the Government House Leader or the Minister 

of Agriculture will not stand in their place today and indeed 

provide the answer to this question that has been asked of this 

House for -- and has been on the books -- for, I believe, the past 

three months, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I think that would be only 

appropriate.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Trade Union Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, I want first 

of all to welcome you and your officials back to discuss The 

Trade Union Act.  And I want to take this opportunity to thank 

you for sending over a copy of the amendments that you intend 

on introducing into this Assembly and into the Act as we go.  I 

have taken the liberty of sending them out to have them 

photocopied so that some of the rest of my colleagues can study 

through them a bit before we actually get into the 

clause-by-clause part of that process. 

 

But we do appreciate having them and we're going to study 

them.  And hopefully these amendments will do some of the 

things that we and the rest of the community have been asking 

for which, very simply stated, is to modify the position that 

you've taken through the two major Acts in this session; to 

modify things, to bring them back to some balance so that we 

can bring some comfort to the community at large -- most 

particularly of course the business community, but also, just as 

importantly, the working community of our province who of 

course have seen the very real possibility of the loss of their 

jobs as a result of taking this legislation too far, too fast. 

 

It is altogether possible in my thinking, Minister, that in time 

the things you've proposed that are not acceptable today could 

be acceptable down the road, just as Barry Goldwater's 

opinions about philosophy in the United States at one time 

were considered to be so extremely to the right even in 

American politics that people outrightly rejected him at the 

polls and very severely criticized him for his positions. 

 

While as you know and I know from history, the Reagan 

administration brought the country fully to the right of the 

political spectrum to the point where Barry Goldwater would 

have been considered to be a moderate.  And so that's how 

changes can come in politics. 

 

I'm not going to stand in my place and say that we couldn't go 

to the left of the philosophical range 

enough in the future so that your proposals would be acceptable 

and might be considered to be common day, ordinary, and even 

acceptable. 

 

Unfortunately we are not in the future yet; we are here today 

and we have to face the reality of today.  And the reality of 

today, Minister, is that the suggestions that you've made in your 

two Acts concerning labour and labour legislation, the reality is 

that the spectrum has been pushed too far; that your pendulum, 

as you like to refer to it as, has been pushed too far to the 

opposite side. 

 

And in your attempt to bring about the balance that you talk 

about that was lacking in the 1980s from your perspective, you 

have taken the balance the other way too far for people to 

accept.  Too fast, too far, and to a point where business has 

thumbs down on what we are doing in our province.  And that 

we see as a very real detriment to our society, we see that as a 

detriment to our province, and we have asked you to take 

account of these suggestions made by people in the business 

community to slow this process down.  And as we study 

through these amendments that you are proposing, that's what 

we hope to find -- is that moderating trend, that moderating 

influence. 

 

And while we get into studying that, there are a couple of 

points that I want to make on behalf of the business community 

that have come up of late and we haven't had a chance really to 

discuss, and a few questions therein that we will be asking you 

so that we can get a little bit of an understanding. 

 

Now as I do that I think perhaps it might be fair that I give you 

an opportunity to explain the amendments to us and what you 

in your views think that these amendments will do to the 

picture of the labour Bill.  We need to get on the record your 

interpretation because, as you know, there is the way the law is 

written and then there is the spirit of the law or the intent of the 

law, and those kinds of things come into play as time comes by.  

So what is your intention for the spirit of the law to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Chairman, I've answered these 

questions many times.  All the member has to do is refer to 

Hansard for a response as to what the amendments are. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I was more specifically 

hoping that you would go into explaining to us what your 

proposed amendments would do to change the picture that you 

have painted for us over the past.  Obviously the picture you 

have painted to us is the Bill in its original form, which we 

have all seen. 

 

Now you're suggesting, by handing me these amendments that I 

haven't read, that there will be changes.  So the picture now 

will be changed according to those amendments.  What new 

picture do those amendments offer for the business 

community? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There are no amendments here that 

were not contemplated when I made the 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

second reading speech.  The second reading speech describes 

the Bill with the House amendments. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  You're saying, 

Minister, that the amendments that you just had delivered to me 

are nothing new? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's unfortunate because I had hoped 

when you delivered them to me that we were seeing a package 

of amendments that would be brought in that would include 

something different than what we had seen before; that in fact 

you had seen the light of day, that your government had seen 

the need to go along with the massive, massive pressure from 

all of Saskatchewan's people to have you moderate this 

legislation.  And I had hoped that these amendments that you 

passed over would contain some of that moderation.   I'm very, 

very disappointed that you have stood in your place and said 

no, there is no change and that these amendments really mean 

nothing to anybody. 

 

So with that in that situation, then we have no choice, Minister, 

but to present to you yet a few more arguments on behalf of the 

business community in the last minute hopes that you will 

change your mind on this very serious issue. 

 

There are people, Minister, in this province who sincerely 

believe that your legislation will have an element of 

destruction, a distinct effect of reducing the number of jobs 

available to people, the distinct effect of eroding our tax base, 

and the distinct disadvantage to placing our province in a 

non-competitive position for those people who might anticipate 

coming to the province. 

 

I have talked to business people who say that under the present 

circumstances that at the earliest opportunity they will pull up 

stakes and leave the province.  And obviously not everyone can 

just leave when things get tough.  Farmers who own land or 

have investments in buildings or have pigs in pig barns can't 

just lift them up and go away somewhere else.  We're stuck 

here. 

 

But there are a lot of people in business that create work and 

jobs who can pull up stakes and leave in not today or not 

tomorrow perhaps, maybe two weeks from now, maybe two 

months from now.  But realistically as time goes by -- it may 

take a year or two -- that opportunity presents itself where 

there's an opening in Alberta or Montana or North Dakota and 

just as sure as the sun does come up in the East, those people 

will take that opportunity and move out of the province and 

take their jobs, their creativity, and all of their advantages of 

tax base with them. 

 

And you will not lose very much as an individual.  You will 

still have your fat pension as an MLA.  You will still have your 

legal firm which will be very busy fighting union disputes.  

Because you, with this legislation, will 

be creating an atmosphere where there can be a lot of work for 

lawyers and a lot of work for legal firms.  So you will be busy, 

you will have your life pretty well intact, and the only thing is 

that you will be one of the very few people left in the province. 

 

So I hope you enjoy solitude because that's the kind of life 

you're going to have.  You're going to live by yourself in this 

little remote city of Regina that will shrink in numbers except 

for the escalating number of people on welfare.  You will have 

an escalating number of people who will drop through the 

cracks in society and not have work.  Unemployment figures 

won't go up because you'll orchestrate that.  You will have less 

jobs, less opportunities, but you'll be smiling amongst it all 

because you will be the king of the hill, the only fat cat in 

society of Regina because you are creating this new elite of the 

elite in our province, the union lords who will be the masters of 

our society and the masters of the people . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to remind the 

member that in bringing debate to the Bill, he should be 

directing his remarks to the Bill and not personalizing them or 

directing them to the personal motivations of the minister, as I 

remind the member of that and encourage him to direct his 

remarks to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We most 

certainly are going to direct our questions to this Bill and our 

debate will certainly centre on it.  I have in my hand a news 

article, Minister, that specifically tells what the business 

community thinks of the Bill and needs to be changed.  So I'll 

simply quote a little bit of that so that you can concentrate on 

that and understand where the business community is coming 

from. 

 

It says here, and I quote, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Mike Carr got up on Thursday morning and had Ned 

Shillington for breakfast. 

 

 Carr, personnel manager for Intercontinental Packers and a 

member of the Saskatchewan Business Coalition, delivered a 

stern 15-minute address to the provincial labour minister as 

the two shared the head table at a Saskatoon Chamber of 

Commerce breakfast. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to say that at least the minister 

finally showed up at a function and listened to the concerns of 

the business community with regards to this Trade Union Act.  

Unfortunately, though he listened for 15 minutes, he came back 

to this Assembly and tells us now that he's not going to make 

any changes.  And that has to be a grave disappointment to the 

people who are waiting for some changes to this legislation. 

 

I think perhaps I should quote on a little bit to be fair in the 

balance of the way the reported article goes, and I further 

quote: 

 

 "There is a crisis of trust in the business 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

community in that there is a very much universal feeling that 

the consultation processes we've been involved in have not 

served the business community well," said Carr. 

 

 "The perception in the business community is that your 

department has a bias toward organized labour," said Carr.  

"It makes us wonder if you're able to represent the interests of 

business in this province." 

 

Now it goes on, and your name is used, Minister: 

 

 . . . allowed that business people are feeling slighted . . . 

 

Even you admitted after that day that business people are 

feeling slighted.  And having recognized that, it really makes 

me wonder why you wouldn't take seriously the comments of a 

very head personnel person from the Intercontinental Packers 

organization.  Now it is even more particularly interesting 

when you consider that Fred Mitchell, who is one of the owners 

of this very establishment, had himself got up and suggested 

that this kind of debate shouldn't be made in public; that in fact 

at the public meeting in Saskatoon where 500 to 550 business 

organizations assembled to discuss this matter over the past 

weekend, that's where Mr. Mitchell got up and said we 

shouldn't be washing our dirty linen in public; we should be 

doing this in consultation behind closed doors. 

 

Right shortly after that I take it, by the date on this article, you 

went to Saskatoon and that very gentleman's personnel 

manager blistered your skin politically, saying that, in public, 

we've got to change these Bills. 

 

Now obviously Mr. Mitchell had a change of heart about 

washing dirty linen in public or else his personnel manager 

doesn't agree with that position and feels that something has to 

be done publicly in order to obtain some fair play for the 

business community in this province.  And I think it's a 

desperate attempt to try to save the province for future 

development. 

 

I've got all kinds of newspaper articles, Minister, that you must 

obviously be aware of.  There's tons and tons of evidence of 

people protesting what you're doing.  We have Dale Eisler's 

article, "Attempts to heal labour/business rift fails."  We've got, 

"More skirmishes on labour laws."  We've got the Deputy 

Premier . . . I'll quote here, from the article: 

 

 Saskatchewan business leaders didn't win any concessions 

with their scathing criticism of the NDP labour agenda and 

their call for Labour minister Ned Shillington's resignation.  

Deputy Premier Ed Tchorzewski said Friday, the government 

fully expects to pass the legislation during the current 

session, which could come at that end of next week. 

Well of course he was wrong about that.  That concludes my 

quotation, Mr. Chairman, of that article. 

 

Minister, obviously the Deputy Premier thought that he was 

going to orchestrate the end of the session last week.  He was 

wrong about that; and I say as wrong as he was proven to be 

about that, he is wrong about the way and the direction that you 

and your government are taking on this labour Bill and both 

labour Bills.  You are dead wrong in this situation. To think 

that you can plough this legislation through and have it 

forgotten afterwards is not going to happen. 

 

Now you suggested to me the other day in this very debate on 

these very Bills that we would be coming into a situation where 

people in a year's time would forget all about the legislation 

and they never even would know it existed, as is evidenced and 

proved, you said, because they had forgotten about The 

Workers' Compensation Act and The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act of last year. 

 

Now they certainly, certainly did not forget, Minister, because 

the regulations, as we found out by your own admission in the 

last segment of this debate, the regulations haven't even been 

completed yet.  The law from last year hasn't been finished 

being written yet behind closed doors in this dictatorship 

government that you run under the guise of being a democratic 

government.  You have a dictatorship writing laws through 

regulations that haven't a year later been finished, and you say 

people have forgotten it?  Not very likely, Minister. 

 

Now, Minister, we have heard some people speculate that there 

would be a way for you to get out of this whole mess that 

would be somewhat helpful at least, if not completely helpful.  

And I'm suggesting to you that after we have debated this in 

our caucus and discussed it at very, very long lengths, we have 

come up with the idea that perhaps you might commit to at 

least doing something right here. 

 

Perhaps you might consider going along with the idea of 

delaying the proclamation of certain sections of this Bill until 

they can be brought to the business community for 

reconsideration.  And that way, even though the Bill itself 

passes, certain segments wouldn't be proclaimed to be law until 

later on. 

 

Is this something that you might give some consideration to, 

Minister?  We haven't asked you that question on these two 

Bills -- and I'm going to cover both Bills in this one question 

because it may happen with one and not the other or maybe 

both. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Anything is possible.  I don't know 

that we have an official government policy on it.  We see a 

delay in proclaiming The Labour Standards Act because there 

is the necessity to draft regulations.  No such complication 

exists with respect to The Trade Union Act.  And I don't 

therefore foresee a lengthy delay in proclaiming the Bill.  As I 

say, anything's possible.  You're asking me to speculate on a 

decision which the government has not yet made.  But I do not 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

foresee a lengthy delay in proclaiming The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, what the member from Maple Creek has proposed to 

you, I think, is not something you should dismiss so lightly.  I 

mean you stood in this House time and time again and told us 

that there is absolute euphoria out there over the changes that 

you made last year. 

 

The member from Maple Creek asked you questions about 

where those regulations are at, and you have to admit in this 

House that you still don't have them done a year later.  A whole 

year later the evidence of whether they are as good or bad isn't 

evident. 

 

So what he is suggesting to you is, until you put all of the 

pieces together -- and some of this stuff is already a year old -- 

before you would design the regulations, for instance, around 

the labour standards, that you might be prepared to delay the 

proclamation of certain parts of The Trade Union Act which 

the people find most offensive.  Because I think on 

occupational health, on workmans' comp, on the items that 

potentially can cost business the most, which you yourself 

admit now you have not done the regulations for, don't you 

think it would be appropriate, Mr. Minister, that you delay 

proclamation of other components which would have the 

highest cost implication for business until you at least have 

done last year's homework, so that the business community can 

actually see the cost?  Because you admit yourself that you 

haven't implemented those sections yet. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I can only repeat myself.  There's 

been extensive consultation with respect to this Bill.  There 

have been an extensive analysis of it done by Price 

Waterhouse. 

 

And apart from any comments which are made, as I say, no 

official government decision's been taken on this; anything can 

happen.  But I just do not foresee the circumstances which 

would cause us to delay, for any lengthy period of time, the 

proclamation of The Trade Union Act. 

 

The Labour Standards Act is different. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well let's go back to the beginning, Mr. 

Minister.  Do you know the full cost implications to business of 

the two pieces of legislation passed last year? Because you 

haven't done the regulations yet.  Do you know what, in effect, 

the total cost to the business community in the province is, 

given that you haven't finished your regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There's no if's, and's, or but's about it; 

the cost is going to be a negative figure; it'll be a saving -- no 

if's, and's, or but's about it.  That can be easily verified if you 

want to get into what I think is largely an irrelevant subject.  It's 

not irrelevant, but it's not relevant to this subject. 

 

No if's, and's, or but's about it; the figure is minus.  The cost is 

a minus figure.  The business community is 

saving money with the changes in WCB (Workers' 

Compensation Board) and will save a whole lot more when 

occupational health and safety gets fully in effect in rigour. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Why then, Mr. Minister . . . and it's you that 

keeps bringing this into the argument.  You have stated over 

and over again that the reaction to both of the Bills this year 

will be insignificant down the road because of the previous 

year's work. 

 

You tell the Assembly now that there will be in fact cost 

savings to the business community.  If that's the case, why the 

delay in the implementation of the regulations?  If you can 

categorically state in here today that there will be no cost 

implications on the negative side, what's been the delay in 

implementing those regulations? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Under The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act, this is an extremely complex process.  I am told 

that the regulations will comprise about 350 pages.  I am told 

it'll take three months of someone working 9 to 5, Monday to 

Friday, to draft them.  They're a very complex affair. 

 

We have some 20 committees working industry by industry.  

Each of the committees, one management and one labour -- or 

two of each, but they were balanced -- with a chairperson from 

the department, every one of the committees agreed upon the 

regulations.  There was consensus on all 20 committees.  That's 

now gone to the folks who draft it and that is going to take 

some two to three months to do.  That's why the delay -- it is a 

very complex process. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What are you going to change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And the member asks, what will there 

be to change?  There would be a fair amount to change.  That's 

why the regulations have not been proclaimed; it's because 

they're just being drafted.  They're very lengthy and complex. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Don't you think, Mr. Minister, that you are a 

tad unfair to this House, to stand and debate and say in 

response, particularly to the member from Maple Creek, that 

the questions you ask me are not relevant because of everyone's 

happiness with this other process?  And yet you now inform the 

House today that we are only going into drafting, that the 

regulations will be some 350 pages long. 

 

Now the average business person in this province, Mr. 

Minister, who gathered in Saskatoon last week, is not the kind 

of person that has a whole crew of lawyers and draftsmen 

available to them.  These are small-business people with very 

limited resources to go through very complicated government 

regulations to see how their business at the end of the day is 

going to come out. 

 

Now you state in the House today that there is no cost 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1994 

implication, but each and every one of those 500, for instance, 

who gathered in Saskatoon, is going to have to sit down with 

those regulations and see how that affects their business.  Now 

a lot of those people last year said there was a cost implication.  

You say no, there isn't, but you don't even have a clue yourself 

until the drafting is done with these 20 committees one whole 

year later as to what will be the case. 

 

I don't know how you can stand in this House and say 

unequivocally there are no cost implications.  We have been 

told by many sectors of the economy that there is no possible 

way that their bill will be less -- no possible way.  And yet you 

stand here and say that simply isn't true.  How can we trust you 

on the implications of these two pieces of legislation when in 

effect what you are proposing may not be finished up until 

we're going into the next election campaign? 

 

And at that point the reality of what is before people in this 

province will become apparent.  You're saying, pass the 

legislation and trust me.  Well they trusted you last year, you're 

a whole year down the road, you still don't have it done.  And 

then you're going to throw a 350-page document down on the 

office desk of the average small business in this province and 

say, read it, sort it out, see how it fits. 

 

And you call that good government.  You say to the business 

community, go out and hire a bunch of people under that type 

of process, go out and invest more of your life savings under 

that type of process, come in from some other province or some 

other jurisdiction under that kind of process.  I don't think so.  

That's not realistic, Mr. Minister.  That's why people have 

asked you over and over again to lay out the framework and the 

groundwork and bring that to this Assembly and bring that to 

the people so that they can see what you are proposing, not 

giving you omnibus legislative power to then re-jig however it 

pleases you. 

 

That's the problem, Mr. Minister.  So we go back to the 

question asked by the member from Maple Creek.  Would it 

not, under those circumstances, be more appropriate for you to 

say, because of the complexity of last year's work and this 

year's work, that we will delay proclamation of the most 

contentious parts of these Bills. 

 

Set a date on it -- one year from now or at least until the 

legislature reconvenes so that it can be publicly talked about 

and debated in this House, rather than us giving you passage 

today of everything, or tomorrow or next week, and then 

allowing you to go through the processes that you've gone 

through with the two pieces from last year, which I don't find 

acceptable,  that you would keep the business community 

waiting that long to determine the costs of their everyday life, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I'm not sure whether or not you've 

confused the two in your mind but in your discourse you 

certainly have.  There are very few regulations under The Trade 

Union Act.  The regulations are under The Labour Standards 

Act which is not now before the Assembly. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you can try and use 

whatever out you wish in the committee today to try and avoid 

the topic, but those two pieces of legislation walk hand in hand 

through the business community of this province, and you 

know it.  That's why they gathered last week to protest what 

you've done.  It was for no other reason, Mr. Minister, because 

they go hand in hand. 

 

Now I don't think that's an unreasonable request, given the way 

that you've operated.  They don't know what you potentially 

have done from last year. 

 

Can you give the assurance then to this Assembly, Mr. 

Minister, that any pertinent regulations dealing with the two 

pieces of legislation this year will be done in less time than we 

did with the two Bills last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- It's certainly our anticipation it'll take 

a lot less time.  The regulations under The Labour Standards 

Act are much, much simpler -- much, much simpler. 

 

The regulations under occupational health and safety really are 

very complex.  What they are is sort of a series of safety codes 

for each business, for each institution, and thus the sort of 

things the hospital needs to do are irrelevant to a mine and 

those are all irrelevant to a restaurant.  Each industry has its 

own chapter of the regulations. 

 

None of those considerations apply to this.  These regulations 

will be much, much simpler.  We anticipate that they will . . . 

the whole process should be complete and the regulations in 

effect by the end of the year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So you're making the commitment then, I 

gather from your earlier comments, that the regulations around 

The Labour Standards Act and The Trade Union Act will 

probably come in tandem probably with the regulations around 

occupational health and safety and workmen's compensation 

which you now say is into a three- to four-month drafting 

period of time. 

 

In other words, the entire package will probably become 

evident to the business community of this province sometime 

in November or December.  Does that sound reasonable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wouldn't phrase it as a commitment; 

it's a prediction. 

 

My anticipation is that the regulations under the occupational 

health and safety will be ready by early fall.  And there are no 

regulations on the Workers' Compensation Board.  None are 

contemplated.  None are being drafted. 

 

On the occupational health and safety, there's these very 

complex regulations.  We anticipate those will be available 

early fall.  They will be drafted over the summer, with summer 

holidays factored into the system. 



May 31, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

I anticipate the regulations on The Labour Standards Act will 

be proclaimed year end.  Again that's a prediction.  It's not in 

any sense . . . It shouldn't be phrased as a commitment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that says to me then, Mr. Minister, that 

the proposal brought forward by my colleague from Maple 

Creek is not unreasonable then -- not unreasonable at all that 

you could delay proclamation of certain sections which would 

leave those sections . . . the implementation period could easily 

be brought in then in tandem.  You could delay two, three, four 

months, and you don't subject your process to any difficulty 

then by doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Again, I'm not sure whether or not the 

member's confused in his mind, but in your discourse you are 

confusing the two Bills.  The Trade Union Act, they are really 

no regulations under it of any substance and I contemplate no 

reason why that would be delayed for any lengthy period of 

time. 

 

It is our intention to delay the proclamation of The Labour 

Standards Act until the regulations are ready to be proclaimed.  

You can't read the sections on the part-time workers under the 

Act; you can't read the sections under the Act from part-time 

workers and really know what we intend, so much of it is left to 

regulation.  So we contemplate the Act and the regulations and 

we proclaim them at the same time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's that contemplation 

that scares people.  It really does.  Okay, if there are no 

problems with the regulations in The Trade Union Act, there 

are certain sections of it that people find offensive.  Would it 

not seem reasonable then that those most offensive to the 

business community, those could be delayed by proclamation 

until the regulation's process on the other Bill are finished? 

 

I mean we're only talking about three or four components here, 

Mr. Minister -- three or four -- that probably make or break a 

lot business people in this province.  Would it not seem 

reasonable talking about part-timers, for instance, that you 

would delay proclamation of certain sections of the Bill that we 

are talking about today until the regulations in some of the 

other parts are evident to the business people of this province?  

I don't see that being a terrible big problem.  You won't have 

ruined anyone's life out there.  And you may give people the 

opportunity, the opportunity to better structure their life.  Now I 

don't think that's an unreasonable request that the member from 

Maple Creek's brought forward. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- And if the member understood what 

I'm saying, I've said several times, we're going to.  The member 

is confusing The Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards 

Act.  Nothing in The Trade Union Act has any bearing on the 

issue of part-time workers. 

Now let me say it again:  nothing in The Trade Union Act has 

any bearing on the issue of part-time workers.  That arises 

exclusively under The Labour Standards Act.  It is not our 

intention to proclaim the Act until the regulations are 

proclaimed. 

 

So if the member understood what I was saying, he'd realize 

that I'm giving you, in a sense, that commitment -- that we don't 

intend to proclaim The Labour Standards Act until the 

regulations are ready.  But it's not true of The Trade Union Act, 

which, by the way, happens to be the subject under discussion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, The Trade Union Act, you can't 

tell me there aren't companies in this province that don't 

employ both part-time and full-time workers . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well there are sections under there that affect 

you whether you are a full-time or a part-time worker if that 

business is sold and there is successor rights or there are 

shifting changes.  There are all sorts of things that you talk 

about in The Trade Union Act that will affect businesses in this 

province that employ both types of workers. 

 

And what we're simply saying to you on those two or three 

sections that people find most offensive -- and you know what 

they are -- why wouldn't you delay proclamation of those 

sections?  Bring it all forward at once, Mr. Minister, is all we're 

saying to you and give people time.  Is that not reasonable and 

appropriate? 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


