




















































Hansard: May 30, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2679 

 May 30, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

an honour and a pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to the members of the Legislative Assembly, three visitors from 

Namibia:  Hendrik Thirion, Eva Neels, and Vatanavi 

Mazeingo.  Mr. Speaker, they're sitting in your gallery. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is once again participating 

in the Canada-Namibia exchange program sponsored by the 

Canadian International Development Agency, CIDA, and the 

Institute of Public Administration of Canada, IPAC.  The 

program objective is to provide for exchanges among practising 

public servants.  The Namibian candidates will be provided 

with an opportunity to observe the Saskatchewan public service 

with an emphasis on the functioning of a deputy minister's 

office.  Saskatchewan was selected as the host province, based 

on similarities including our agricultural base, the province's 

two major urban centres, and the Saskatchewan oil and gas 

industry. 

 

The candidates currently hold senior positions within the 

Namibian government in the departments of Mines and Energy, 

Trade and Industry, and Women's Affairs.  This visit follows 

previous exchanges with Namibia in 1993, which have resulted 

in Namibia adopting the Saskatchewan model for executive 

government decision-making processes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to 

welcome the Namibian delegation and honoured to have been 

chosen to participate in this program.  I believe that we can 

provide our Namibian guests with a unique perspective and 

insight into the workings of government.  I ask all members to 

welcome our guests to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Access Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today marks the 

beginning of National Access Awareness Week.  It's organized 

by a partnership of charitable foundations, various levels of 

government, and thousands of volunteers.  The week 

challenges us to think differently about the things we take for 

granted, namely, access to education, employment, 

transportation, housing, communications, and recreation. 

 

In Saskatchewan the week is coordinated by the disabilities 

directorate of Saskatchewan Labour and it's undertaking two 

major activities.  The first of these is the face-to-face program.  

Managers and job seekers 

 with disabilities will meet in an informal setting to discuss job 

requirements and job accommodation.  An important focus is 

on obtaining job interviews.  In the general population, one in 

ten people who apply for a job receive an interview; but in the 

disabled community, the ratio is one in one hundred.  

Face-to-face will work to make that ratio more equitable. 

 

The second major activity is the launching of the Government 

Access Award, an annual award that will first be presented in 

1995.  This award will recognize areas within government that 

distinguish themselves by providing either extraordinary access 

to employees with disabilities or programs and services for the 

disabled. 

 

I think it's important at this time to recognize and thank all of 

the people who work not only this week but every day to 

ensure that being disabled does not mean being unemployed.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mining Week 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

bring to the attention of all members of this Assembly that the 

week of May 29 to June 4 has been declared Mining Week -- a 

time set aside to recognize the contribution of the mining 

industry to the provincial economy. 

 

Mining could be called Saskatchewan's hidden industry by 

virtue of its location in remote areas of the province or 

underground.  It generally attracts little public attention; yet 

mining and mineral exploration is second only to agriculture in 

terms of value to the provincial economy.  Saskatchewan's 

deposits of uranium, coal, potash, and gold are world-class. 

 

An interesting fact is that the Cigar Lake uranium deposit has 

385 million pounds of high-grade uranium.  This deposit alone 

could generate billions of dollars. 

 

The mining industry contributes more than $1 billion to the 

provincial economy in the form of wages, benefit, and 

purchases of goods and services.  It directly employs over five 

and half thousand people and creates or helps support the 

employment of an estimated 15,000 more.  Many of these jobs 

are in northern Saskatchewan where there are few other 

employment opportunities. 

 

The purpose of the Mining Week is to bring to the industry the 

recognition it deserves as a major contributor to our economic 

well-being.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Awareness Week 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

like to take this time to inform the members of the House that 

this week is Tourism Awareness Week.  This special week 

focuses on the important role tourism plays in Saskatchewan's 

economy and on the variety of vacation opportunities 

Saskatchewan has to offer.  The theme will be, Saskatchewan 

Vacations: Take One! 

 

The Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan and 

Tourism Saskatoon have kicked off the week's events with an 

industry luncheon in Saskatoon. 

 

Special tourism employee banquets in Saskatoon and Regina 

have been said to honour more than 100 graduates of a 

certificate program offered by the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Education Council.  These employees have worked very hard 

and they are proof that this province is a leader in setting 

standards for the kind of professional service that keeps tourists 

coming back.  Tourism here is built on a clean, attractive, 

natural environment, rich history, and vital culture. 

 

Travellers spend some $890 million a year in our province.  

Tourism also supports more than 38,000 full- and part-time 

jobs.  This year tourist inquiries are being received at a rapid 

pace and seem destined to break last year's record of 200,000 

inquiries. 

 

The future looks bright for Saskatchewan tourism with events 

such as the Grey Cup in our province's 90th anniversary next 

year. 

 

Tourism Awareness Week is a time to reflect on the role 

tourism plays in our province and to look forward, Mr. 

Speaker, to what we can achieve in the future.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Pensioners 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again we are 

very pleased to bring a series of questions to the Legislative 

Assembly from citizens around the province who have 

questions that they wish to have put on the record. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, my question comes from a group of 

retired employees, government employees from the city of 

Regina.  And their question is:  Mr. Premier, will retired 

government employees be getting an increase in pension any 

time in the near future?  Recent increases in the cost of living 

have left many superannuates in a tough position and our 

pension dollars are buying less. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  In response to 

the correspondent, we would indicate that we have every 

sympathy for them, but these are matters which will be 

disposed of in the upcoming budget.  And I can only say to the 

correspondent who wrote to you, that we'll be giving their 

needs every consideration, as we will the needs of others to 

whom the Department of Finance relates. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Emergency Health Care 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier as well.  It comes from Mr. Orest 

Pobran of Hafford, Saskatchewan:  recently several people in 

the Hafford area have prematurely died from heart attacks, 

either at home or on the way to the hospital.  In one case, the 

ambulance driver lost his way and did not arrive till it was too 

late. 

 

These situations suggest that our area has very poor emergency 

services.  Our closest ambulance is 30 minutes away.  Our local 

hospital is not equipped to handle such emergencies and the 

Royal University Hospital is at least 60 minutes away. 

 

Mr. Premier, I'd like to know how quickly you can provide our 

area with a 911 service, a local ambulance, an emergency 

response team, and an air ambulance service. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well with respect to the Hafford area, the 

ambulance situation in Hafford is as it was in the past.  

However, the province of Saskatchewan, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, has been looking at improving the response 

system throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

We have established a first responder system and many 

communities have taken up the offer to put their first responder 

system in place.  I don't have the information in front of me 

right now as to whether or not Hafford has done this.  That may 

be something they will want to look at. 

 

The province is also looking at the possibility of a number 

something like a 911, or something for a district area. 

 

And I would suggest to this particular individual that he contact 

the district health board in that area and talk to them about how 

emergency services can be improved in that area, because the 

district board is looking at those issues right now and if there is 

a need for improvement, those improvements will be put in 

place.  So my suggestion is he do that. 

 

From my point of view, I will talk to the Department of Health 

about this individual's concerns and they will get in touch with 

the district board to see whether or not there is something that 

can be done to improve the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Problem Gambling 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question to the Premier comes from Clarence Wiebe from Rush 

Lake, and he asks:  I heard that the government has set up an 

800-number to help people who have a gambling problem.  

Why are my tax dollars being spent to encourage gambling and 

then 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

more tax dollars spent to solve the gambling problems?  Did we 

close our hospitals for this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, recognizing that gambling 

is prevalent in our society and has been for some time, this is 

the first Government of Saskatchewan to undertake a very 

significant program to try and, number one, prevent addictions 

to gaming and to offer treatment opportunities for those who 

may find themselves in that circumstance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to underline that in 

establishment of casino gambling in this province, there will be 

no public dollars involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TeleBonds 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This morning my 

question to the Premier comes from June Coakwell from 

Elrose. 

 

Why is there no direct interest payment on TeleBonds instead 

of them just being deducted from telephone bills?  I have no 

telephone registered in my name, but I would still like to buy 

TeleBonds. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

happy to respond to the question that was sent to the members 

and presented here.  It is the approach by the government that 

investments in Saskatchewan and the recovery in Saskatchewan 

and the management of our debt is done through the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds, one central mechanism by which 

people can invest within the province. 

 

The Saskatchewan savings bond has been a very successful 

program which has given people an opportunity to invest their 

dollars so that the interest we pay is paid to people in 

Saskatchewan.  SaskTel bonds are a different vehicle, a 

different instrument, and therefore we just simply provide an 

opportunity for the customers of SaskTel to get the benefit of 

them by having it deducted from their bill when their bill 

comes due. 

 

Casino Agreement 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question is to the minister of gambling.  Mr. Minister, recently 

your government announced a deal that was struck by your 

government and the Saskatchewan Federation of Indians.  And 

because this deal was made behind closed doors, there's 

precious little information that we have been able to gather up.  

We have no idea how or why you came up with the agreement 

to divvy up this gambling booty, and in fact we may never 

indeed know. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, there's one particular aspect of that deal that 

I want to explore.  I notice that you gave the FSIN (Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) one and three-quarters of a 

million dollars up front to -- and I quote -- "help cover the costs 

associated with developing the partnership." 

Mr. Minister, what exactly is developing the partnership, and 

why is that going to cost the taxpayer one and three-quarters of 

a million dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member from Rosthern for asking that question, because I've 

been attempting over the past months to articulate how these 

agreements will work and how our casino policy will impact on 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

First of all, let me say to the member from Rosthern that the 

money that will go to the FSIN will be paid from casino profits.  

And I want to say, with respect to the details of the agreement, 

they are articulated in detail in the new Act that is placed 

before this legislature that we will be debating. 

 

Why would we divide the money in this fashion?  Quite 

simply, Mr. Speaker, to provide economic development and 

social development for first nations people.  Why would we 

have a Metis component?  To provide economic development 

and social development for Metis people.  Why would we have 

a charity component?  Simply because we understand there 

may be some good work that could be done with gambling 

dollars, as been done in the past. 

 

With respect to the $1.75 million, I would say to the member 

from Rosthern, the FSIN was wanting to be involved in the 

development and had asked to be involved in the expanded 

casinos, both in Regina and Saskatoon.  During the process of 

negotiations we agreed to pay the $1.75 million up front.  The 

vast majority of that money will go to the reserve level for 

social and economic development, which is what we intend the 

revenue share for the first nations' profits to go to -- they have 

incurred some meeting costs and some administrative costs as 

we've been involved in these negotiations.  And if the member 

has any further questions, I would be more than pleased to 

articulate in detail answers to his concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

there are a great deal of other organizations within the province 

that have also had these development costs and I fail to see and 

recognize any amounts of money being turned over to them, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

But how did you arrive at $1.75 million?  That's a pretty 

specific number, and so therefore there must be a fairly specific 

accounting procedure, I would suggest to you.  Now I would 

like you to table a complete breakdown of where that money is 

going and how it will be spent.  It's taxpayers' money -- every 

penny of it.  I'm sure that you have done your due diligence by 

now, and so therefore that breakdown is available and will you 

table that for us this afternoon, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member opposite, if he had taken the time to read 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

the legislation that was put before this House, he would know 

exactly how the accounting procedures work.  The money will 

be accounted for through the Consolidated Fund which is a 

process that he's well aware of, having been a member of this 

legislature for a number of years. 

 

I want to say with respect to the accounting that will go the 

charity and the Metis, it goes through the Consolidated Fund in 

a similar fashion to what the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations revenue-sharing portion goes for.  In terms of 

the breakdown of the expenditures, when the money has been 

spent, quite clearly we will be asking for an accounting, and it 

will be provided and it will be accountable to the legislature. 

 

In terms of, Mr. Speaker, the member's inability to understand 

the partnership.  The agreement that we have reached is one for 

social and economic development for aboriginal people.  This 

is an agreement that can provide peace and avoid the kind of a 

situation where the Quebec government faces with Oka, that's 

in the paper on a daily basis. 

 

Now I say to the member from Rosthern that you can oppose 

this Bill and you can oppose social and economic development 

for Indian and Metis people; that's your prerogative.  But I say, 

Mr. Speaker, we have put together an arrangement that works 

in the best interest of all Saskatchewan people, and I will 

defend this Bill in the legislature.  I'm anxious to know where 

he stands. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, let me tell 

you one thing.  You're going to have ample opportunity to 

defend that Bill in this legislature.  You will have ample 

opportunity for that, Mr. Minister, because quite frankly I don't 

know what you're trying to hide.  You're hiding something 

because you will not give me the answer. 

 

You've taken $1.75 million, but you will not tell the legislature, 

you will not tell the people of this province, the taxpayers of 

this province, what you're going to be spending it on.  You're 

giving us just a run-around here, Mr. Minister; that's all that's 

happening. 

 

But since you won't give me the what, then let's continue on 

with the question of the why.  I'm wondering if you can tell me 

why the taxpayers are paying $1.75 million for the FSIN to 

form a partnership with this government -- a partnership that's 

going to see them, see them getting a net 25 per cent return on 

or from the province.  They're automatically going to be getting 

25 per cent return from the province and that amounts to some 

$20 million, Mr. Minister. 

 

And now to form that partnership you're saying they are also 

going to be receiving $1.75 million to help defray some of the 

costs, as you mentioned before.  So what about the other 

organizations within the 

province that are also exploring those same kind of costs in 

their exploration of this partnership deal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to again thank 

the member for the question.  It's quite clear that he hasn't 

listened to my answer, and I indicated that the money -- part of 

it -- would be for administrative, but the bulk of it would be 

going for social and economic development for first nations 

people. 

 

Now I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that he will have ample 

opportunity to question in great detail where these dollars go, 

how they will be funnelled through to the band level, and I look 

forward to those questions. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think this is a partnership 

unique anywhere in North America.  It's a partnership that's 

based on cooperation.  It's a partnership that's based on a new 

way of dealing with first nations people.  And I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, it gives them hope, but it also gives them the 

opportunity to deal with the provincial government not in the 

spirit of paternalism that was evidenced by the Conservative 

and Liberal governments over the last hundred years in this 

province -- this is based on looking at the future, looking at 

new ways of dealing with first nations people. 

 

And I say to the member, he'll have all the opportunity in the 

world to question in detail during the discussion of this 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I want you to note how that 

member has avoided answering the question -- and not skilfully 

at that, I might add. 

 

Mr. Minister, you forget that there are other people that wanted 

to get in on your high-stakes game of poker here.  These were 

the charities, the exhibition associations, the Metis association, 

and they had to sit on the sidelines waiting for you to throw 

them some scraps, Mr. Minister -- that's what it amounts to.  

They also incurred costs and they are also part of the 

partnership, I would remind you. 

 

If you're giving 1.75 millions of dollars to the FSIN to help 

them get started so that they can get 25 per cent of the stake, 

what about the exhibition associations?  What about the 

charities, Mr. Minister?  Where are the specific breakdowns?  

Table the breakdown of where that $1.75 million is going to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Rosthern, we are going to be -- in all the detail 

that he would care to be involved in -- we will be discussing the 

details of the Act, which he quite clearly hasn't read because in 

the Act he would understand how the revenue-sharing flow 

works.  He would understand that there is in fact a Metis 

component; that there is in fact an exhibition component; and if 

he had been listening, he would also understand that there are 

some variables with respect to the 25 per cent that's set aside -- 

one being whether or not the exhibition associations will be 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

involved in the management.  And if they won't be involved in 

the management, we've given the commitment that their 

revenues would be maintained whole. 

 

Now the member from Rosthern may disagree with that, and he 

may disagree with forming partnerships with first nations, 

Metis.  That may be all part and parcel of an agreement that he 

doesn't believe in, but I say to the member, if I have the choice 

between striking a deal with the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations, and thereby attempting to avoid a 

confrontation, I'm going to  tell you, Mr. Member, I will choose 

the partnership every time, as does Chief Crowe and all of the 

members of the FSIN, who sat in this gallery in support of the 

legislation on Friday.  And I ask you to go out and explain to 

them where you come from.  Is it the 25 per cent that bothers 

you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is for the minister of Gaming as well as some later for the 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Minister, I see it as my responsibility to ask questions that 

will ensure the viability of any projects that your government 

undertakes, and the failures of the Conservative administration 

demonstrated that it is imperative to ask the tough questions up 

front. 

 

Mr. Minister, when the casino partnership and your new Crown 

was announced last week there was a statement that three 

members of the board of directors will represent the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, which is understandable since 

they are 25 per cent partners in your deal. 

 

But we did hear no endorsement at all of the partnership from 

the exhibition boards, from the Metis Nation, and the charitable 

component to which you have referred so often.  They have not 

signed a deal with you, Mr. Minister, and they in fact have not 

even been asked to meet with you, as of today anyway. 

 

Who exactly are the other partners?  What share will they get?  

And will they also have three members appointed to the board 

of directors of this new Crown? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me answer the 

member from Greystone in this fashion.  If she had read the 

Bill she will understand that there is a 25 per cent component 

for the exhibition associations, charity, and the Metis.  Now she 

may not agree with that percentage figure and that's fine.  

That's her prerogative. 

 

But I'll tell you what hasn't been heard in this legislature, 

Madam Member, there has been no endorsement from you with 

respect to the 25 per cent of the revenues that we have 

earmarked for the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians.  And I 

want to say to you that during the course of this debate we are 

going to demand that you stand in this legislature and 

tell Chief Crowe and the chiefs of this province where you 

stand.  Do you support them or do you oppose them?  And I'm 

going to ask you to stand and indicate whether you support a 

Metis and a charity component and whether you support the 

exhibition component. 

 

I say to you, Madam Member, the time has come when you're 

flushed out of the woodwork.  You're going to have to make a 

decision and you better make it soon because, Madam Member, 

we're going to be counting on you to let the people of this 

province know exactly where you stand.  We've indicated 

through the Bill where we stand.  Where do you stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister still 

lives in fantasy land.  I was the only member to speak for an 

hour on this topic during private members' day and not one of 

the 53 members of this Premier's government had enough 

courage to put on record what they thought of this. 

 

Mr. Premier -- and by the way, the jurisdictional issue has not 

even been settled yet so you, sir, have a lot to stand and talk 

about as well -- Mr. Premier, overnight your government has 

proposed a Crown corporation that has the power over almost 

$100 million per year, and the Act empowers the board to build 

buildings and operate almost a limitless range of businesses. 

 

The minister, and Mr. Premier, restaurants, hotels, parking lots, 

ad agencies, food suppliers, equipment manufacturers, cleaning 

companies, and accounting firms are all, in quotes, "related to 

operating a casino."  The board also has the power to, and I 

quote: "promote and market its casinos and related businesses 

and activities." 

 

Mr. Premier, this Act has the potential to build a very powerful 

empire . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the member please put her 

question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Particularly if the minister in charge had 

direct connections with Economic Development. 

 

My question, Mr. Premier, is, whether or not you feel it 

necessary to replace the current Gaming minister, will you 

assure us today that the casino Crown will be strictly regulatory 

and will stay under liquor, gaming and horse-racing, and not be 

moved to Economic Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, on some things I can 

agree with the member from Greystone, many I can't.  One I do 

agree is that she did spend an hour in this legislature speaking 

to the casino issue.  And I want to tell her what she said.  She 

said some of my friends support gambling and some of my 

friends oppose gambling and I support my friends.  That's what 

she said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- And I want to hear, Mr. Speaker, if 

she's going to repeat her position when we're in 

clause-by-clause debate on this legislation that establishes a 

Crown corporation to give accountability to the revenue that 

will come from casinos, accountability that will come before 

the members of this legislature.  I want to know if she'll support 

that.  Or I want to know, Mr. Speaker, if she'll support some of 

her friends who oppose the Act and some of her friends who 

support the Act and stand directly in the middle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the 

trepidation that people are feeling in Saskatchewan happens to 

be because of the friends of the Minister of Economic 

Development, the minister of Gaming, the friends of yourself, 

who in fact are directly and indirectly involved in gaming. 

 

The creation of a new Crown corporation to administer casino 

gaming leaves a lot of people with a feeling of pause.  And I 

respect the commitment, any commitment, to tight control and 

regulation, but I have grave concerns about seven government 

appointees, at least three of whom are partners in the business, 

having control over the disbursement of almost $100 million 

annually. 

 

Mr. Premier, I know that we will be getting into further 

examination, detailed examination later today, but I want to 

have your answer as the Premier of Saskatchewan that this 

Crown will not be open in any way, shape, or form to 

manipulation of its income or diversion of its resources to 

projects that would give the board or the minister responsible 

any untoward powers. 

 

Mr. Premier, can I have your word today that this will not 

become an economic development corporation that builds 

hotels or restaurants or its own little government empire?  Will 

it stay under the liquor, gaming, and horse-racing as a 

regulatory body -- yes or no?  And that's it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me give a short 

answer to the member.  The answer is that the corporation will 

not be under the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority; 

that is a licensing and a regulatory body.  We are establishing 

the development of two casinos which is separate and arm's 

length from the regulation.  And you can't be the regulator and 

the operator at the same time.  And the member might not 

understand, but members of this government do. 

 

With respect to the establishment of the Crown, Madam 

Member, there are four members appointed by the Government 

of Saskatchewan, three members who will be appointed by the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  It will have the 

same accountability as SaskPower, SaskTel, or any other 

Crown corporation that has been established in this province.  

And if the member doesn't like the way we 

deal with accountability, what she might want to do is have a 

look at what other people are saying about the accountability of 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from The Bottom Line by Deana 

Driver:  the government adopted most of the recommendations 

of the Gass Commission and now produces one of the best 

financial statements in the country. 

 

And I want to say, that's the kind of accountability you can 

expect from this new corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour.  Mr. Minister, I 

guess you feel that you haven't done enough to insult and 

alienate the Saskatchewan business people over the past few 

months, so you had to haul in a real pro, your old friend Bob 

White, to give you a hand.  I guess it's not enough that you 

think that all business people are greedy and ruthless 

extremists; we now have to listen to an Ontario union leader 

tell us that Saskatchewan business people have no commitment 

to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you share Bob White's views about 

Saskatchewan business people?  Why don't you tell Bob White 

to go back home to Ontario where he belongs, and go back 

yourself to work on this legislation and change it so that it will 

work in a way that will make the Saskatchewan business 

people as satisfied with what you're doing as Bob White is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I am quite prepared to respond to the 

member from Maple Creek on the actions and the comments of 

this government.  The head of the CLC (Canadian Labour 

Congress) is a little beyond the jurisdiction of the Minister of 

Labour for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

the members of the Assembly, 25 grade 8 students from the 

Turtleford School that are in your gallery.  They're 

accompanied today by Colleen Roper, Jacquie Gerwing and 

Cheryl Macnar, teachers and chaperon. 

 

They've made the trip down from Turtleford to look at the 

things that are taking place in the Assembly and to do some 

other touring in the Regina area.  And I would ask the members 

of the Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

member for Quill Lakes, I'm pleased to introduce a group of 22 

grade 10 students from Muenster, seated in your gallery.  Mr. 

Speaker, they're accompanied by their teacher, Paul Reist, and 

chaperons Mary Thoen and Glen and Susan Taphorn. 

 

I hope that they have an enjoyable visit to Regina, seeing the 

sights, and a very safe trip home.  I'd like to ask all members to 

join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Canada Remembers Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to 

make a statement to the Assembly about the Canada 

Remembers program and the 50th anniversary of D-Day.  This 

afternoon each member of the Assembly has a Canada 

Remembers pin on his or her desk, provided compliments of 

the Regina office of the Department of Veterans' Affairs of 

Canada.  Members have received the program for the D-Day 

anniversary events in Regina from June 4 to 6.  There will also 

be events in Saskatoon and Moose Jaw and other communities 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this first item in the 1994 throne speech was the 

50th anniversary of the D-Day landings and the end of the 

Second World War.  Members will be glad to know that we 

were able to follow up on this by establishing a 

Saskatchewan-Canada Remembers Committee chaired by my 

department. 

 

This committee includes representatives of the Department of 

Veteran Affairs' Canada, veterans' organizations, the Canadian 

Forces, and the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). The 

committee is coordinating 50th anniversary events in the 

province during 1994 and 1995.  The committee decided to 

focus on Regina for the D-Day anniversary.  I think members 

will agree that this is appropriate, given that the only formed 

Saskatchewan unit to take part in the Normandy landings was 

the Regina Rifle Regiment, now the Royal Regina Rifles. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the cooperation and the support of 

Mayor Archer and the city of Regina as well as Veterans' 

Affairs Canada in making our D-Day events possible.  The 

soldiers of the Regina Rifles showed courage and daring and 

tenacity on that pivotal day of June 6, 1944 and many of them 

gave their lives.  Others were wounded.  All of them suffered 

the discomforts, indeed the terrors, of combat.  But 

they carried on through France, Belgium, Holland, and 

Germany until the liberation of Europe was achieved, and I 

salute them and I know all members of this House join me in 

that salute. 

 

I encourage members to take part in the D-Day anniversary 

events.  I know that all members will join with me in 

expressing our thanks and admiration to the veterans who 

helped preserve the liberties that we enjoy today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

think that most of us have been observing, over the last few 

days, a number of programs that have focused on the courage 

of so many Canadians in the Second World War and D-Day. 

 

It is with great regret that I can't participate with everyone on 

Saturday during the D-Day memorial service at St Paul's 

Cathedral in Regina, as well as the Canada Remembers service 

at City Hall. 

 

But I do want people to know that, as the Leader of the Third 

Party, our caucus has been looking at the incredible 

contribution that was made, and especially now that many of 

our people have gone overseas to relive and remember some of 

what they did during their time in the Second World War.  It's 

brought to the fore the role that such a small and unpopulated 

country did for world peace. 

 

So we would like to join with the minister today in 

acknowledging what a tremendous role we played, and to 

applaud all of those people who took risks on our behalf for our 

freedom. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

with the hon. minister and the Leader of the Liberal Party in 

congratulating those in our province that have put forward the 

effort to be part of this celebration which obviously is one that 

we have a great deal of pride in. 

 

Many of us in this province had relatives who served in that 

particular conflict and have heard the stories that went along 

with it.  An uncle of mine was with the 8th recce's.  They 

landed two days later, behind where the Regina Rifles had gone 

in, and I've heard many times personally about the courage of 

those men who went ashore that early morning on June 6. 

 

And I congratulate the Deputy Premier for heading up the 

committee and garnering all Saskatchewan people together in 

an effort that we all appreciate.  And our hearts go out to the 

families and members of people who actually served that day, 

and hope that this remembrance by our province stands them 

very proud as they remember those days long ago. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I will be tabling the response 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

to question no. 62 with the assistance of a page. 

 

The Speaker: -- The answer to question no. 62 has been tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 70 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 70 -- An Act 

to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(No. 6) be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 72 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 72 -- An Act 

to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation 

and to enact certain Consequential Amendments arising from 

the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

make a few comments pertaining to this particular Bill and they 

will be somewhat restricted simply, Mr. Speaker, because we 

have the opportunity to, in great depth and detail, ascertain as 

to why this legislation is necessary when we get to the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I may say that I am astonished that the member 

for Prince Albert Northcote and his colleagues would think for 

one moment that it is an acceptable procedure of this legislature 

to bring forward a Bill of this magnitude on day 76 of any 

sitting, Mr. Speaker -- day 76.  Many people thought we were 

going to be out of here last week.  Now of course, many people 

recognize that we'll be lucky to get out of here next month, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Simply because a Bill like this thrown in at the last second 

demonstrates a number of things.  Firstly, it demonstrates to me 

that this government, in spite of its apparent success in some 

legislation, is totally abominable and dismal in its record of 

coming forward with meaning legislation that has been 

properly thought out. 

 

We see examples of this on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, where 

we have to have succeeding legislation that is changing 

previous legislation.  A good case in point is the court case with 

the judges where the members opposite had to do a lot of 

scrambling around trying to make last-moment changes.  But in 

the case in point in Bill 72, what it demonstrates clearly is a 

lack of direction and a lack of understanding of members 

opposite of how to set up this new gaming industry of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker 

 

And it is rather abhorrent to most people to recognize that it 

this government with this type of mismanagement that is now 

purporting to lead this province in a totally different direction 

than we have ever had before.  We are finding, Mr. Speaker, 

with this legislation that we have a government that is adamant 

in its view that the only way it can achieve success in its goal, 

its primary goal, the goal upon which all of its action are 

premissed on, and that is the fighting of the deficit and the 

reduction of the debt, Mr. Speaker . . . As I have accused the 

Minister of Justice on times repeatedly that as far as they are 

concerned the end justifies the means. 

 

It doesn't matter what means we need; it doesn't matter what 

means we have to use to accomplish the goal.  And if the goal 

is wrestling the monster of the debt, as they would like to refer 

to it, to the ground and we have to use a method that is almost 

foreign to this province, Mr. Speaker, to accomplish that goal, 

then so be it; it is justified. 

 

And we have the member from Moose Jaw, who had all the 

ministers of Moose Jaw around in a parade down Main Street 

demonstrating against the evils of gaming, is now one of the 

strongest proponents of the gaming procedure, Mr. Speaker.  

And I think that is reprehensible. 

 

(1415) 

 

And I don't think that he is very comfortable with this new 

direction that his government is charting, and I don't think that 

very many of those members are very comfortable with this 

new direction.  And I certainly know that a lot of people are 

expressing this type of concern to me that what is happening in 

our society -- what is happening in our society when, granted, 

we have financial problems and fiscal restraints, that we have 

to turn to the remedy, Mr. Speaker, to a system that is probably 

and very likely going to create more problems than it will serve 

and settle.  And I know the Minister of Social Services must be 

extremely, extremely concerned about the impact that this kind 

of strategy is going to have on the citizenry of Saskatchewan. 

 

The minister of Gaming from Prince Albert, during his second 

reading speech made much ado -- and he spent a whole page of 

Hansard, I notice -- trying to legitimatize the course of action, 

that what this government was doing now and proposing now is 

just a next logical step in a sequence that had already been 

begun back in 1971 by the Liberal government.  And that this 

was just a natural progression, that there was nothing 

particularly unique about it. 

 

But I want to say to that minister, and I want to say to the 

Minister of Health -- who runs the 800 line that we have been 

talking about, the Associate Minister of Health -- that you folks 

I do not think have a full comprehension of the negative impact 

of what you are proposing to do. 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

Now you say it's going to raise money for the coffers of the 

people of Saskatchewan.  Look at what it's doing right now 

already before you've even begun this process.  Look what has 

been initiated.  We have a squabble -- we have a squabble 

being established by the people of this province as to who's 

going to get what share of the booty. 

 

And you trumpet loudly and hail with a great deal of fanfare 

the agreement made with the FSIN and Chief Roland Crowe.  

Now I've spoken to Roland Crowe since this agreement was 

announced and I give the Indians of this province full credit for 

making a deal at 25 per cent of the booty.  I don't blame them, 

Mr. Speaker, I don't blame them at all.  Because they are 

desperate; they have waited for two and a half years now on 

this government to live up to their promise that there would be 

job creation, that indeed the quality of life of all of the people 

of Saskatchewan would be enhanced by your job creation 

strategy.  And you have failed dismally, folks, you have failed 

dismally. 

 

What do we have now, Mr. Speaker?  We have a minimum of 

6,000 jobs fewer than you had when you were elected.  That's 

your job creation record.  Is it any wonder that the Indians are 

saying, it's time, enough is enough. 

 

And the Premier says, well we had to do this because we 

wanted to avoid an Oka in Saskatchewan.  In a second reading 

speech, the minister of gambling said if we didn't do this, we'd 

have an Oka on our hands in Saskatchewan.  Now I don't know 

about Chief Roland Crowe and the rest of the Indians in this 

province, but I would not take kindly to that kind of a 

discussion that we're going to go out there and we're going to 

start fighting and we're going to start shooting and we're going 

to start killing people like in Oka. 

 

I don't think the Indians in Saskatchewan are like that.  I know 

Chief Roland Crowe, I worked with him for two and a half 

years.  He's a gentleman of honour.  And for you to use that as 

an excuse I think is abominable and I think you should be 

ashamed of that. 

 

I'm not saying that they're happy; I'm not saying that some of 

the folks might not get a little bit disturbed and do some things 

that they shouldn't do.  But that's only in response to the fact 

that you have not lived up to their expectations of the promises 

that you made which encouraged them to vote for you and to 

elect you.  And now when there's no recourse, when you have 

not been able to improve that quality of life for these people, 

you fall back upon something that seems to you to be the 

answer of all of your problems. 

 

And I say to you again, members opposite, that your legacy as 

this government and the Premier's legacy of this government is 

not going to be like that of a fellow whose bones you like to dig 

up from time to time, namely Tommy Douglas.  When we think 

of Tommy Douglas, we think of great accomplishments -- and 

rightfully so.  Not that we agree with everything that he did, but 

that's almost taken for granted. 

But your legacy is that you were the government that tried to 

answer the problems, the ails of this province, by 

institutionalizing gambling.  Oh, not gambling like at the 

exhibition park here in Regina where you go to the casino once 

a year when you go to the exhibition, or the bingos, or what the 

charities do.  But you have institutionalized that to the point 

where the minister is going around . . . the minister of gambling 

is going around saying, we haven't got enough of it, we have to 

encourage people to come out and gamble more.  He said that, 

Mr. Speaker, in a second reading speech on Bill 33 where the 

Horse Racing Commission now is being taken out of the 

Department of Agriculture and then put into the gaming and 

alcohol commission.  Then he said we've got to get more 

people out to the tracks so that they bet more.  Of course you 

want them to bet more because you get 50 per cent of the kitty 

-- 50 per cent is automatically going to be turned over to the 

Consolidated Fund. 

 

But what does this 50 per cent . . . what is it comprised of, Mr. 

Speaker?  That 50 per cent is taken out of the individual 

people's pockets and is it necessarily revenue that is 

expendable?  Is it expendable revenue that the people don't 

need, that they can afford to lose?  Of course not. 

 

What it's going to do is encourage people to go for that pot that 

is at the end of the rainbow.  We have a lot of poor people in 

Saskatchewan.  We have a lot of people in Saskatchewan that 

are making it, but just barely.  And so what better chance is 

there for them to escape from this world of boredom and 

mediocrity than to go and buy a lottery ticket, which is what 

they're doing now and that's always that possibility of winning 

that pot at the end of the rainbow; or simply going into 

gambling casinos that are . . . the proliferation of which is what 

I'm concerned because it makes it so darn easy for anyone to go 

and gamble at any time.  And so there are going to be 

concomitant problems that are associated with this new 

venture. 

 

And every time I get up and ask you, well what has your study 

shown, what is the impact of this gambling venture going to be 

on the average citizen out there, how are they going to be 

affected, how many people are going to become addicts, 

addicted to gambling, there's no answer -- there's no answer. 

 

We know for example that the police in the city of Windsor 

said to their city council and to their government: listen, we 

suspect that there is going to be a wholesale increase in crime, 

from drug trafficking to prostitution to whatever you would 

want to consider and to name; so therefore, we need more 

resources in terms of men, in terms of equipment.  And they 

were promptly given what they felt would be necessary. 

 

In Saskatchewan, have we arrived at that state?  No, Mr. 

Speaker, we have not.  In fact, in Saskatchewan the minister 

said: oh by golly, maybe we should have a look at that. 

 

And that's the problem.  I come right back to the specific 

problem of Bill 72.  Listen, folks, you came up 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

with this Bill on day 76 when the legislature should have been 

done, finished, because you don't know what you're doing.  

You just realized now all of a sudden that oh, by golly, we're 

going to have to be accountable for this $80 million a year.  

And the lawyers are telling you now, dream up something or 

form another Crown corporation so that you can do this legally. 

 

And you're flying by the seats of your pants.  And that's not 

good enough to give any degree of comfort and any degree of 

confidence to the people of Saskatchewan as to how you are 

handling this situation.  Because if you've done that with this 

aspect of the gambling innovation, you probably have done it 

with many others.  And case in point is your 800 line.  Great 

fanfare announced.  We've got this 800 line; if you've got any 

trouble with gambling, please phone in.  We phoned in; it didn't 

work.  Ten minutes after the announcement was made. 

 

And so what I'm going to do now is just simply say: here we 

have a White Paper that, as far as I'm concerned -- in this Bill 

72 -- it's a good starting point.  Now what we should do is 

lessen our haste, acknowledge the fact that maybe this is 

premature, and let's spend the summer months, and perhaps the 

fall months, Mr. Speaker, going out and ascertaining first of all 

whether indeed and in fact this is the direction that the people 

of this province want to have their government heading them. 

 

Do we want full-scale casino gambling in Saskatchewan?  Do 

we want that?  That's never been proven.  That's never even 

been suggested.  I think it's a given by many people.  Take, for 

example, the scramble that's out there right now to get a piece 

of the action.  And I don't blame those folks out there.  I don't 

blame them at all.  But fundamentally there has never been the 

question asked of the citizenry of this province: do you want us 

to head down the road of gambling, so where gambling will 

become a major source of revenue for this government?  

They've never been asked that. 

 

If they would be asked that I am sure they would say, hold on 

now, let's have a second look at this.  Let's give it some second 

thought.  Because what are the implications?  You can't answer 

that.  You cannot answer what the implications are.  But I do 

know, as looking over some of you members, I see those 

shining dollar signs.  That's your motivation.  That's your 

motivation. 

 

And I would just say, let's pause, let's give this some thought, 

let's take this Act out and bring it to the people of 

Saskatchewan so they can look at it, so that they can have some 

input into it.  And let's not just talk to the players in this game.  

Let's not just talk to the groups that have a vested interested as 

to how this turns out.  Let's take a look and ask the biggest 

vested group in this province, which is the taxpayer and the 

citizenry of this province, what they believe.  And then if you 

can come up in here with any kind of show of support, then you 

will see that you have an opposition here that will be willing to 

play ball and work at it the 

way it's supposed to be worked at. 

 

But under the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I say to members 

opposite, you do not have a mandate for this.  There is no 

mandate for you to go out and fundamentally change the course 

and the tenor of this province by putting all of your bets on the 

gaming industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks of admonition and with 

those pleas to have some second thoughts before we pursue 

blindly on this course, I take my seat.  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish 

to rise and speak on this Bill as well this afternoon.  I want to 

express first of all, my disbelief that we are actually being 

asked to examine, to speak to and, no doubt, pass a piece of 

legislation to create a new Crown corporation with literally 

hours to go in a session.  A piece of legislation that seems to 

have come out of nowhere and has come to great surprise to 

substantially many people throughout Saskatchewan, including 

I'm sure, the NDP (New Democratic Party) caucus. 

 

The minister has indicated that the Criminal Code of Canada 

obliges the government to establish a corporation that has the 

legislative authority to involve itself in gaming.  I really 

question whether this legislation creates legislative authority or 

whether it creates a new empire for the NDP government. 

 

I have made it very clear that I am uncomfortable and our 

Liberal caucus is uncomfortable with the government's 

approach to expanding gaming and the way it's gone about this 

from the outset.  There is overwhelming evidence that this has 

been very piecemeal at best. 

 

And I am simply not giving my opinion, Mr. Speaker.  

Sometimes it takes people a while to catch up on what the 

government is doing.  We have seen evidence of that with the 

labour Bills.  Once people realize the potential dangers inherent 

in the course of action that the government is taking, they begin 

to question things and they end up calling their local MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly).  They call me.  They 

call the opposition caucus because they have genuine concerns.  

And it is our responsibility as representatives of the people to 

raise their concerns in this House and hopefully the government 

will feel responsible enough and accountable enough to them 

that they would provide real answers. 

 

And we all recognize that the government has become very, 

very good at one thing, and that is stringing people along and 

reassuring them that their concerns are being addressed 

somehow.  It's a sort of "don't worry, be happy" school of 

advice.  Well, Mr. Speaker, people are worried, and they are 

not happy about the way that this particular deal in particular is 

proceeding. 

 

(1430) 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

Now I do want to be on record for giving credit to the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations.  The leadership of 

the federation has known from the outset what they have 

wanted.  They have known what they've wanted to achieve 

through negotiations and, with credit to them, they have gotten 

exactly what they did set out to achieve.  That is something that 

they set about to achieve for their people, and they are to be 

given credit for representing their people -- something which I 

think should give pause to this particular administration when 

people remain unconvinced that they are representing them 

well. 

 

For the sake of those in FSIN and for the future of the province 

and all of its people, I hope that they have gotten . . . and what 

they have gotten will prove to be beneficial to them in the ways 

that they expect. 

 

To this date however, Mr. Speaker, there are no accurate 

projections of jobs.  There is no answer to the jurisdictional 

issue of whether or not there'll be on-reserve gaming.  There 

are no questions and answers specifically to the true 

projections, no actual answers to the numbers of visits that will 

be necessary to make these casinos sustainable.  It's an 

astonishing way to go about attempting to participate in 

something that will have a reflection on the well-being, the 

financial well-being of the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, and to the Premier as well, hope is not a 

strategy; it is simply hope.  And one cannot build a future or a 

province or even a casino on wishful thinking, which is 

regretfully what there appears to be happening here. 

 

As I said, the FSIN seems to be very satisfied with their end of 

the deal.  And not only have they received a promise to share in 

one-quarter of the profits, they have received the $1.75 million 

advance toward the cost of establishing the partnership, as was 

laid out in question period today by the official opposition. 

 

Now one cannot hold Chief Crowe or any of his negotiators or 

criticize them for pursuing this or accepting it.  I am not here to 

challenge the FSIN; I am here to challenge the Government of 

Saskatchewan and to hold them accountable for any of their 

actions on a wide range of issues including this, as well as their 

future plans that will have an impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan.  That is my job and I take it very seriously. 

 

I have enormous concern and considerable suspicion in my 

mind about the process in the way the government has gone 

about the gambling issue overall.  I find it very curious that the 

minister would engage in months and months and months of 

negotiation with the exhibition boards in Regina and 

Saskatoon, with the exhibition boards around the province of 

Saskatchewan, with both Indian and Metis people, and would 

talk about these people as if they were partners all along, but 

would then proceed to make the announcement of the 

agreement with only one portion of all of the people with 

whom they have consulted,  having no representation of the 

other individuals who have been involved in this process. 

What kind of a partnership is it where 25 per cent interest is left 

hanging in limbo while the other partners are able to establish 

their relationships, their partnerships, and ultimately establish a 

Crown corporation?  What is the urgency of the situation is the 

question I pose yet again, Mr. Speaker, the urgency of the 

situation that dictates that all of this must be done at the 11th 

hour to the exclusion of all of the different players in the 

partnership? 

 

Or is it to say that the government considers itself to be an 

important partner, that it considers itself to be the most 

important partner, and then because of the very excellent 

leadership of the FSIN, they too were able to focus and bring 

about their partnership. 

 

But they've given less consideration as a government and no 

consideration as far as respect to the current stakeholders in the 

gaming industry -- the exhibition boards and the Metis Nation 

and the charitable organizations who have been promised to be 

treated fairly and equitably but at this point have not been 

engaged in any serious conversations since this announcement 

has taken place. 

 

What message would it have sent to the government for the 

government to negotiate the deal with the exhibition boards and 

the charities, appoint three of their representatives to the new 

Crown board of directors, and not include the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations?  What message would that have 

sent? 

 

And I think that the leadership of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations would agree that this would have 

been totally unacceptable to them and it should have been 

totally unacceptable to them if it had transpired that way.  So 

why should it be any less unacceptable to the other potential 

partners who appear to have been left twisting in the wind? 

 

Those are just some of the questions that we expect the minister 

to have answers for before he gets any leeway to proceed with 

this Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Act itself.  I am certain that the manner 

in which this Act was presented to Saskatchewan people 

through its legislature is unprecedented.  Just a few days before 

the anticipated end of a session we find out, through a news 

conference, no less, that we will be asked to pass an Act to 

create a new Crown corporation, a baby brother for our family 

of Crown corporations.  Just a few days before the Assembly 

plans to adjourn, we receive a photocopied Act that appears, on 

closer examination, to have been prepared in the greatest of 

haste.  It would appear that this indeed was a last-minute 

political decision, to avoid the fallout that could have arisen 

from creating this corporation through an order in council. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government may feel that it is following 

proper process.  But regardless of their motivation to avoid 

political fallout, there is no good reason to be rushing into this 

kind of legislation in 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

advance of all of the considerations of potential partners who 

have been able to and willing to participate in working out the 

partnership. 

 

In a media scrum on May 26, 1994 in this very Legislative 

Building, the minister in charge indicated that the Liquor and 

Gaming Authority would be the regulatory arm of the 

corporation, but the casino corporation would be more the 

developmental side of it. 

 

The minister said, and I quote directly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 In order to have the partnership and have the board of 

directors where we have direct involvement by the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and other appointments that 

the government may make, we needed to establish a 

corporation, we needed to have this process in place as soon 

as we possibly could. 

 

I think it indeed curious that if the minister wanted the 

corporation in place, and the process in place, that he never 

mentioned it once, Mr. Speaker, not once during all of the 

questioning about providing a plan and a strategy during this 

entire session.  Nowhere at any time, during questioning in 

question period, any comments, any news releases, anything 

made by the minister in charge, has he raised the issue of 

setting up a new Crown corporation. 

 

I also find it unbelievable that the minister would say on one 

hand that he wants partners involved on the board, but would 

go ahead and make the announcement, the formal 

announcement, that the deal was signed, sealed and delivered 

without the other 25 per cent of the partners being involved at 

all.  And I underline the "at all," Mr. Speaker, because the 

exhibition boards and the Metis Nation and the charitable 

organizations have all contacted us, and they're confused.  

They're confused because they have not been able to meet with 

the minister, they have not been approached by the minister, 

ever since all of these particular issues have come to the fore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about accountability.  This Act 

provides very questionable accountability.  Not only does the 

Act empower the board to build buildings, to operate 

businesses, to hire people, it speaks of turning over the net 

profits of the casinos to the Consolidated Fund. 

 

But where is the term "net profits" defined?  Does the Bill tell 

us how much the operators will get?  No, it does not.  Does it 

tell us whether net profits are before or after the operators 

receive their monies?  Is it after they get their cut?  Well no, the 

Act does not define this.  Does the Bill tell us whether net 

profits include the current 9 per cent casino tax the government 

currently takes on casino revenues?  No, it does not. 

 

But credit to the government, they are getting things done in a 

hurry.  But on this occasion, I very much disagree with 

Shakespeare.  This is not a case of if it 'twere done, 'tis well 

'twere done quickly.  In fact I 

think the opposite applies.  If this is going to be done at all, it is 

in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan that it be 

done cautiously, that it be done carefully, and that it be done 

sensibly. 

 

To date we have no evidence that the government is prepared to 

take its time and to do this right.  And that in and of itself poses 

great questions.  In fact, I'm surprised . . . not surprised 

actually; I was going to say I was surprised that when the 

members of government had an opportunity to speak on the 

issue of gaming in the province of Saskatchewan -- very broad 

reaching, including all different possibilities for them to talk 

about the aboriginal component, the research and development 

side, the studies that have been done, all of the projections, 

everything -- they had not one word to say, as if they don't have 

an opinion on this, Mr. Speaker, which took me then by great 

surprise.  I cannot believe that the members opposite actually 

support the introduction of a new Crown corporation on such 

short notice, and then actually support the view that no time be 

taken to examine this fully. 

 

To date we have no evidence that the government is prepared to 

take its time and to do this right.  Simple questions still remain 

unanswered.  Who says we should build two casinos?  Who has 

determined the amount of jobs that are available?  How will 

The Trade Union Act affect the government's commitment to 

provide 50 per cent of the casino jobs to aboriginal workers 

when their own legislation, Bill 54, says those jobs must go to 

union employees? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many questions to ask and many 

to answer.  I want to reiterate that the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations has done a masterful job of 

negotiating on behalf of their people.  And I believe that they 

have done not only a good job, but they should be commended 

for the work that they've done for their people. 

 

I support their aims and objectives and I've made that clear on 

many occasions, although I do have concerns that perhaps they 

may end up being disappointed, that in fact their confidence 

that the results be achieved will be the results that they 

anticipate.  And the reason I question that is because we've 

been provided with actually no solid information from the 

government on the numbers that are backed up by evidence.  I 

would like to be provided with the evidence that would support 

the anticipation of all of the people who are ultimately going to 

be partnerships in this. 

 

I think it is unfortunate that the minister would be so political 

as to imply that anyone who questions the viability of these 

projects or asks to see the hard evidence that the government 

has done its homework, it is unfortunate that the government 

would be so anxious to proceed with its ill-thought-out plan, 

that it would try to paint anyone who asks responsible 

questions as someone who opposes jobs and opportunities for 

aboriginal people. 

 

Surely after sitting for nine and a half years in opposition to a 

Conservative government that did work sliding by deal after 

deal without legitimate 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

economic impact studies, any cost/benefit analyses, surely the 

members opposite would have more respect for the people of 

Saskatchewan and aboriginal people and the rest of the 

population than that. 

 

What sense is there in promising aboriginal people 1,000 jobs 

when they have no evidence as to how many jobs there will be?  

What sense is there in ignoring the implications of Bill 54 on 

that promise by telling people that the government will simply 

fine-tune the regulations to look after that little glitch? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am tired of retroactive planning on the 

part of the government and in particular this department.  This 

ministry has demonstrated that all it really knows how to do is 

make up the plan as it goes along.  This particular government 

is placing the viability of this project in jeopardy through their 

ham-handed approach to negotiations.  And throughout the 

course of the gaming discussions there has been little evidence 

that this government knows what it is doing. 

 

There is no doubt, no doubt at all, that casinos will make 

money.  There is no doubt that they will create some jobs.  This 

agreement ensures that half of those jobs will go to aboriginal 

peoples.  But there are some doubts, doubts about how the 

overall gaming strategy of this government will have an impact 

on the province and the future of its people. 

 

This Act is a dangerous move toward putting power and control 

of a tremendous amount of money and influence into the hands 

of very few people to the exclusion of many.  There are many 

clauses in the legislation that open a virtual Pandora's Box and 

we intend to pursue those issues in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recognize that the agreement with the FSIN 

commits to establishing this corporation this session or next.  

What I must question in all sincerity is the wisdom of doing 

this with inadequate planning, incomplete information, and lack 

of endorsement by all of the partners.  I will conclude my 

remarks with the commitment to pose extensive questions to 

the minister in Committee of the Whole. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It 

gives me great pleasure today to introduce a group of students 

from Stony Rapids, Stony Rapids School, 15 in numbers from 

grade 4 to grade 9, and they are accompanied by their teacher 

Janet Simpson and Martina Cain.  This group of students, Mr. 

Speaker, come from Stony Rapids, which is on the very east 

end of Lake Athabasca, just approximately 50 miles south of 

Northwest Territories -- they've had 

to fly out. 
 

And I just want to indicate to the group that I sincerely hope on 

behalf of myself and all the members here that your trip to 

southern Saskatchewan is enjoyable and that you have a safe 

journey home.  Thank you very much. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 72 -- An Act 

to Establish the Saskatchewan Gaming Investment Corporation 

and to enact certain Consequential Amendments arising from 

the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 
 

The division bells rang from 2:47 p.m. until 3:17 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas 
 

Romanow Bradley 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Thompson Pringle 

Simard Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Shillington Serby 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Johnson Scott 

Atkinson Crofford 

Kowalsky Kluz 

Cunningham Jess 

Upshall Langford 

Hagel  

-- 25 

Nays 
 

Swenson Goohsen 

Muirhead Haverstock 

Neudorf McPherson 

Boyd Bergman 

-- 8 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 

Vote 20 

Item 1 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, the time 

we have taken with the labour Bills is long, and hopefully 

somewhat productive in that you have suggested that you are 

making some changes as we go along.  Unfortunately though, 

when we have as important an issue as this that will affect all of 

our 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

province, it's natural that more and more concerns will arise. 

 

I bring to you today a serious situation that has developed, that 

I need to have your response and reaction to.  I have here a 

transcript, I guess you might say, of a taped show that was on 

CBC Radio with the Barry Burgess show.  Now I'm going to 

read you the questions and then I'm going to allude to the tape, 

after which I will table the taped material in words so that you 

can peruse them and make your comments.  Because, quite 

frankly, I believe we have a conflict of interest here, Minister, 

that you will have to resolve by asking for some resignations. 

 

Now we have been informed that John -- the man who is 

identified on this tape -- is a member of the Labour Relations 

Board.  Now, Mr. Minister, this tape calls into question the 

impartiality of the Labour Relations Board itself.  And we will 

be asking you, Minister, will you not agree once we read you 

this tape, that it will clearly illustrate a bias in favour of the 

unions by the Labour Relations Board itself and its members 

and that the businesses who challenge a certification vote 

haven't got a chance of any kind. 

 

We verify this document through the efforts and contribution 

and call to our office by Bill Stuart of Merit Construction and 

he is assuring us that he has identified this individual, John, as 

a member of the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Mr. Chairman, without further to-do, I will allude to the taped 

transcript so that I can table it for the minister.  Very quickly it 

begins: 

 

 John: (just like a script from a movie)  Hi, I just want to 

make a couple of comments.  First comment -- I'm sorry I 

missed the Minister of Labour.  I know he had to rush back 

to question period. 

 

So there, Minister, you might note the fact that you had already 

left the studio and may not be totally aware of what happened 

here.  It goes on: 

 

 Barry: yes. 

 

 John:  But I'm glad I didn't miss Mr. Botting.  I didn't realize 

that he was going to be on the program or . . . 

 

 Barry:  Well Barb Byers is coming up in about 10 minutes. 

 

 John:   Well, yeah, well, I really think that if we're going to 

have Mr. Botting on we should have representatives of the 

trade union movement and so forth, not just that he calls in 

and monopolizes the conversation. 

 

Anyway, let's deal with a couple of his points. 

 

 So injunctions by the Labour Relations Board . . . the 

injunctions of the Labour Relations Board . . . was in fact 

told by the courts and Mr. Botting 

should know that, that they did have the right to issue 

injunctions.  In fact the Labour Relations Board in the 

province of Saskatchewan was not exercising that right.  In 

fact it wasn't a right, it was a duty and the court ruled that 

they must exercise that right so it's really nothing to do . . . 

The injunction has absolutely nothing to do with any 

amendments to the new Trade Union Act as far as the 

powers of the Labour Relations Boards. I think the minister 

has stated quite clearly the Labour Relations Board gets no 

new powers under this Act. 

 

 What it does get of course is the right to enforce its rulings 

which is really interesting in the courts. They can enforce 

their rulings and that's the only change to this. 

 

 Barry:  Isn't that a power? 

 

 John:  Well, it may be a power, Dale . . . I didn't interrupt 

you, I hope you won't me because . . . 

 

 Barry:  Sorry, that was just me.  I was just asking you a 

question. 

 

 Dale:  No, I'm respecting your . . . I'm listening very 

carefully, sir. 

 

 John:  Okay.  Really, it's a power, but it's a duty and an 

obligation which the courts told the Labour Relations 

Boards that they had. Not only did they have the right to do 

it, but they had the duty to do it and that was put onto the 

Labour Relations by the Court of Queen's Bench.  I 

understand the ruling that came from . . . so it's nothing new 

in The Trade Union Act. 

 

 Now in certifying and decertifying, Mr. Botting seems to 

think that I notice that he talks about democracy and he 

would like a free and open voice . . . votes everywhere. 

 

 Well it's interesting that he would make that point.  The only 

points that change in this Act is that under where the 

Labour Relations finds that there has been blatant 

interference by one party or the other and the blatant 

interference would make the taking of a vote amongst the 

employees, either way, by the way for certification or 

decertification, if they held that, if they find that that is the 

case, then the original intent was then they could order an 

automatic certification. 

 

 That right has been taken away from the Labour Relations 

Board, but the board does have the right to fine, I guess, 

either a union or an employer who blatantly interferes with 

the free wishes of the employee.  And some people should 

realize in this province that it's not the employer that 

becomes unionized, it's the employee that make that choice, 

not the employer that makes the choice.  And if there is a 

blatant interference in making that decision, then the 

Labour Relations Board could rule that 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

there was unfair labour practice charges.  But they cannot 

order, under these recent amendments, an automatic 

decertification. 

 

 Barry:  John, can I ask you how you know all of this? 

 

 John:  Because I'm the business manager for the building 

trade in the province of Saskatchewan and I've been 

involved in the trade union movement for about 30 years. 

 

This is where I think, Minister, that he started to be identified.  

It goes on and Dale interjects and says: 

 

 John, I acknowledge that last point.  In fact I said it myself.  I 

acknowledged the recent amendments and indicated that 

the government had come to their senses and moved back 

from their original requirement even a month ago to go to 

automatic certification.  We still wish that, though, like the 

people's electoral process, likewise, if there is a choice to be 

made in a workplace, is that everything always be done in 

secret ballot.  People should recognize that intimidation and 

. . . (inaudible) . . . can happen not just by employer to 

employee, but by a union to worker as well, and people can 

be harassed and intimidated on both sides of the street. 

 

 So the idea would be to have a . . . or our proposal was to 

have in all circumstances, a government scrutineer on sight, 

much like a scrutineer during an election and have the 

privacy, the dignity of a private, democratic, secret ballot 

vote, and then respect the will of the people that way. 

 

 John: Well that's interesting but those involved in the 

certification know that it's not quite that simple.  For 

instance, right now when an employee signs a card, that's 

done in secrecy. An employee signs up, signs a card, and 

that card says he wishes to be represented for the purpose 

of the collective bargaining by whatever union that 

employee names. And then after that certification those 

cards are filed with the Labour Relations Board. 

 

(1530) 

 

 That's when we find that there is all kinds of to-do and all 

kinds of petitions being taken up by the boards not only in 

Saskatchewan, but across Canada and the U.S., I might add, 

have found that the taking of those secret ballot votes that it 

would really lead to is when a person signs the original 

card.  And by the way, in this province, nobody knows who 

signs those cards, and an employee can sign that card in 

secrecy.  The only ones that know, of course, is the union 

that person is attempting to join.  The Labour Relations 

Board won't tell anybody who signed the card, nor should 

they, and after the fact. 

 And I think it's interesting that we talk about democracy.  

There is a secret ballot vote all over the place.  And in fact I 

hold shares in many companies and I have never been 

afforded the privilege of holding a secret ballot vote every 

time some decision is made in a boardroom.  If we're going 

to extend that, let's really go the whole hog. 

 

 In a way it sounds like you're really supporting a fairness and 

democracy image when we have found in most people in 

many jurisdictions and, in fact, most jurisdictions in 

Canada, other than Alberta, find that once a person signs 

that card, the person has made up their mind they wish to 

belong to the union of their choice.  And all of the petitions 

in the world and employer interference isn't to be allowed. 

 

 If we're going to allow the employer in, I think there has 

been too much of that.  I doubt very much if there is a mass 

number of employers that voluntarily say, gosh, I'd sure 

like to have a union shop.  I don't say, by the way, that 

every employer is not fair, or in fact, I would suggest that 

most employers are fair and impartial. 

 

 What we hear from, though, is the ones who are represented 

by Mr. Botting who really aren't the mass of employers.  

For instance, nobody who belongs to the chamber of 

commerce. 

 

Barry interjects and says: 

 

 John, let Dale Botting have a chance to respond. 

 

 Okay. 

 

I will table this for the perusal of the press as well as yourself, 

Minister.  And I will ask you very simply the question.  What 

action are you planning on taking against this member of the 

Labour Relations Board who has clearly conflicted his interests 

by allowing himself to be heard on public radio defending only 

the union side of issues when he is supposedly to be in a 

quasi-judicial responsibility, to be impartial and fair? 

 

Mr. Minister, I will table this now and ask you for your 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- On a quick reading of this, and I have 

reread it quickly, there is nothing in this which is improper on 

the part of any one of the Johns.  This could be any one of three 

Johns.  There is a John Hobbs, who is a current board member; 

as an alternate member, there's a John Forsyth, and there is a 

John MacLeod.  It could be any one of those Johns. 

 

Whichever one it is, there is no indication from what you read 

that there's any conflict of interest or anything improper in what 

they've done.  The law requires only that a member be impartial 

about a matter coming before it.  There is no requirement and 

no practical way, indeed, there's no requirement that 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

the members be impartial on the general issues of labour 

relations. 

 

I might point out -- this is not currently before the House -- I 

might point out that this is one of the problems which the new 

Trade Union Act, if it be a problem, this is one of the things 

which the new Trade Union Act will resolve because we are 

doing away with alternate members and we'll have full-time 

members.  But at the moment though that is the system. 

 

The Labour Relations Board operates as much like a board of 

arbitration as it does a judicial court, and it is operated in kind 

of a no man's land.  We are resolving that and we will be . . . if 

that's a problem, and I think it is, we'll be correcting it.  But as 

it currently stands there is nothing improper in this, what was 

said. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So what you're saying, Minister, is that new 

board members will be appointed and likely this individual will 

no longer be there.  And I think that's proper that he shouldn't 

be there.  He obviously is in a position where he should be 

impartial and he obviously has compromised that position.  

And he is obviously being identified by Bill Stuart and there is 

no recourse other than that you remove this individual from 

that board and never appoint him again to a position of 

responsibility in quasi-judicial form. 

 

Minister, we have other important issues that need to be talked 

about.  The other day you, once again -- and you have done this 

many, many times through the course of this past session -- 

referred to The Workers' Compensation and The Occupational 

Health and Safety Acts.  You have referred to them saying that 

nobody really worries about them any more, that you've got 

them all into place and everything like that. 

 

So my question is very simply this: Minister, you have many 

regulations that really form the working guts of the Bills in 

question -- The Workers' Compensation and Occupational 

Health and Safety Acts are really enactments of regulations that 

you have put into place after the legislation was passed and 

during the past sessions -- have you finished all of the 

regulations for those two Acts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The member is partially right.  There 

is no amendments being planned pursuant to the changes in the 

Workers' Compensation Board.  There aren't any amendments 

which follow upon those legislative . . . there aren't any new 

regulations which follow upon those legislated amendments.  

There are very . . . you are certainly right with respect to 

occupational health and safety.  There is an extensive series of 

amendments which will be . . . which will follow, which will 

provide safety standards in . . . fine-tuned to each industry. 

 

The member asks when those will be available.  I would expect 

that the regulations will be in final draft form probably by the 

end of June, and perhaps in effect within a reasonable period of 

time thereafter. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, that sort of rings hollow.  All 

of the words and all of the arguments that you've used in this 

Assembly where you say people are so happy with your past 

legislation, when in fact you haven't even finished it yet and 

nobody knows exactly what the results of that legislation will 

be; how can you stand in this Assembly and honestly say to 

people that they're happy with legislation, when you haven't 

even shown them what the regulations and the rules are going 

to be yet?  You haven't even finished what you started a year 

ago, and you're almost through this session of the Assembly 

and you're standing up in here saying how happy people are. 

 

Minister, I think that you had better rethink your position 

because it is blatantly clear that people of this province, with 

the exception of a handful of union leaders, are not happy with 

you.  You even find yourself embarrassed over the weekend by 

not being able to rally your troops after I challenged you last 

week to do so. 

 

All you could get out to rally the troops in favour of your 

labour legislation was Bob White from Ontario and a handful 

of select union leaders from the province who couldn't even 

amass enough of a crowd to make a decent television picture.  

They had to zoom in on them, on the lady that was talking, in 

order to make sure that they didn't show how empty the area 

was where there weren't any people there to support you.  

Because the workers of this province do not support your 

legislation, and that's the bottom line and that's what's 

important here. 

 

They have recognized that you are going to cost them their jobs 

and their livelihood and their futures.  And they are certainly 

not in support of you and they evidenced that by the fact that 

they simply stayed home and they don't support you.  And the 

business people who are busy people are able to bring out 500 

in one city of Saskatoon with only a few days notice.  So I say 

to you, sir, that is indication, clear and precise, that you must 

now withdraw this legislation and do it over and this time 

consult with the business community. 

 

Minister, in the process of the Labour estimates we have to talk 

about a few things that we missed earlier.  And you can 

comment on my remarks when I get my questions on the road 

here.  We have what we call I guess our package of questions 

and answers that you supplied to us last year and this year, and 

apparently it's here.  And we've come up with a little bit of 

research on it that indicates that we need a bit more preciseness 

in the answers. 

 

Now we need to know the details of any travel undertaken by 

yourself as minister including the costs, mode of travel, who 

accompanied you and destinations and the people of each trip.  

Apparently in our research as we have discovered here that that 

is not positively identified. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I certainly intended to supply it.  If 

the member has . . . we certainly intended to 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

supply that information.  If the member has some specific 

question we'd be happy to answer his specific questions.  We 

did supply the information about it though. 

 

I may say as well it's been very modest.  My travel as Minister 

of Labour has been extremely modest.  This is not a portfolio 

which takes you out of the province actually. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, these global questions, as we refer 

to them as being, do not clearly identify the travel undertaken 

by yourself individually and including the costs, the mode of 

travel, and who accompanied you and what destinations and the 

purposes for each of the trips.  At least I couldn't find them in 

mine so maybe you will tell the people of Saskatchewan here 

today what exactly you did. 

 

If the minister chooses not to answer I guess I'll just have to 

report to the people of the province that he refuses to answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I would invite the member from 

Maple Creek to observe a bit of patience.  Well okay, I can read 

this for the member.  May 4 to 8, destination Edmonton, 

Alberta.  Attended a meeting of labour representatives.  Total 

cost was $971.  May 18 to 20, 1993, Quebec City; was a guest 

speaker at the Canadian convention of pension fund 

administrators -- well received, I want to say.  Total cost of that 

was $1,766.75. 

 

On July 27 there was a trip to London, England, which was . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  This was in my capacity as 

minister in charge of SaskTel.  SaskTel has extensive holdings 

in England and they're getting larger.  In a decade's time, 

SaskTel's holdings in England may be larger than those in 

Saskatchewan.  And that was the purpose of that visit. 

 

I did visit with . . . I did spend a portion of the time meeting 

with representatives of the Department of Labour of the 

national government in England, and thus -- the people who try 

to unravel such problems -- ascribed $469.27 of the total cost 

of the trip to the Department of Labour.  The rest went to 

SaskTel. 

 

Finally on August 12, 13, I went to Winnipeg, Manitoba, to 

attend a meeting of labour representatives; the total cost was 

$668.66.  That was all the out-of-province travel. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister, much better.  Now what 

I need to know is how you handle the payments when you're 

travelling around and how you handle the money of the 

taxpayers.  Could you give us a detail of any kind of expenses 

that might be paid by the minister and you might be reimbursed 

for, or how do you handle payments when you're travelling 

abroad? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Travelling abroad in the sense of 

overseas, okay . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Outside the province. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Just out of province . . . Air fare is 

billed to the office and paid by the treasury.  All other expenses 

we pay and claim back.  I hope that's the question the member 

asked.  Air fare is billed directly to the department and paid.  It 

may be billed to Executive Council.  Air fare is billed directly 

to a department and paid directly.  All other expenses we pay 

out of our own pocket and then claim them back. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Would those all be receipted expenditures 

that you would claim back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All except the out-of-province per 

diem intended to cover miscellaneous expenses.  All others are 

paid on the basis of a receipt only. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  So if you had a sore 

foot from standing up talking too long, as you sometimes do, 

you'd buy some Absorbine Jr. to put on it, you'd pay that 

yourself and claim it back.  So I understand how that process 

works, and I want to thank you for that direct answer. 

 

I want also to know then, Minister, the details of all the travel 

undertaken by your staff including the total cost, cost per 

employee, mode of travel, destination, and purpose of each trip. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I was accompanied in the Edmonton 

trip of May 4 to 8, I was accompanied by a ministerial 

assistant, Heather Padfield.  On the Winnipeg trip I was 

accompanied by the same ministerial assistant.  I was 

unaccompanied in the other two trips. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And the funding for the expenses, is that 

handled the same as you handled your own? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That's correct, yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We have a note here that says that senior 

ministerial assistant, Heather Padfield, received a salary 

increase of close to $5,000 a month, an increase of 13 per cent, 

if that information is correct, over her last year's salary.  Did 

she receive this increase?  If this was due to the Executive 

Council reorganization, we'd like to know if that was the 

reasoning for it or if there was something else.  Or why did the 

other staff get zero increases, as seems to be indicated in the 

global question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- She was put in a new range and that 

was why the increase was awarded.  When she first came -- I'm 

trying to recall this from memory -- when she she first came, it 

was not contemplated there would be more than one ministerial 

assistant.  Then my duties changed and with it the . . . let me 

just back up a step.  I began as associate minister of Finance, 

had very few contacts with the public; my role involved very 

little contact with the public.  That was done almost entirely by 

the minister of Finance, Ed Tchorzewski.  My responsibilities 

were far more 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

administrative than public . . . than interfacing with the public. 

 

After changing portfolios and going to Labour, we detected a 

rise in the amount of letters which we got, visits which we got, 

and we went from being one of the . . . having probably as little 

contact with the public as any minister in the cabinet to 

probably having as much contact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. probably more.  That's right -- probably more contact than 

anyone else except the Premier. 

 

That resulted in an expansion of the staff and accordingly a 

reclassification of Ms. Padfield's duties. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The Minister of Economic Development 

wanted to brief me on a few things here, so I apologize for 

being a little late on my feet, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But, Minister, we do have some important things we have to 

discuss here with regards to the way that people get increases in 

this government of yours.  People in the province of course 

have always and will always watch government increases in 

pay and assess their own merit and their own results in life by 

the way that you treat people under your jurisdiction directly. 

 

An awful lot of people have been asked to take no increases in 

this province.  Many have been asked to take very marginal 

increases.  I expect there are even some that might claim that 

they've been asked to take roll-backs.  But not the people that 

work in your department.  So we need to pursue this just a bit 

further to find out how you justify this. 

 

Now one of the common explanations we've heard from these 

sorts of increases is that the jobs have been redefined and new 

duties have been added.  What specifically is the difference 

between a ministerial assistant 4 -- Ms. Padfield's previous 

designation -- and a senior MA (ministerial assistant), her 

current designation?  What specific new duties is Ms. Padfield 

doing in your office that she wasn't doing before?  Who was 

doing those tasks previously that she is now doing extra? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I just finished explaining that to the 

member.  While I was associate minister of Finance I dealt 

directly with the department and had very little contact with the 

public either by way of letters, visits, or interviews.  I dealt 

more with the public . . . and the member from Regina North 

East dealt primarily with the public.  After I became Minister 

of Labour that changed dramatically, and thus when the contact 

we had with the public increased dramatically, her workload 

and her duties changed very dramatically when we went from 

associate minister of Finance to the Minister of Labour. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, we'll let the people judge your 

words and I hope it sounded better the first time when I was 

visiting with the Minister of Economic Development, because 

it didn't sound all that convincing the second time around. 

Now you also have a junior ministerial assistant, Mary 

McGuire, who was hired last February as a temporary 

employee.  Why was this done?  What are the conditions of her 

employment that make her temporary?  And do you have a 

projected date as to when her work assignment will be 

completed? 

 

And in order to facilitate some time -- I know you can handle 

two questions at once -- so I want to ask you also, Minister, 

your department hired 8.6 new in-scope permanent employees 

this year.  Can you tell us what these people do as well as what 

Mary McGuire does? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Bill Davies is a . . . he has a doctorate 

in English literature; has written some works which are 

respected in academic circles, and is eminently qualified for 

what he does, which is primarily writing.  He's both eminent 

and it is imminent.  I think the answer is imminent and he is 

eminently qualified. 

 

Mary McGuire, the third person, works handling a job which 

has really proved to be very difficult.  She has been interfacing 

between my office and the Workers' Compensation Board. 

 

When I was first appointed as Minister of Labour we received 

an enormous number of complaints about the Workers' 

Compensation Board and she had the job of taking those 

complaints, going to the Workers' Compensation Board, 

providing explanations and so on and so forth.  That has really 

remained her job.  She's also assisted us with casework in other 

areas.  Most of the casework, however, comes from Workers' 

Compensation Board. 

 

It has been a very, very fertile source of work for my staff -- the 

Workers' Compensation Board. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, we have several questions that have 

arisen as a result of our researches into the global answers that 

you've provided with us, but realistically I have, for the purpose 

of the record here, made my point that your department is very 

generous with employees that do very little more than they did 

previously. 

 

You're setting a bad example for the community at large, 

especially because you're the Minister of Labour and because 

you are responsible for the workers of this province who you 

are telling shouldn't have increases and yet you are justifying 

huge, massive expenditures for your own personal employees 

to make them happy within your office. 

 

I have here several pages of questions that I will ask you to 

make a commitment to answer, in which case if you do, I will 

simply table them.  They will photocopy copies and have them 

sent to you and you can answer them for me because my point 

will be just repeated in the next seven or eight pages of 

questions here that you are spending far, far too much money 

trying to make yourself look like a good guy in your own 

office, while at the same time setting a bad example for the 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

people of the province that you represent. 

 

Could I have that commitment, Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- You've got to admit that's a tall order.  

I say seriously to the member from Maple Creek that I will 

answer those written questions to the best of my ability, as I 

would have if you had asked them orally here in the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I accept that 

commitment and I have passed these on to the page to be tabled 

for you and for the world to see. 

 

Now Minister, I want to know: were the amendments currently 

proposed in The Labour Standards Act factored into the 

1994-95 budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- How much is that going to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- If I were to refer the member to vote 

3, you will note that there is an increase of $162,000.  That is in 

the labour standards subvote.  The majority of that would relate 

to the additional cost of implementing and administering The 

Labour Standards Act. 

 

If you refer the member to . . . If I can refer the member to 

subvote 7, you will note that the total for labour relations and 

conciliation increases from 366,000 to 701,000.  The majority, 

but not all, of that increase of 335,000 would relate to the 

changes in The Trade Union Act, some of which are one-time 

only changes, some of which are ongoing increases.  We just 

mentioned one of them.  We talked about the Labour Relations 

Board and the move to permanent members; that is factored 

into this. 

 

And we have . . . I'm told as well that we have factored into this 

the cost of The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act and 

the JAP (jurisdictional assignment plan) plan.  We do not have 

the JAP plan in effect at the moment, and it is not inevitable 

that we will.  But if we should, there's money budgeted there 

for it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, the last phrase that you alluded to 

might have eluded some folks, and would you explain what that 

reference is and why it might cost more money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Are the members referring to the 

jurisdictional assignment plan?  The jurisdictional assignment 

plan is a plan which attempts to resolve disputes in construction 

workplaces, as to which of a number of trades should do a 

given job.  This is an irritation to both the contractors and 

indeed the workers.  And sometimes the workplace can be shut 

down in a dispute though as to whether or not boiler makers or 

iron workers do a given job.  The jurisdictional assignment plan 

is intended to resolve those disputes as to the jurisdiction of the 

trades, and do so quickly and cheaply. 

 

It has proved to be an easier . . . it has proved to be 

easier to conceptualize than it has been to get it into effect.  

We've had the Labour Relations Board . . . we've had the Act in 

effect now for over a year; we've not yet been able to get this 

working.  So I cautioned . . . I attached a caveat to my earlier 

comment, that the money is there budgeted.  It is not inevitable 

we will in fact have a jurisdictional assignment plan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Minister, I'm not surprised that you 

would attach caveats to some of your comments.  And being a 

lawyer, I'm surprised you haven't used those kind of terms to 

opt out sooner of your responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Not getting this plan into effect might save the 

taxpayers some money.  But really I want to finish with these 

questions that I have here before I get into that new area. 

 

I have about another seven pages of questions here that I think I 

would table if you would once again give a commitment that 

you would answer them for us within a reasonably short period 

of time, and we could have them on record for the people.  I 

think I've made my point with the first few questions, which I 

will expand on after I get your answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I'll respond to those in writing as 

I would if they were asked in the House.  I'll do my best to 

provide as complete and full an answer as is possible. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Minister.  I'll ask the page to 

please table that for your perusal and for anyone else that wants 

to see what kind of questions we have on our minds. 

 

Having done those first few though, I have made my point that 

would have been more emphasized by asking the rest of the 

package.  And of course the point that I'm making is that no 

matter how you cut it, we're going to spend an awful lot more 

money in the Labour department this year than we have in the 

past. 

 

We're spending that money as a result of your decision and 

your government's decision to transfer power from the people 

of this province, through the democratic process of 

government, to the trade union leaders in this province.  It's as 

simple as that.  And these taxpayers of this province should 

know that that's what they're paying for. 

 

(1600) 

 

They're not paying for the creation of jobs; they're not paying 

for the creation of work; they're not paying for the protection of 

workers to have jobs.  They're paying for new legislation that 

transfers power -- transfers power in a major way -- from 

government to the trade union leaders.  And that, I think, the 

taxpayers of this province will find to be not only objectionable 

but unacceptable. 

 

And I say that the test of course will have to come when we 

have perhaps a by-election or a regular election sometime down 

the road.  But clearly, clearly you are costing the people of this 

province many 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

hundreds of thousands of dollars in order to meet a political 

agenda that the business community has outrightly objected to, 

has outrightly come out against.  Where you have yourself, 

through your union leaders, gone all the way to Ontario to find 

a spokesman for you, have brought him into the province only 

to find that you couldn't get any rank-and-file workers out to 

support him in numbers on the lawns of Regina. 

 

And a dismal failure it is and I hope that you will take that into 

account when you force through this legislation and bring in 

your regulations as time goes by.  The reality is that if you don't 

tone down your regulations, business will flee this province and 

other businesses won't come in. 

 

Someone said to me the other day, what will be the result of all 

of this when a week or two's gone by and this legislation is 

law?  I told him, quite simply, as I'll tell you now, life will go 

on in Saskatchewan.  The sun will still come up in the East, but 

people will leave.  And the population will not grow, and the 

job numbers of 16,000 short now from what you had when you 

started in power -- 16,000 less jobs now than you had then -- 

that number is bound to grow. 

 

If you can live with the record of having destroyed the province 

in that way, then you are justified to continue and meet the 

electorate in the next election.  But reality is that I don't 

honestly believe you want to destroy the province.  Surely you 

must have some feeling towards what you are doing in terms of 

destroying the business potential and the job potential in this 

province. 

 

Everything that has been talked about politically in the last year 

has been jobs, jobs, jobs.  You could almost tell me who said it 

over and over again.  And it certainly hasn't been the rank and 

file of your government, especially not the cabinet, because you 

chase away jobs and you destroy the potential. 

 

And we want you to know, Minister, that the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to hold you accountable for the 

treasonous acts that you do with this labour legislation.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, I wanted to ask you several questions this afternoon, 

particularly beginning with the broad and becoming much more 

narrow and specific.  For the consideration of time, what I have 

done is to ask the page to copy my 22 pages of questions.  I'll 

pose but three to you directly today, if you'll agree to respond 

in writing to the questions that I am sending to you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I give the member from Greystone 

the same undertaking I gave the member from Maple Creek.  I 

will do my level best to answer your questions in writing, as I 

would have done if they'd been asked orally in the House. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'm wondering as 

well if you would be willing to send 

your responses to questions that would be posed by the official 

opposition.  Since there may be some that are similar, what I'm 

suggesting is that rather than answering them both, you can say 

this is a similar question as posed by the official opposition and 

provide it to us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That seems to be a common sense 

approach; yes, we'll do that as well. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much. 

 

I have a copy of a letter, Mr. Minister, addressed: "Dear 

Constituency of Greystone Resident", on Saskatchewan New 

Democratic caucus letterhead, dated April 1994.  This letter is 

about current amendments to The Labour Standards Act.  It 

was distributed to my constituency, together with a brochure 

that was produced by the Department of Labour, which began, 

and I quote:  Important news for Saskatchewan workers and 

employers. 

 

Now I want to know from you how many copies of this 

brochure were produced at your department's expense, which 

of course is funded by taxpayers' dollars.  I want to know how 

many were provided to the New Democratic caucus office for 

distribution in my constituency or any other constituencies who 

do not have a sitting NDP member. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- That actually came up in an earlier 

series of estimates here.  We have gone through a very large 

number of those.  Our approach has been to make available to 

anyone who asks the number of copies for which they ask.  So 

if the caucus office asks for a number to make available, we've 

made that available.  We would of course make the same 

number available to the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Our approach has been to make available to anyone who asks 

for as many copies as they ask for.  They're relatively cheap to 

produce. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I guess one 

should add that there were several people in my constituency 

who were quite interested in knowing about this particular 

practice . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they were actually 

much more interested in the practice undertaken by your 

department to supply something that would be attached to 

something that was not only blatantly partisan, but 

unbelievably erroneous -- something about how I commented 

that I didn't think such changes were necessary to The Labour 

Standards Act because, quote: she'd consulted with officials 

from a mining company in Calgary who said they were not 

necessary. 

 

Interesting how incompetent the New Democratic caucus is, 

since I've never consulted with anybody in Calgary from any 

mining company about any such things. 

 

Were there any arrangements made for your department to help 

fund the mailing costs or any other 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

costs associated with the distribution of this information about 

your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- So I take it from your earlier comments 

then that you actually consider this to be acceptable use of the 

department's budget, their own communications budget, is to 

copy as many copies as is necessary to accompany any kind of 

information necessary; in other words, printing brochures ad 

nauseam that are to be distributed by any political agent of your 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we have made . . . these things 

are relatively inexpensive to produce.  Our policy has been that 

we will make as many copies available to anyone who asks for 

them.  That's what we've done.  And yes, that's been standard 

policy in various government departments actually for a long 

time.  There's nothing unique to the Department of Labour 

about this. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Well thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  I 

will now be able to pass your comments on to those in my 

constituency who raised this as a question.  And since they did 

feel that this was their tax money that helped produce this 

information, they found it quite ironic the way in which it was 

used.  So I appreciate your explanation of it and I will forward 

it on to them. 

 

Without belabouring the issues, we know precisely where my 

concerns, and the concerns of people who have come to my 

office, have been regarding The Trade Union Act, The Labour 

Standards Act, as well as other pieces of information that have 

come forward from your department.  I think what I will do is 

simply thank you and your officials and look forward to the 

responses that you provide to our written questions, which are 

quite extensive I know, but I appreciate the time that will be 

taken to answer them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- We have nothing better to do than to 

answer questions put by hon. members and we'll get them back 

as quick as you can. 

 

I gather that . . . wait, I should let the Chairman go through the 

votes first. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1993-94 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Labour 

Vote 20 

 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 20 agreed to. 

The Chair: -- That concludes estimates for the Department of 

Labour and I would invite the minister at this time to thank his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, I would like to thank the 

officials who have been here.  I think this is the fourth occasion 

they've been here and I'd like to thank them for the help they 

gave me. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would like 

to join with the minister in thanking the officials for their help 

in the estimates of the Labour portfolio and we truly hope that 

they will be diligent in their work throughout the next year and 

keep track of all the taxpayers' dollars.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to 

introduce to you and to the members of the House, seated first 

of all to my left, the deputy minister to myself and the 

Executive Council, Mr. Ron Clark; to my right is the chief of 

staff to myself, Mr. Garry Aldridge; seated directly behind me 

is our director of administration, Don Wincherauk. To his left 

is the policy adviser for policy and planning, Jim Nicol; and 

behind Mr. Wincherauk is admin, budget and personnel officer, 

Bonita Heidt. 

 

Mr. Chairman, while I have the floor, I want to just give a few 

opening remarks to the members of the committee.  As we all 

know, or at least as we suspect, the government is coming to 

the conclusion of its third legislative session fairly shortly and I 

think none of us would say, certainly from this side, that the 

past two and a half years have been easy.  In fact they have 

been very difficult and we have faced many heart-wrenching 

choices. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I want to report to the House that again and 

again we've been inspired by the willingness of Saskatchewan 

people to make sacrifices today in order to build for a better 

tomorrow for their children, their children's children, and above 

all, for the good and well-being of this province.  And because 

of this sacrifice by them, to which I pay full tribute and 

acknowledgement, we have made remarkable progress. 

 

In 1991 we said that our first priority would be to get the fiscal 

house of the province in order, and we're well on the way.  The 

projected annual budget deficit in November 1991, when we 

were first sworn to office, was $1.3 billion.  The actual deficit 

for '93-94, the year just closed a few days ago, saw a deficit of 

$294 million or a billion-dollar turnaround in less than three 

years.  We're on target to present Saskatchewan taxpayers with 

a balanced budget in 1996 as promised. 

 

(1615) 

 

In addition, we have kept faith with our commitment 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

to review and to renegotiate, where possible, taxpayer-funded 

megaprojects entered into by the former administration.  A 

brief recapitulation of these successful renegotiations: $190 

million cash settlement from Weyerhaeuser and release from 

another $40 million in loan guarantees; a reduction of the 

taxpayer exposure in the HARO-Crown Life deal by 

approximately $80 million. 

 

We reached an agreement with NewGrade to relieve taxpayers 

of sole responsibility for operating shortfalls and established a 

workable arbitration procedure.  And for the first time, 

NewGrade has contributed $75 million to the project.  I might 

report to the House that discussions with the federal 

government are ongoing to finalize this particular aspect. 

 

Fourthly, we eliminated the $22 million commitment to 

Promavia and launched court action to recover $2.3 million of 

taxpayers' money with respect to that arrangement.  For the 

price of $500,000 we escaped a potential liability of up to $15 

million on a previous Agdevco drainage project in Pakistan.  

We removed $39 million in loan guarantees to PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and are in process of 

removing yet another $39 million.  We also removed 

guarantees of more than $4 million to the Vitality Health 

Science Corporation which, as it turns out, has proceeded with 

the project in any event. 

 

In sum, Mr. Chairman, there have been in excess of $400 

million renegotiated from these and other projects which I have 

not named. 

 

The policy of this government is to reverse what we call the 

massive megabucks strategies for megaprojects and it puts 

development strategy squarely on the shoulders of local 

business and local communities first. 

 

We think it's just common sense that it is easier and cheaper for 

taxpayers to encourage local business to expand than to try to 

entice non-Saskatchewan firms with huge investments.  We're 

still out to entice them where it makes sense and where we can 

afford it.  But by and large, the strategy is Main Street focused. 

 

For the first time, as members of the House will know, we have 

a written, long-term, comprehensive game plan for job creation 

and growth entitled the Partnership for Renewal plan.  This 

plan is geared to supporting Main Street, Saskatchewan through 

the following ways: regional economic development authorities 

to bring the communities together, prioritize what the region 

can do and what it cannot do, pool scarce resources and get on 

with the job of pursuing economic development; secondly, a 

newer, simpler regulatory system;  thirdly, new trade and 

tourism authorities; and finally, a new Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation which will replace SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), which 

also is in desperate financial circumstances and is in the 

process of being wound down. 

 

The partnership blueprint also guides our budget 

 measures such as: 1) elimination of the tax on direct agents 

used in manufacturing as of July, 1994; 2) elimination of the 9 

per cent tax on 1-800 phone services; 3) a lowered small 

business corporate tax rate, down from 10 per cent in 1992 to 

8.5 on the way down to 8 per cent for next year; 4) a revised 

royalty structure for the oil and gas industry to encourage new 

investment. 

 

Now all of this, Mr. Chairman, is beginning to pay off.  To 

name just a few, the Sears' western Canada call centre is up and 

running with about 800 new jobs.  The Royal Bank's western 

Canada payroll telephone centre is up and running with 60 jobs.  

Hitachi has expanded in Saskatoon, 25 new jobs; the Majestic 

Paper relocation from Winnipeg to Tisdale, 17 jobs; Can-Agro, 

coming to Saskatoon as part of a burgeoning biotech activity, 

15 jobs, just to name a few. 

 

So carefully targeted, limited incentives plus a climate which 

encourages growth is bringing new investors to Saskatchewan.  

Moreover, Mr. Chair, members of the House may be interested 

in knowing that our economy is growing.  StatsCanada's 

preliminary estimates show that our province's gross domestic 

product measured at factor cost -- that is, excluding 

government activity in the economy -- grew by 1.7 per cent in 

1993.  Now that's not rockets and red flares, but the trend line 

is in the right direction. 

 

But measured at another scale, namely actual market value, our 

economy grew by 6.1 per cent.  That's the strongest growth of 

any in the country.  This growth was driven by a near record 

crop year last year and an overall 4.2 per cent increase in 

consumer spending. 

 

StatsCanada also notes that personal income in Saskatchewan 

was up last year by 2.9 per cent and personal disposable 

income up by 3.2 per cent. 

 

Some other statistics I find very encouraging, and hope the 

members do as well, are as follows: retail sales were up 6.3 per 

cent in 1993 over '92 -- I might add, Mr. Chair, higher than the 

national rate and higher than the province of Alberta where 

there is no sales tax.  Retail growth continued into January 

when sales were up another 4.5 per cent compared to January 

of '93. 

 

Crude oil production increased by more than 11 per cent.  

Uranium sales are up by 25 per cent.  Crop receipts were up 

13.7 in '93 over '92.  And livestock receipts during the same 

period were up 11 per cent. 

 

Housing construction improved in 1993, and CMHC (Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation) is predicting a strong 

housing growth period in 1994.  And the economy diversified 

and Saskatchewan companies shipped more machinery, 

clothing, textiles, wood products, transportation equipment, and 

other value added products, especially in the food sector. 

 

Now with respect to jobs, there is also some encouragement 

here too.  Comparing April '94 to 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

April '93, the following statistics are important to this House: 

(1) employment in manufacturing, a key wealth-generating 

sector, was up year over to year over by 2,000 jobs; in 

construction, up 2,000; in wholesale and retail trade, up 7,000; 

in service industries, up 6,000; overall in non-agricultural 

employment year over '84 to '83, April, up 12,000 jobs. 

 

Now if you really take a look at these numbers, what we're 

seeing here is a shift -- a shift to small, young, new, 

technology-driven and export-focused companies which are 

rooted here in the province of Saskatchewan.  And these are 

companies which are forming in communities across the 

province to try to respond to the new global economy. 

 

Saskatchewan continues to have, as a result, the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country at 8.9 per cent in April 1994. 

 

Now a word about farming.  In agriculture the six-year 

leaseback program has helped to keep farmers on their land 

through these troubled years.  And while there are trouble 

spots, to be sure, overall there is reason here too for hope. 

 

Farm cash receipts were up 3.8 per cent in '93; and in '93 

overall, higher crop volumes, better quality crops and better 

prices resulted in a 41 per cent jump in realized net farm 

income over '92 levels and an increase in net cash income of 21 

per cent. 

 

We're continuing to work on other issues which are important 

to the farm agenda, such as income security and new income 

security plan; intergenerational transfer of farm land; keeping 

the Crow benefits to the benefit of this region; maintaining 

trade with the United States; and preserving and improving the 

integrity and the functioning of the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

And all of this, as members will know, is also documented in 

our Agriculture 2000 paper, which is a comprehensive strategy 

to diversify and value add to our products, as a complement to 

the Partnership for Renewal paper.  They fit together. 

 

A word about health, Mr. Chair.  We're also, I think, on the 

leading edge of health care reform.  In less than three years -- 

actually in less than 1,000 days of office -- 400 hospital boards 

and various other government boards have now been replaced 

with 30 health care districts and all of the administrative 

savings that that kind of integration implies.  These districts are 

now looking at providing a whole new range of health care 

services in their areas. 

 

Now people around the world have recognized that our reforms 

are leading the way, just as medicare did right here in 

Saskatchewan in 1962 as we led the way then.  In fact, Health 

minister of this government is becoming a choice guest at 

major international symposia to discuss the reforms 

undertaken. 

 

For example, at a recent conference on health care 

cost control, jointly sponsored by Montreal's Institute for 

Research on Public Policy, and the Brookings Institute of 

Washington, D.C. (District of Columbia), the Health minister's 

presence was considered to be essential. 

 

For the May 18-20, Royal Society of Medicine foundation's 

annual American-Canadian meeting, she was the unanimous 

choice of the steering committee to speak on the lead subject -- 

public policy issues and health care governance and 

management. 

 

And some members may not know this, but there's a very 

recent book out called, Strong Medicine: How to Save 

Canada's Health Care System, written by Michael Rachlis 

and Carol Kushner.  And I have not yet read all the book 

myself, but I'm working through it.  I think members might be 

interested in this quotation at page 321.  Quote: 

 

 There's nothing more gratifying to a politician than being 

acknowledged as a good leader.  In this respect, 

Saskatchewan's Health Minister, Louise Simard, has been 

outstanding.  Since her appointment by Premier Roy 

Romanow in 1991, she has moved quickly to: 

 

 -- regionalize health system management and service 

delivery, and 

 

 -- provide the thirty new district health boards with pooled 

funding. 

 

 None of this was easy (the authors write).  It took courage to 

wipe out existing boards and replace them with a 

consolidated structure for governing the entire system.  But 

Ms. Simard didn't blink or back down.  Instead, she 

participated directly in a careful political strategy to win 

support.  In dozens and dozens of community meetings, she 

talked up the ideas of reform, bringing people to a positive 

vision of a better system. 

 

 And unlike some other health ministers, who are using 

slash-and-burn tactics to cut hospitals and community care, 

Ms. Simard is taking the long view by putting in place two 

of the key mechanisms for shifting the way resources are 

allocated.  In 1992-93, Saskatchewan's hospital budget 

decreased by over 2 percent, (but) . . . home care . . . 

increased by over 10 percent.  Simard has also announced 

that the system will move to capitation funding in 1995.  

The Ministry of Health has been working with McMaster 

University researcher Dr. Stephen Birch to develop a 

funding formula that will base . . . (this situation). 

 

 Ms. Simard has also been quick to recognize and correct 

mistakes.  The province now has a labour adjustment 

strategy -- a key element that was lacking when her reforms 

were first implemented.  In fact, throughout the reform 

process, Saskatchewan's Health Minister 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

(above all others in the country) has shown extraordinary 

fortitude and a willingness to exert prowess -- key Guardian 

characteristics. 

 

Perhaps I should just give one other quote which has a touch of 

immodesty in me so quoting it, but this will give you a flavour 

of what's happening, and I will read it very briefly. 

 

The authors write finally as follows: 

 

 Provincial premiers, too, will discover that health reform can 

be a political plus.  In the summer of 1993, Prince Edward 

Island Premier Catherine Callbeck introduced legislation to 

set up locally elected regional authorities to replace the 

existing boards of hospitals and community service 

agencies, without substantial outcries. 

 

I might add, she did this after we introduced it in our legislature 

and we're pleased to see people following. 

 

 Saskatchewan's Premier, Roy Romanow, (the authors write) 

stood behind his . . . Minister as she proceeded to 

regionalize the system.  He withstood a lot of criticism for 

cutting off fifty-two hospitals from acute-care funding.  

And, as the system began to produce savings, he didn't grab 

all the money -- he allowed some of it to be reallocated to 

improve district services.  In consequence, he's managed to 

retain much of his popularity.  A much more responsive 

and efficient health care system will be in place before Mr. 

Romanow has to face another election.  Other Premiers 

should take note.  Health reform done properly can be a 

political winner. 

 

End quote, from Rachlis and Kushner, Strong Medicine: How 

to Save Canada's Health Care System. 

 

I think it will be a political winner because it is the right thing 

to do, because what we're doing here is a system which is to be 

renewed based on the principles of better communication, 

better integration, appropriate and affordable service, new 

services like palliative and respite care, all of these and others 

which will be implemented in the next two years as we head to 

an election period.  The wellness model and the election reform 

will succeed, and in the long run will mean a health care system 

far superior to any in the country. 

 

Still, Mr. Chairman, not a week goes by that someone on the 

opposition benches fails to ask: what is your vision for 

Saskatchewan?  So let me state it once more for the record, if I 

haven't already in revealing the balanced budget, the 

partnership paper, the Ag 2000 paper, and the health care 

paper.  Let me restate it for the record as follows.  Our vision is 

stronger families; stronger Saskatchewan communities; a 

stronger, more prosperous Saskatchewan.  My vision includes 

freedom from debt, opportunities for our young people, equal 

access for all our citizens, the public 

services like education and health care, safety, security, and 

respect for the dignity of our people. 

 

(1630) 

 

That's why even in difficult times we've increased assistance 

for families in need.  That's why we have the children's action 

plan to meet the needs of children and families within their 

communities.  That's why we've introduced the 

ground-breaking Victims of Domestic Violence Act.  That's 

why we've introduced the ground-breaking Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act; that's why we've introduced the labour 

legislation. 

 

In just two and one-half years we've made major progress in 

putting substance to our vision of stronger families, helping 

ordinary people, stronger communities, a more prosperous 

Saskatchewan.  We're putting this province's financial house in 

order, Mr. Chair, helping to create new jobs and new economic 

development, looking to the future in farming and health care, 

and helping people find real solutions to their problems. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, and members of the committee, let me close 

with a very brief word on democratic reform.  In 1991 we said 

that we would restore open, honest, and accountable 

government to the province.  To date, we have implemented the 

following:  regular sittings of the legislature, predictable; 

secondly, a new conflict of interest Act and freedom of 

information Acts; thirdly, regular presentation of annual 

budgets so that the people and our third-party partners know 

exactly what's in store; fourthly, mid-year financial reports; 

fifth, timely tabling of Public Accounts and annual reports; 

sixth, mandatory by-elections within six months of a vacancy; 

seventh, open meetings of the Board of Internal Economy; 

eighth, measures to strengthen the Crown Corporations 

Committee and its operations; nine, improved public 

accountability of the Crown corporations through a new Crown 

Corporations Act; ten, an end to such fiascos like GigaText; 

eleven, a 5 per cent pay cut for cabinet ministers, frozen until 

the budget is balanced, MLA compensation frozen as well; and 

a 40.2 per cent drop in public funds spent on advertising 

between 1990 and '91 and the years 1993-94 -- 40.2 per cent 

drop. 

 

There are others as well, but these are major steps in the 

process of democratic reform of this institution, and they've 

been taking in less than a thousand days. 

 

Mr. Chair, this being the Committee of Finance, I know that I 

will shortly be answering a variety of questions and criticisms 

and I'd tell the members I welcome them.  We've all heard it 

said as follows, quote: to escape criticism, do nothing, say 

nothing, be nothing. 

 

But as the session comes to a close and we each head off to 

fulfil our constituency obligations, I would encourage all 

members of this committee and of the Assembly to join us in 

rebuilding Saskatchewan, perhaps taking some criticisms but 

doing things, 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

acting in the interest of the people of our province and to join 

the people of this province in the optimism that we all should 

share, that I have, in the great future of this great province and 

country.  Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must say 

I've awaited the opportunity for some time to have this 

particular set of estimates come forward and listened with great 

detail and a slight bit of amusement to the comments just made 

by the Hon. Premier, the member from Riversdale, and his 

view of the world and how he sees the world unfolding. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Chairman, that when you stack up what 

the Premier has just said against the promises that he made to 

Saskatchewan people back in the fall of 1991, you have a very 

clear understanding of why he likes to fictionalize the account 

to the degree that he has, because what we see today in this 

province, Mr. Chairman, what we see as reality, what 

Saskatchewan families see as reality is not in the least bit the 

way the Premier has just described his first three years in 

office. 

 

The simple fact is that what we have, Mr. Chairman, in this 

province from the Premier and his government is a litany of 

broken promises -- a litany of broken promises that the Premier 

full well knew back in October of 1991 he could not live up to. 

 

And I don't have to run back through the documentation of that.  

We all saw it for ourselves, Mr. Chairman, as we watched the 

leaders debate in the last week of the '91 election campaign, 

when the member from Riversdale clearly stated that he 

understood the state of the Saskatchewan economy; he 

understood all things about the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

And the result of that, Mr. Chairman, has been that 

Saskatchewan has seen itself sink into the morass of 

unemployment, of welfare, and unjust legislation as never 

before presented to the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

It's why, Mr. Chairman, we have 16,000 fewer people today 

with a job than when the Premier took office three years ago.  

It's why we have 82,000-plus on the welfare rolls.  You know, 

Mr. Chairman, that that's over 25,000 more people than when 

the Premier took office, on the welfare rolls of this province. 

 

They tell me, when he took office there were eight people 

working in this province for every person on welfare.  Today 

there are five and a half working people for every person on 

welfare.  Mr. Chairman, something is wrong. 

 

I remember the commitment so well made that we would 

eliminate poverty in the first term of our government.  That was 

another promise made by the Premier of this province, the 

current Premier, the member from Riversdale.  And it's simply 

not true.  And in fact we see the food banks expanding all over 

the 

province, expanding, telling us that fully 10 per cent of our 

population -- a great deal of the people that live in the 

Riversdale riding -- now depend on the food bank for their 

sustenance. 

 

We have the spectre in Saskatoon of houses being condemned 

because the economic situation is so poor -- this riding that has 

been represented by a premier or a deputy premier for tens of 

tens of years.  And, Mr. Chairman, that is because the promises 

that were made have not been fulfilled. 

 

So we had a legislative session come along, Mr. Chairman, 

with all of these problems, and what is it dedicated to?  Is it 

dedicated to creating jobs?  No.  Is it dedicating to taking 

people off the welfare rolls?  No.  Instead what we have is a 

dedication to bring forward legislation that helps out and looks 

after our political friends. 

 

Why else would we have this entire session devoted to two 

pieces of labour legislation which neither the Premier nor the 

Minister of Labour, time after time, have been able to show us 

one new job because of that legislation?  Neither one of them 

can.  Can they take one person off of the welfare rolls because 

of this legislation which has dominated this Assembly?  No, 

they can't take one more person off the welfare rolls. 

 

Can they take one person out of the food bank line because of 

this legislation?  No, they can't take one person out of the food 

bank line, Mr. Chairman.  For the simple reason is that this 

government, through its history, has been more concerned with 

breaking existing contracts, with settling its political scores, 

and helping out its political friends.  That's what we've seen 

over the course of this Premier's 1,000 days that he likes to 

brag about. 

 

There is hardly anyone left in our society, Mr. Chairman, who 

hasn't, by the force of this NDP majority, had the rules of their 

life changed.  That's farmers and civil servants and judges and 

exhibition associations.  And now we are going to see business 

men and women all across this province also have their lives 

dramatically changed because that is the agenda that has been 

brought forward to this House. 

 

The Premier talks about his commitment to remaking 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and what we in effect have seen 

is one part of our population shoved off to the side.  The 

Premier says there is no rural agenda and yet we simply look at 

the facts. 

 

He brags about health care.  Where has the majority of hurt 

been felt in health care?  In rural Saskatchewan -- not in urban 

centres.  Time after time the concerns of rural people are 

brought to this House because they feel now they are 

second-class citizens and they are ignored. 

 

We see it in the field of education.  We see it in health care.  

We see it in representation in this Legislative Assembly where 

the Premier magically pulled the number 58 out of the air.  

When asked for a reason, he said it sounded good.  Instead of 

having a process in 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

place for Saskatchewan people to determine the type of 

democratic representation that they would like, it was imposed 

by this Legislative Assembly and by that New Democratic 

majority over there. 

 

And the Premier talks about democratic reform.  He talks about 

democratic reform which all Saskatchewan people would like 

to see.  And I would quote, Mr. Chairman, from an article from 

the Leader-Post from Friday last, which was devoted to the 

topic of democratic reform in this House.  It says: 

 

 Similarly the NDP takes its cue from three or four big 

gorillas in its front bench -- (The Premier, the Deputy 

Premier, the Minister of Economic Development, the 

Minister of Labour). 

 

And it says: 

 

 Having learned their politics in the 1960s and 1970s, all 

would be classified as old-style politicians.  And in the 

position they are now in, all are incredibly influential on the 

rest of the NDP caucus of the 1990s. 

 

 It also seems to be here where much of the old-style politics 

is generated. 

 

There is no democratic reform, Mr. Speaker, that is 

meaningful; it is simply rhetoric.  It is a continuation on of the 

style which the NDP practised in this province in the 1970s and 

the early 1980s, and we continue to see it here today.  This 

House on the 76th day of its session sees a major piece of 

legislation, a formation of another Crown corporation, brought 

forward.  The very end of a session, a piece of legislation 

which will deal with hundreds of millions of dollars. 

 

And like we've seen from the member from Riversdale in the 

past when it comes to the family of Crowns, most of these deals 

are cut in the back room; they are cut without consultation with 

Saskatchewan people; and they are going to be taken through 

this Legislative Assembly by that massive NDP majority, the 

same as the rights of farmers were overridden in this Assembly, 

the rights of judges were overridden in this Assembly.  And if 

co-op members had not stood up and fought, they would have 

had their rights overridden in this Assembly the same way, Mr. 

Chairman, as we now see the Premier and his government 

operating at the end of this legislative session. 

 

And it's sad, Mr. Chairman.  And I'm glad the Premier touched 

on so much ground because it certainly will make for a very 

well-rounded debate during his estimates and the direction that 

his government is setting. 

 

He touched on so much ground and added so much fiction that 

we will have a very, very interesting debate.  He talks about his 

commitment to debt reduction.  And I would remind the 

Premier -- and this is according to the Provincial Auditor -- that 

in 1991 at the end of the year there was $7.738 billion in the 

accumulated provincial deficit.  At the end of 1993, there was 

$10.218 billion in the provincial accumulated deficit. 

 

When you roll everything else in we're now up -- the auditor 

tells us -- to about $17 billion.  That's an even bigger number 

than the members of the government are wont to throw around 

in question period.  When they respond to questions, some say 

it was 14 when they took over, some say it's 15, some say it 

was 16; but the simple fact is, Mr. Chairman, today it is 17.  It 

is 17.  And the Premier and his government have continued to 

add on to that deficit at a faster pace than anyone previously. 

 

He talks about the economic renewal that is going on, the few 

jobs that have been created.  And I'm glad he mentioned 

biotech . . . and where does he think biotechnology would be 

today in the city of Saskatoon without the new ag college and 

some of the preparation that was done previous to him taking 

over office?  I hear him talking about Hitachi, the turbine plant 

and its expansion.  Well who put Hitachi here? 

 

I see his Minister of the Environment talking about how 

wonderful Millar Western is.  They won an award.  The 

forestry capital of Saskatchewan, I believe it was termed, with 

the wood products up there.  All because someone else took 

some initiative to put some jobs in place in this province, so 

that through the tough times there would be the opportunity for 

people like the member from Riversdale to add on to it.  

Because they certainly weren't put here during the 1970s. 

 

(1645) 

 

He talks about PCS.  Well, Mr. Chairman, we spent hundreds 

of millions of dollars in this province for used holes in the 

ground and we didn't create one new job in the 1970s.  That 

was a great legacy to leave this province, wasn't it? 

 

And today, when we have so many either fleeing the province . 

. . they tell me today that the job numbers, the total workforce 

in this province, is at its lowest ebb in 15 years. 

 

You know why that is, Mr. Chairman?  It isn't because the 

government has been able to maintain that low unemployment 

rate; it is because Saskatchewan people flee.  They go to 

Alberta.  They go to British Columbia.  They go to United 

States.  They go anywhere there is economic opportunity.  If 

they're bright and they're educated, which Saskatchewan people 

are want to be, they aren't going to sit around in this province 

while the Premier and his government dither, bringing in 

legislation that in fact will increase the number of unemployed, 

which will increase the number on welfare, which will increase 

the level of taxation which the rest of us in this province must 

bear.  That is the legacy that we have before us today. 

 

Saskatchewan people, if not the highest taxed, are very close to 

the highest taxed jurisdiction in this country, and there are 

fewer and fewer of us paying 



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

taxes all the time. 

 

I would have thought midway through my mandate that a 

legislative session dedicated to creating taxpayers would have 

been on the agenda.  To reverse the economic stagnation which 

we see in this province, that would have been the agenda to 

bring forward.  And instead we see Draconian labour 

legislation and we see the formation of more Crown 

corporations without Saskatchewan people knowing what is 

going to happen after its formation. 

 

The Premier talks about agriculture -- agriculture -- and what is 

going on out there.  And the price of cows and the price of 

grain and the price of lentils and everything else that is going 

on, Mr. Chairman, has absolutely nothing to do with that 

Premier or any of his government.  And you can take all the 

credit you want, but the simple fact, Mr. Chairman, is that it 

has rained and with opening up of trade, Saskatchewan people 

have more opportunities to market their products. 

 

And the only thing that the Premier should do, Mr. Chairman, 

is come to this Assembly and thank the previous Conservative 

administration in Ottawa for keeping interest rates down and 

for signing a trade agreement which opened up a good part of 

the world for Saskatchewan products to be traded in, and 

everyone in this province understands, Mr. Chairman, that we 

either trade or we die.  And it's about time that the Premier and 

his government gave credit where credit is due because none of 

that is a result of any government policy that we've seen 

emanate from those benches. 

 

And they can talk about Ag 2000 all they want; the simple fact 

is, Mr. Chairman, that we in this province are tied to a world 

economy and we had best get out of the road of the producer 

instead of piling on the roadblocks, like we've seen this Premier 

and this government do. 

 

The Premier raised the point about Sears and other large 

concerns in this province who are going to do well.  And I say, 

bravo.  Bravo for bringing them here, and we all understand 

how they got here.  They got here because there was an 

incentive put in place that was lucrative enough for them to 

choose this jurisdiction over somewhere else. 

 

So don't be fooled.  They didn't come here because they liked 

the Premier's labour legislation; they didn't come here because 

they totally agree with the way the economy is being run; they 

were brought here, and they're staying here because the proper 

incentives were put in place. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Chairman?  That isn't a whole lot 

different than what the previous administration did.  A different 

style, different verbiage, different semantics, but it's basically 

the same. 

 

And I know they like to talk about the deals that they do with 

various large concerns. But what really 

concerns me, Mr. Chairman, and what I want the Premier to 

comment on, is the fact that 500 small-business people 

gathered together in Saskatoon, his home city, last week -- 500 

people who are concerned about their livelihood, about their 

employees, about the families that have invested in their 

livelihood and their future.  And they are dismissed summarily 

by members of his cabinet.  Those 500 have no special deal or 

arrangement.  They don't get free telephone service like Sears 

does.  They don't have access to large amounts of grant money 

through the growth fund like other companies do. 

 

They don't have the promise of buildings or other incentives 

put before them.  These are people that will make it or break it 

because of their ingenuity, because of hard work, and because 

their families have contributed to the society for generations.  

That's how they'll succeed, Mr. Chairman. 

 

So perhaps the best place to start, keeping in mind that these 

500 said: where are the jobs going to come from, where is the 

profit margin going to come from, where is our ability to 

compete in a North American market-place going to come from 

with this agenda of high taxes, restrictive labour law, and an 

inability to influence government; perhaps the Premier could 

start there and then we can work back through the presentation 

that he made to us today here with all of the points that are 

involved.  And we can see how the Premier is spending the 

taxpayers' money and whether it's wise or we are simply going 

to be subjected to a litany of more broken promises that will 

never be fulfilled in the term of this Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Chairman, it's difficult to know 

where to begin with the rambling -- how should I describe it? -- 

dissertation of the Leader of the Opposition, but I'll try to just 

make two or three points and hope to focus the debate a little 

bit more specifically. 

 

Most latterly, the Leader of the Opposition talked about the 300 

or so people who were at a rally in Saskatoon respecting The 

Labour Standards Act amendments and The Trade Union Act 

amendments.  And I want to say to the Leader of the 

Opposition that the history of both of these pieces of legislation 

is a history of consultation, extensively involving both 

employers and employees. 

 

Now I understand how consultation goes in public life.  If you 

meet, but your point of view is not accepted, very often the 

person says that he or she was not consulted.  It's when you 

meet and the point of view is accepted, that you are consulted 

and you understood and you accept the change. 

 

The nature of the process would be that both the trade union 

movements and some sectors in the employers' sectors -- not as 

many as the hon. member would have the public believe in his 

doomsday scenario -- would be happy with some changes and 

unhappy with some other changes. 

 

I want to tell you that for the first time -- I've gone 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 1994 

through, I think, three or four Trade Union Act revisions in my 

political career -- for the first time in that period, I dare say 

since 1944 when we introduced The LSA (The Labour 

Standards Act) and The TUA (The Trade Union Act), the 

amendments, and the amendments that were introduced 

subsequent to consultation in this House, they were done to the 

benefit, if I could put it that way, from the employer point of 

view.  I don't like to categorize it as employer or employee; I 

think it's to the benefit of the entire economic view. 

 

In 1983 when you were part of the government that introduced 

The Trade Union Act amendments -- the last comprehensive 

amendments from that point of view -- the trade union 

movement was not even allowed inside this Legislative 

Building, let alone inside the Labour minister's office or the 

premier's office.  There wasn't one change to one t or one i; 

everything was cast in stone. 

 

Now do we have a perfect solution here?  I think the answer is 

we do not.  We have told the business community that we want 

to work with them and the trade union community to further 

develop the improvements of The Labour Standards Act.  The 

minister has given the details of that announcement; I need not 

to repeat them. 

 

With respect to The Trade Union Act, we're going to set up an 

industrial relations council to look at outstanding issues which 

need to be reviewed, whether it's the issues of notice to 

terminate or other considerations such as the powers of the 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

I believe this process will be transparent, it'll be open.  It'll be 

dominated by people who are respected in the community, 

arms length from the government, and at that point the progress 

will take place from these changes. That is what responsible 

business leaders see.  That's what I think the Leader of the 

Opposition sees, except for what he has to do as a politician. 

 

And that is a marked contrast -- talk about democratic reform -- 

a marked contrast from the way things were done from 1982 to 

1991, albeit it is not as perfect as people, depending on your 

points of view, would want it to be achieved. 

 

The second point that I want to make is the fundamental 

contradiction that the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader 

of the Third Party always find themselves in.  It is this: you 

should have devoted this session to tax reduction, no cut-backs, 

and balancing the budget.  And by the way, no 24 . . . and a 24 

per cent increase for judges. 

 

Now you know if you can believe that, if you can square that 

circle, you'd believe -- with the greatest respect to Doug 

Henning and the Natural Law Party -- you'd believe in yogic 

flying. 

 

If you tell me where you want the tax cuts and the loss of 

revenue, and you tell me you want to achieve a balanced 

budget, you have to tell me and the people 

of Saskatchewan where you're going to make up the revenue. 

 

Now don't get up and say, oh well we're going to make up the 

revenue by growth in the economy.  There simply is not 

enough growth in any provincial economy anywhere, let alone 

Canada, to make up the deficit, as the federal government is 

finding out and as our Liberal government friends are finding 

out in Atlantic Canada.  Huge protests of people that have been 

involved with respect to cut-backs in P.E.I. (Prince Edward 

Island) and New Brunswick . . . well New Brunswick not so 

badly hit, but P.E.I., Nova Scotia with Premier Savage is going 

through, Premier Wells in Newfoundland -- can't do it. 

 

I mean you can debate this all you want, but this is common 

sense, and the voter knows this.  And that's why it is a fallacy; 

it's a contradiction.  And without getting into 

old-style/new-style politics, it is the oldest of old-style politics, 

walking both sides or all sides of the street.  You can't do that. 

 

And as a consequence I'm not going to get into it except to say 

one thing.  I draw to the attention of the hon. members' interest 

an editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, a paper I do not 

read very often and whose editorials I do not read very often 

but somebody forced this to me today. It says: "Taking (the) 

next step."  Quote: 

 

 A report by the Toronto-Dominion Bank provides the 

Romanow government -- and Saskatchewan residents -- 

with a reason to smile. 

 

I'm smiling.  I wish you'd smile. 

 

 It found that Saskatchewan was 10th among provinces when 

it came to per capita deficit.  The Saskatchewan figure, 

according to the bank, was $290 a person.  Only a year 

earlier, it stood at $587 and the province was seventh on the 

list. 

 

 The Romanow government remains on track to eliminating 

the deficit within the next two years, making the provincial 

debt more manageable. 

 

By the way it then goes on to say what we should do.  And 

there's some interesting ideas there which I would not dismiss 

out of hand.  That's a priority.  That's the record. 

 

I won't belabour the House but I can give you quotations from 

Nesbitt Thomson, Wood Gundy, RBC Dominion Securities.  I 

can give them to you from Moody's.  I can give them to you 

from Standard and Poor's.  I can give them to you from the 

Canadian Bond Rating Service, the Dominion Bond Rating 

Service. 

 

They're saying this is a time to smile.  What's wrong with you 

folks in the opposition?  I mean the face doesn't crack if you 

smile.  This is good news.  We've come through a  



May 30, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

hard time and we've done it through a credible, credible 

approach, an approach which is balanced and is responsible. 

 

I'll make one last point if I can before I sit down and that is the 

business of broken promises.  I know that time is really . . . I'm 

sorry to eat up the time but I may as well take the remaining 

minute and a half.  This is what we promised in 1991.  "Let's 

do it . . . The Saskatchewan Way".  "First Things First" was the 

first promise -- "Common Sense Financial Management". 

 

 (One)  Open the books.  A public, independent audit of the 

province's financial affairs to cut government waste and 

mismanagement. 

 

I mean, it can be said done -- Gass. 

 

 (Two) A comprehensive review of all PC privatizations and 

business deals, to determine if they are in the public 

interest. 

 

Almost done, or we're doing it. 

 

 (Three) A balanced budget in our first term of office (not yet 

done), and a 15-year plan to eliminate the accumulated 

Devine deficit. 

 

We'll seal that; it's on track. 

 

Next heading: "New Directions, New Priorities -- Jobs, Fair 

Taxes, and Wealth Creation." 

 

 (One) A commitment to save 7,500 jobs threatened by the 

expanded 7% PST. We will repeal this unfair tax (done). 

 

 (Two) Work with local manufacturers and businesses to 

increase the value-added processing of our resources and 

commodities for both the domestic and export markets. 

 

We're doing it. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


