




















































Hansard: February 22, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  337
 February 22, 1994 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Thursday next ask the government 
the following question: 
 

 Regarding the Department of Executive Council, please 
provide the following information on the position of 
communications event coordinator.  I want a full: (1) job 
description and list of duties and responsibilities of the 
position; (2) in which branch of Executive Council this 
position has been created; details regarding public 
competition for this position if any; (3) qualification of the 
individual appointed, Ms. Anne N. Davis; and (4) 
justification for a salary range of between $51,900 and 
$67,400 per year. 

 
I so submit. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 
take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to 
the House a . . . he used to be a constituent of mine, from my 
constituency, who now resides in the Moosomin 
constituency and after redistribution will be again back into 
my constituency, Mr. Archie McKenzie up in your gallery, 
sir.  I'd like the House to welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a family from Esterhazy, Lloyd and Delphine 
Tochor, and their daughter Dennille.  If you'd please rise -- 
they're in the Speaker's gallery. 
 
They're in Regina for a few days to enjoy the spring break 
that Lloyd is having from the teaching profession.  I would 
like to welcome them to Regina, and also extend a hearty 
welcome from the Assembly; wish them well in their 
sojourn here in Regina, and wish them a safe trip back 
home, I believe tomorrow.  So please welcome Lloyd and 
Delphine. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to take 
the opportunity to introduce to the House and to yourself the 
former MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Kelvington-Wadena, Mr. Sherwin Petersen, who joins us in 
the gallery on the west side of the House.  Please welcome 
Sherwin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 
to you and to members of the Assembly, 12 patients from 
the cancer lodge here in Regina.  I want to recognize them, 
because as members will know, we have an excellent cancer 
treatment facility here in the province of Saskatchewan in 
Regina. And I know all members will want to wish you well 
with your treatment.  We understand the ordeal that this is 
for you and your family, and we want to extend best wishes 
to you and hope you enjoy your stay here, and look forward 
to seeing you after question period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce through 
you and to members of the Assembly a young man in the 
gallery, Mr. Jim Tsakas, who was an enthusiastic supporter 
and worker for me in my recent by-election win in Regina 
North West. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I would also like to join members in 
welcoming a guest here today.  I think most members will 
recognize her.  She's seated in the Speaker's gallery.  She 
was a page in the Assembly last year.  Larissa Fuhr.  Could 
everybody welcome her? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cigarette Taxes 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Finance.  Madam Minister, the official opposition has 
consistently and strenuously opposed the ill-advised and 
harmful federal policies with respect to national cigarette 
taxation policy.  We maintain that our federal government 
has overacted on the concerns of eastern Canada and 
particularly Quebec at the expense of western Canadians.  In 
this, Mr. Speaker, history is repeating itself. 
 
I want our federal government to be assured that the official 
opposition wholeheartedly supports the anti-smuggling 
measures announced yesterday by the four ministers . . . 
western provinces.  It is encouraging to note that the two 
Conservative and two NDP (New Democratic Party) 
governments are able to generate a coordinated and unified 
approach to this most important issue. 
 
Madam Minister, I would ask you to report to this Assembly 
the actions which our government intends to take to assure 
that the interests of Saskatchewan people remain a priority. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question and for the support.  We agree with 
the member opposite that the Liberals have been very 
ill-advised.  This is not the correct way 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
to deal with smuggling.  All the Liberals are really doing 
here is encouraging young people to smoke.  We know that. 
 
The other thing the Liberals are doing though is almost 
implicitly encouraging smuggling because if you can make 
smuggling successful enough perhaps you can force the 
Liberal government to lower taxes. 
 
So to give you a brief response, the western governments -- 
along with the northern governments -- are going to stand 
behind the Government of Manitoba, which is now under the 
spotlight.  We're going to work with them to coordinate 
enforcement across western and northern Canada because 
we don't agree with the Liberal's ill-advised policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I believe 
we all agree that removing the taxes on cigarettes to appease 
concerns in Quebec is a backwards step financially, 
politically, for the health of the people of Canada, and 
certainly in terms of this country's national health standards.  
At the same time they are reducing taxes on cigarettes there 
has been much speculation that the federal government may 
start taxing health and dental premiums, Madam Minister, 
where the federal government could contemplate taking off 
taxes on products that create health problems and tax those 
that could prevent a health care system being stretched to the 
limit. 
 
Madam Minister, have you pointed out this obvious 
contradiction to the federal counterparts?  And what 
submissions have you made to the federal government in 
opposition to the taxation of health care coverage? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, again I thank the 
member opposite for that question.  And again I agree with 
the member opposite.  That is a very good point.  It would 
be absolutely hypocritical for the Liberals to choose to lower 
one tax.  And of all the taxes in Canada that you could lower 
that might bring benefit to people, the one tax you lower is 
the tax on cigarettes, which we know leads to tragic health 
care problems and actually costs later on in the system. 
 
We have also pointed out to the federal government that it 
would be especially hypocritical at this time to increase any 
taxes on health care benefits.  We have made that point.  I 
have no idea as to whether or not the Liberal government 
has heard that particular point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also to the Minister of Finance.  Madam 
Minister, today your federal counterpart will deliver his first 
budget.  On many 

 occasions in the past you have said that the federal 
government should not continue to offload its funding 
responsibilities onto the provinces.  And I believe that is a 
fair criticism, Madam Minister, although I think it is 
somewhat hypocritical considering the way you have 
offloaded time and time again onto municipalities and 
school boards. 
 
Madam Minister, in your consultations with municipalities, 
have you determined what effect this year's massive cuts 
will have?  How much can Saskatchewan residents expect 
their property taxes to increase?  What services will be cut, 
and how many jobs will be lost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to that 
question, I'd like to make a few points initially.  Our first 
choice was not to make cuts in the area of education or 
health care.  The problem is, about 80 or 90 per cent of our 
budget is taken up by education, health care, social 
programs, and agriculture.  We are not like the federal 
government; we don't have a helicopter program that we can 
easily get rid of.  So that was a very difficult decision for us 
to make. 
 
Now with respect to third parties, I would also make the 
point that we have established a municipal round table with 
urban and rural municipal leaders in which we are trying to 
work through the proper relationship between the two levels 
of government and the proper funding. 
 
I believe sincerely that our counterparts at the local level 
will join with us and they will tighten their belts, and I do 
not believe that we will necessarily see these increases 
passed on to the electorate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 
Minister, when you delivered your budget last year, we 
called it the iceberg budget because so much of it was 
hidden beneath the surface.  Some of that is coming to the 
fore today. 
 
Madam Minister, last year you announced that this year's cut 
to urban revenue sharing would be 8 per cent.  But in this 
year's budget, you cut revenue sharing from 50.6 million to 
45.4 million.  That's a reduction of 10.3 per cent. 
 
Madam Minister, why has the revenue-sharing pool been cut 
by an additional 2.3 per cent on top of the 8 per cent 
announced in last year's budget?  Why have you not been 
more forthcoming about the actual size of the cut to urban 
revenue sharing; and what additional effect will this have on 
municipalities in terms of job cuts and property tax 
increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, in reply to that question 
from the hon. minister, I would like to say that we have only 
reduced our revenue-sharing pools 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

 by 8 per cent.  What has happened though as we have 
looked at our transfer of funding on SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency), that we've reduced the 
pool in revenue sharing, both the urban side and the rural 
side, by $2 million in order to make a direct contribution 
onto the operations of SAMA from the revenue-sharing 
pool. 
 
So the revenue sharing really essentially stays the same, 
except instead of having it transferred from the provincial 
government to the municipal governments and then have 
SAMA requisition them, we have made a direct contribution 
to SAMA through the revenue-sharing pool on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, to the minister who just 
answered. Madam Minister, your cuts to SAMA, your 
proposed cuts to SAMA, I believe amount to another 
massive download on municipalities.  Municipalities will see 
their SAMA requisition increase by about 250 per cent this 
year with further increases planned for '95 and '96.  And that 
is in spite of your pledge of no further downloading. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, the RM (rural municipality) of Pense 
in my constituency has seen their SAMA bill jump from 
$4,400 last year to $11,600 this year.  The RM of 
Reciprocity has seen their's jump from $3,000 to $8,000. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, do you think it is reasonable to 
expect municipalities to absorb 250 per cent hikes in one 
very important area of their budget?  Now can you tell me 
what effect this massive hike will have in terms of jobs and 
property tax increases this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, a number of responses to 
that question.  One, first of all, urban and rural governments 
have a fairly healthy reserve in all of their accounts.  We 
will be bringing forth those figures later, but there is a very 
healthy situation within the budgets of the urban and rural 
municipal governments. 
 
Second of all, we have talked to them extensively for the 
past two years and they acknowledge and agree with us that 
assessment is essentially a service that is provided for 
municipalities in order for them to establish their revenue 
base. 
 
So assessment is a legitimate expenditure that should be 
accounted for through municipal budgets, and what we're 
doing is making that move gradually.  We've done it through 
consultation with them and we'll continue to work and 
monitor the situation as we go. 
 
It is simply a matter of us trying to adjust to the debt that we 
have been left with and we have been trying to do it in a 
compassionate and reasonable way, not like Alberta which 
has simply unilaterally decided to remove all funding 
without any consultation or 

discussion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 
minister.  Madam Minister, the question here is fairness -- 
fairness in Saskatchewan.  On account of your downloading, 
property taxpayers are being asked to pay more and more 
taxes at a time when property values are actually declining 
in many areas of our province. 
 
Most people, Madam Minister, consider the property tax to 
be a regressive tax, because it really isn't based on the 
person's ability to pay.  There are many farmers in this 
province, Madam Minister, for example, who own a lot of 
land but may have little or no income over the past few 
years.  Yet they are expected to pay more and more property 
taxes because of the downloading that you're instituting on 
municipalities and school boards. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, at a time when people are looking 
for fair taxation, why do you continue to load up the 
property tax base with increase after increase through this 
provincial downloading?  Why do you do that, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, what we have been trying 
to do through a period of two years of consultation is to 
decide which services can and should be funded by the 
municipal property tax. 
 
We have, through the changes that we made in the union 
hospital requisition, removed from the property tax load, 
$4.6 million.  In other words, by simply changing the mill 
from the union hospital requisition to a revenue tax of 2 
mills, we have provided a benefit of $4.6 million to 
municipalities. 
 
What we are doing also is, by changing our relationship with 
SAMA and providing them with more authority and more 
accountability and more responsibility for a service that is 
essentially needed for them in order to raise their revenue 
base, we are now saying that we're going to transfer to them 
approximately $3.5 million.  So we have removed $4.6 
million from the property tax base by virtue of the changes 
we have made to The Union Hospital Act, but we are also 
making a change of providing them the authority to raise 
their own revenue by the requisition of $3.5 million through 
SAMA. 
 

Liquor and Gaming Authority Early Retirement 
Package 

 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you please advise this House what 
retirement packages were recently offered to employees of 
the Saskatchewan Liquor Board, specifically regarding the 
formula for years of service 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
and age which would qualify employees for this retirement 
package, and whether this package differed according to 
whether an employee was in the scope of the union, or out of 
scope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can 
indicate to the member opposite the retirement package that 
would be offered by the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
would be in line with what would be set down by the Public 
Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these, as the member will find, are answers that 
are much more suited to estimates.  And when we go 
through the estimate process, I would be more than willing 
to discuss with her the number of employees who would be 
impacted by this, the exact cost to the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, and if she so wishes, the people who chose to 
accept early retirement. 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I have been advised by 
someone from the Liquor Board that 35 individuals 
expressed an interest in the early retirement option, but that 
the Liquor Board had only 15 packages available.  Can you 
confirm for me how many employees accepted this offer and 
how were the 15 finalists selected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I 
would want to indicate to the member that the only positions 
that would be qualifying for early retirement would be 
positions that we would not be refilling in the future.  So in 
terms of those who would be offered early retirement, it 
would be quite clearly in positions where the jobs wouldn't 
be filled. 
 
Now we have gone through an extensive reorganization in 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority.  Some of the roles and 
some of the positions are changing with this reorganization.  
And I can indicate to the member opposite, I have no idea 
how many have chosen early retirement and how many have 
been offered.  But I can indicate to her that the people of this 
province will be saving money in the long run through the 
early retirements because those jobs will not be refilled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, of the 15 employees your 
agency selected for early retirement, did any of them not 
meet the minimum years of service plus age?  And if there 
were exceptions to this rule, on what basis were those 
exceptions made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated to 
the member in my last answer, I have no idea the number of 
early retirees that came from the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, nor do I know the details surrounding who in fact 
they might be.  I can indicate to the member what the policy 
of the Liquor and Gaming Authority is, what the policy of 
this government is, as I have done. 
 
In terms of more detailed answers, I can indicate to the 
member that she's more than welcome to ask me any 

 of these questions.  And I would be more than forthcoming 
in answering them, as I was in the last session of the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, just take notice if you're 
unable to answer the questions.  Over the weekend I 
received a call from a constituent who is employed by the 
Liquor Board.  This gentleman is 61 years of age and has 33 
years of government service.  He has spent the last two years 
on long-term disability as a result of a heart attack.  Yet he 
did not receive an offer in the recent round of early 
retirements.  Could you please undertake to look into his 
situation, as it is causing serious concerns for him.  I will 
send his name and personal information across to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be more 
than willing to look into this individual case that is raised by 
the member.  Given the short period of time that she's spent 
in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I would want to suggest to 
her that the process, if she's looking for information from 
any of my cabinet colleagues, we have offices -- each and 
every one of us -- in the legislature.  We have staff that are 
hired to do research and we are certainly more than willing 
to get answers to these questions.  And if this is the most 
pressing question that she has, I'm afraid we're in for a 
session of very dull questions in this legislature. 
 

Organization of Rural Health Care 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Madam Minister, in rural Saskatchewan a number of 
hospitals have operated tremendously efficient.  They have 
scraped and saved and ended up with operating surpluses.  
These facilities were told by your department officials that 
the funds could be used, within the health care facility for 
the care of patients.  Instead, Madam Minister, we have 
learned that they are being used for the expenses of the 
health care board. 
 
One administrator we spoke to, Miss Marlene Chapellaz of 
Loon Lake, says this is a frivolous use of money -- money 
for travel, unnecessary salaries, etc.  Madam Minister, can 
you confirm that some of the funds that were earmarked for 
patient care are being used to fund the expenses of the 
appointed health care boards, and why is this being done, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  
With respect to surplus funding that was in union hospital 
institutions and districts, this money was to be turned over to 
the district board and was going to be used to administer 
health care services in the community and within the context 
of the district.  Union hospital boards entered into 
agreements with district boards as to how the funding would 
be dealt with.  As to what may be happening in a specific 
community with respect to specific dollars, of course 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

I'm unable to answer that question.  I'd be pleased to look 
into it on behalf of the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
Madam Minister, rural hospitals that had rainy day funds set 
aside are no longer able to control those funds.  For instance 
money that was willed to specific health care facilities is no 
longer controlled by those facilities originally intended.  
Instead you make them go through the district health board 
and an ad hoc committee for permission to use their own 
money. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Minister, many reasonable requests 
have been turned down.  For instance, Oxbow Union 
Hospital, one of the 52 rural hospitals to have their acute 
care funding eliminated, had enough money in their 
contingency fund to adequately staff their facility for 
24-hour-a-day care.  Their request, Madam Minister, was 
denied.  They were told the money could be spent on 
promoting your wellness program but not on staffing their 
hospital. 
 
Madam Minister, why did you find it necessary to tie the 
hands of the local health care facilities?  Why are you taking 
away the local control of that money that rightfully belongs 
to those rural hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to surplus 
funds, I want the legislature to know that these funds were 
dealt with in a different fashion depending on where they 
came from.  If they came from the Government of 
Saskatchewan and governmental organizations, they went to 
the district boards via pre-amalgamation agreements that 
spoke to how the funds would be used.  If these funds were 
from bequests or charitable donations, they were often set up 
in a charitable fund for the purpose of use within that 
community.  So depending on where the funds came from, 
they were used in a different fashion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 
you know very well that in the Oxbow Hospital that is not 
the case.  Money that was willed to that facility was 
requested by your department to go to other promotions, not 
to the facilitating of patients, Madam Minister. 
 
Further criticisms, Madam Minister, stem from the fact that 
your appointed boards are filled with political supporters.  
And if you stand today and say that isn't so, I would 
welcome the phone calls from administrators, elected 
officials, and others, who expressed that very concern to us.  
Again, Marlene Chapellaz, the administrator at Loon Lake, 
estimated that 10 of 12 of the board members are political 
appointees on that board -- 10 of 12. 
 
Some of these people are hard-working individuals 

 who only have the betterment of their districts at heart, and 
I congratulate them on that work.  However, Madam 
Minister, many hospital administrators say your political 
appointees have been arbitrarily placed on the boards, 
having tainted the process; that they are carrying out the 
wishes . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member should 
put his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 
under these circumstances, how can you say that rural 
communities have had local input?  Are you prepared to give 
the boards the legitimacy they deserve in their job?  Will 
you give the commitment today, Madam Minister, that the 
boards will be elected and elected as soon as possible, as you 
people have promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, clearly, unlike the 
government opposite, this government in legislation has 
stated that there will be elected boards because we believe in 
elected boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite had 10 years in 
which to do that and they chose not to, in spite of the fact the 
public was asking for a movement towards elected boards.  
The members opposite also know that there has been a 
process put in place to review how we proceed to elections, 
when we proceed to elections, and exactly how the election 
process will take place.  But this government believes in 
elections, Mr. Speaker, and we've stated it in legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 
the Premier said the train has left the station.  And now we 
see, Madam Minister, that you're pulling it to a screeching 
halt and asking it to back up.  Madam Minister, will you 
give the assurance today to the health care boards out there 
and to the general public of rural Saskatchewan, to 
Saskatchewan in general, that you will hold elections this 
fall as promised, Madam Minister -- as promised?  Will you 
give that assurance today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've indicated before, 
there is a process in place to review how we proceed to 
elections.  The member opposite is also aware that the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations feels that 
there is more that has to be done in terms of consolidating 
the boards and putting more of the reform process in place 
before they proceed to elections. 
 
Now surely the members opposite are not going to say to all 
of the members of the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations that they're wrong and out to 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
lunch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 
people believe in rural Saskatchewan that this process has to 
be given some legitimacy.  You must, Madam Minister, 
they're telling us, hold elections as you've promised, as soon 
as possible.  Why will you not give that commitment today, 
Madam Minister?  You promised to hold elections for these 
health care board positions.  Are you or are you not going to 
set election dates as promised, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We have told the member opposite, 
and I have been saying all along, that we will move to 
elections.  There is a process in place to determine how we 
do this, when we do this, and we need to design the 
boundaries, the ward system, for the elections.  The member 
opposite knows that.  There needs to be consultation with 
the public on this process.  The members opposite may 
prefer to ram it down the public's throat, but we are going to 
consult with the public before we proceed to these elections. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Non-utility Generation 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the 
minister responsible for SaskPower, I wish to announce the 
government's decision regarding non-utility generation in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  I'd like to outline how the 
government has arrived at its decision. 
 
In 1992, the ministerial steering committee on co-generation 
identified the potential for non-utility generation in 
Saskatchewan.  Following the steering committee's findings, 
SaskPower embarked on a program to develop a 25 
megawatt non-utility generation demonstration project.  All 
projects had to meet the criteria of being reliable, 
environmentally sound, and economic.  The first step in that 
program was to go to a competitive proposal process.  While 
a number of proponents expressed an interest in submitting 
proposals, in the final analysis SaskPower received 10. 
 
A team of expert engineers, economists, planners, 
environmentalists and support staff from within SaskPower, 
assisted by outside experts both from within government and 
the private sector, evaluated these proposals.  The result of 
the request for proposals is we now have actual costs based 
on solid data for non-utility generation projects that have 
undergone the most comprehensive and expert scrutiny. 
 
While the first two conditions were met, the third, that being 
economic, was not met at this time.  Therefore I'm 
announcing today that the plan to proceed with 

 the 25 megawatt demonstration project has been postponed. 
 
Purchasing electricity from a non-utility generation project 
can be a good investment for the people of Saskatchewan, 
but not at this time.  In the final analysis, the provincial 
government cannot justify spending the additional dollars, 
during these times of fiscal restraint, to enter into a contract 
to purchase electricity that is not needed in our system.  We 
simply cannot ask the electrical consumer to carry this 
additional burden. 
 
While we will be postponing this project, progress has been 
made toward future non-utility generation developments.  
SaskPower now has a process to solicit and evaluate 
non-utility generation projects. 
 
I want to emphasize that SaskPower and this government 
remain committed to proceed with non-utility generation.  
They will be an important part of the considerations made in 
the development of our comprehensive energy strategy now 
under way.  The strategy will bring forward a number of 
options for the future of our province's energy industry.  I 
expect to have a final report on the comprehensive energy 
strategy this summer. 
 
Given the significance of the first non-utility generation 
project, government has spent some time in reviewing the 
process and carefully weighing the costs and benefits of the 
demonstration project.  While this review has delayed the 
announcement for some weeks, our main priority was to 
ensure the best decision was made on behalf of all the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the 
proponents for the high quality of their proposals and the 
considerable effort they put into their submissions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 
obviously the public in Saskatchewan will be disappointed 
with the minister's announcement today.  And I find it a little 
interesting that he's announcing it at the time when the 
federal Minister of Finance is going to come down with the 
budget. 
 
I suspect that he wants to camouflage the announcement 
because so many people will be disappointed that the NDP 
administration in the province of Saskatchewan can't even 
see far enough down the road towards economic 
development to entertain the benefits of research, and 
education, and co-investment, and interest in the province of 
Saskatchewan for the co-generation project.  The public 
learns, investors learn, the general public is concerned with 
the fact that we have a monopoly with . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'll ask members 
please not to interrupt when the member is 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

responding.  There was very little interruption when the 
minister made his statement.  I expect members to give the 
member from Estevan the same courtesy. 
 
Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's just 
disappointing, Mr. Speaker, to hear the minister stand in his 
place, and particularly today with all the other media events, 
to try to frankly hide the fact that either he doesn't have the 
courage or the administration doesn't or they're being run by 
bureaucrats in the Crown corporation that has excess profits 
and a combination of excess profits 3 or $400 million dollars 
because of utility rates going up.  And he won't even present 
a budget to this House or to the Legislative Assembly that 
says we've looked at co-generation, it just won't work right 
now, and tell us what some of the numbers are. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it seems rather interesting that 
government is being criticized across the province and 
certainly from a lot of valid circles about economic activity, 
diversification, value added, and a plan for economic 
activity, that they would deny industry in one of the more 
profitable areas -- that is energy and co-generation -- to 
participate with a large Crown corporation to learn about 
co-generation in the province of Saskatchewan.  And they 
won't. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the NDP administration 
will take SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), a 
utility and a monopoly, and go invest in a neighbouring 
province, take SaskEnergy and go invest in the neighbouring 
province in Alberta, why couldn't they invest in the province 
of Saskatchewan a modest amount of money for the 
education, research, and economic incentive to allow people 
to think about co-generation in a province that needs that 
kind of break from the monopoly that's been here for the last 
several years? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would just say in light of the fact that 
MLAs supported co-generation -- MLAs from Moose Jaw, 
NDP MLAs; it was the big answer when you turned down 
the nuclear activity here and say, well we'll be into 
co-generation -- I think it's rather disappointing, to say the 
least, that the minister would stand in his place on this 
Tuesday during the federal budget and say it's not on in the 
province of Saskatchewan because the NDP doesn't have a 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too, on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, can state 
unequivocally that we are truly disappointed with the 
minister's announcement today. 
 
This was first announced in the throne speech some two 
years ago with emphasis that this would have a focus on 
rural Saskatchewan.  And the amount of electricity that is 
being discussed is such a small portion of SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) generation.  In fact if I 
recall correctly -- we're talking about 25 megs here -- even 
100 megs was going to be proportionately a very, very small 
percentage of SPC generation over all. 

Now if we're talking about such a small percentage, Mr. 
Speaker, that does not mean much to SPC but it definitely 
does mean something as far as the jobs and industry, 
particularly to rural Saskatchewan.  There should be no 
additional costs to the taxpayers.  I mean my understanding 
is that there were numerous private monies that were going 
to be the driving force behind non-utility generation 
projects.  And if that isn't the case, then I have to question 
the minister as to why it is he wouldn't bring forward the 
numbers instead of simply saying that the criteria was met 
on it being reliable, the criteria was met on it being 
environmentally sound, but the criteria was not met as far as 
economics are concerned. 
 
A great deal of time and effort and money has been spent on 
behalf of the contenders with the government with having no 
intention of proceeding.  And that's the great 
disappointment. 
 
I guess an even greater disappointment to me, Mr. Speaker, 
is the fact that this particular minister, to my knowledge, has 
been in favour of non-utility generation projects.  And if he's 
not in charge of his department, then I don't know who is.  
Perhaps it happens to be the CEO (chief executive officer) at 
SaskPower.  Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Bradley: -- Before orders of the day, I request leave for 
a private member's statement about SaskTel scholarships. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As we know, 
SaskTel is now a world leader in telecommunications 
technology, an accomplishment of which we are all 
justifiably proud.  But while SaskTel reaches out to the 
world, it hasn't forgotten its roots, that it began as an 
instrument of Saskatchewan people whose function was to 
bring together those early citizens who are isolated in their 
pioneer homes, separated from their neighbours by miles, 
blizzards, and darkness. 
 
SaskTel linked them, and since then has provided quality, 
low-cost communication service to all of Saskatchewan.  
And the people have supported their communications 
corporation.  In recognition of their support, SaskTel is 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan and their pursuit 
of excellence in all fields.  Consequently, as part of its 
education equity program, it has established the SaskTel 
scholarship program for individuals pursuing education 
directly related to communications. 
 
I am proud to announce that two of this year's award winners 
are from Bengough-Milestone constituency.  They're 
enthusiastic, talented citizens who are entering the 
open-ended world of communications technology. 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
Nancy Leubke of Ogema is in her second year at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology), Palliser Campus, Moose Jaw; and James 
Wolvanshy of Milestone is beginning his studies at the same 
school. 
 
Nancy won an undergraduate scholarship of $3,000, and 
James an entrance scholarship of $2,000.  To win such an 
award takes a lot of dedication and hard work on behalf of 
these students.  I congratulate my two constituents for their 
award and I applaud SaskTel for its commitment to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Leave to 
reply about the scholarships for SaskTel. 
 
The Speaker: -- Did the member say he wanted to reply? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- He wanted leave. 
 
The Speaker: -- There really is no mechanism to reply to a 
private member's statement, but by leave it can be done.  But 
I just want to remind members, we don't ordinarily allow a 
reply to a private member's statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 
congratulate the students who received the scholarships from 
SaskTel.  They are worthy students and they have I'm sure 
worked hard throughout their educational careers to achieve 
this accomplishment. 
 
It's good that SaskTel recognizes that students across this 
province deserve to have some support, some financial 
support, to further their education. And SaskTel as one of 
the major Crown corporations in this province that profits 
greatly from the people of Saskatchewan, should indeed 
participate in that kind of an educational venture. 
 
It was interesting when the member commented on the 
low-cost communications that SaskTel provides for the 
people of Saskatchewan.  When you look at, Mr. Speaker, 
the $5,000 in student scholarships that went to that particular 
constituency, you have to wonder where the funds come 
from though, when SaskTel is able to do this. 
 
My colleague just happened to have a piece of paper here 
that explained where some of those funds came from, Mr. 
Speaker.  When you look at it, that SaskTel raised the 
residential rates by 59 per cent on March 1, 1992, you can 
understand where SaskTel is profiting to such a great 
manner. 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Another member has called 
order, and I assume from that that the member is 
overstepping his bounds and getting into debate rather than 
making a comment on the statement that 

 was made.  And that's why we don't really allow comments 
on private members' statements. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
questions no. 25 and 26 put by members opposite, in the 
spirit of cooperation I table the answers to them. 
 
The Speaker: -- Questions 25 and 26, the answer has been 
tabled. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is 
a pleasure to rise and make a few comments in response to 
the budget, and the budget's entitled Delivering the 
Promise.  I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, that I can't guarantee that 
all constituents in the Wilkie constituency would agree with 
that title. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget . . . delivering the budget is arriving 
a little too late.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP took on a large 
number of promises during the last election -- promises that 
never were and were never intended to be kept. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the promises were: eliminating 
the provincial sales tax -- not done; increased funding for 
education -- not done, cut; increased funding for health care 
-- again not done, cuts; more money for social assistance 
recipients -- there again, not done; the delivery of jobs -- 
there again, not done.  We are somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 12,000 jobs less than when the Premier 
made this promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these promises were made by the now 
Premier who at the time said four and a half billion dollars 
was enough income for the government to keep all these 
promises.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on for the rest of 
the afternoon and point out to you where these promises 
were not kept. 
 
Not only did this government fail to deliver on these 
promises, they downright broke each and every promise 
made on the campaign trail.  And I hope the Saskatchewan 
people will remember that fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have continued this trend.  They say 
no cuts, no new taxes.  Well, Mr. Speaker, the Finance 
minister and her colleagues are proud to announce at each 
and every opportunity that this budget has no new taxes and 
no major program cuts. 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ.  All the spending cuts for this 
year were announced last year.  Now, Mr. Speaker, this is 
another first for the NDP government.  Maybe this is where 
they can budget a year ahead.  If you tell everybody a year 
ahead what you're going to do, then when you bring your 
budget down you can say no, we have no new cuts, no new 
taxes; these things were all pre-budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we even had a tax increase this year because at 
its inception at the middle of the last tax year, there was a 5 
per cent surcharge as a deficit reduction.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that was in last year's budget. 
 
The NDP announced cuts to third-party groups and that will 
be felt by every Saskatchewan family -- everyone in 
Saskatchewan.  No new cuts?  I don't think so.  Not now, but 
the impact will surely be felt all across my constituency. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, cuts announced last year include 
4 per cent cuts to K to 12 education for 1994.  That means 
that $14.2 million in operating grants will be taken out of the 
system this year.  How does that square with the bragging 
and the boasting going on over there of no cuts?  Well I can't 
agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Finance minister said today during question period, she 
didn't think the cuts would be passed on to the taxpayer -- or 
the electorate, as she put it.  Well where do the NDP think 
the money is going to come from?  Where do they think the 
municipalities, cities, and towns are going to get the money 
to cover up the downloading that's going on?  Mr. Speaker, 
it will impact on the mill rate, on property taxes.  There's no 
other way. 
 
The municipalities and cities are supposed to have balanced 
budgets, so they don't have large reserves to draw from.  In 
cases like this they have to go back to the property owner, 
the taxpayer, and get the downloading money that's been 
taken out of their grants. 
 
The revenue-sharing grants have been cut by more than 10 
per cent this year.  Reduction in provincial funding support 
to the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency -- 
that's SAMA -- will result in massive increases in 
assessment billed for every community in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no way that a massive increase in costs 
will not impact on the RMs and the cities and towns of the 
province.  That has to be found somewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have failed to remove health care 
from the property tax base, so property taxes will be 
increased as the provincial government offloads more and 
more onto the health boards. 
 
No cuts?  No increases?  I can't agree, Mr. Speaker.  I do not 
agree with that concept. 

Mr. Speaker, the new deficit surtax is now 10 per cent.  
Many people fail to realize that this tax of 10 per cent for 
1993 tax year, when it was first imposed it was only 5 per 
cent.  Again I ask you the question -- no increases? 
 
Utility rates have been increased to the limit by this 
government, Mr. Speaker.  I have a list of rate increases of 
SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SaskPower, SGI, Liquor Board, STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company), totalling around 
35 different tax increases.  Mr. Speaker, they range from a 
modest 4 per cent up to, well, here's 54, here's 100 per cent, 
77 per cent, 49 per cent -- and the list goes on and on.  And 
again I ask the question -- no increases, no tax increases? 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan are not going to buy, they're not going to buy 
that package.  You may have been able to convince the 
people of Saskatchewan, particularly in my constituency, 
that there was some changes needed; there had to be some 
tough decisions made.  But, Mr. Speaker, they do not like to 
be hoodwinked.  Tell the truth, tell it like it is, and you'll get 
more support. 
 
These examples, Mr. Speaker, are evidence that there are 
program cuts and new taxes for the Saskatchewan people 
this year. 
 
I want to talk about the social services.  These cuts and new 
taxes, Mr. Speaker, are very hard on the people who are 
trying to earn a modest living.  I receive calls and letters, 
Mr. Speaker, from people across the province saying how it 
is to make ends meet.  I have a letter on file -- and I shared it 
with the Minister of Energy -- from a lady who wrote me the 
letter and pointed out the increase the first month of this 
year, the tremendous increase in their power bill.  And I will 
agree that January, February was probably cold, but that 
doesn't help when the person has to write out the cheque to 
pay for the power bill.  The increases are humungous, Mr. 
Speaker, and people are not happy. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it's hard for people with jobs -- this 
lady has a job and her husband has a job -- I would like to 
have you imagine what these increases are going to be on 
the people who are on social assistance.  How are they going 
to make ends meet, Mr. Speaker?  And there are, as you 
know, very, very many people on social assistance today in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you don't recall, maybe I should just point out to the 
members opposite and the viewing audience: in November 
1993 there was 76,799 people on welfare in this province; in 
1991 there were just over 57,000.  Mr. Speaker, that is 
almost 20,000 more people on welfare.  How are those 
people going to pay the increase in telephone, power, 
energy, insurance, licence registration fees, all those things?  
How are they going to pay those bills? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the answer is we will raise their social 
benefits, then I would suggest that these raises in taxes 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
are probably counter-productive. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I wanted once again to mention, while the 
social welfare rolls have raised by 20,000, jobs have gone 
down by 12,000.  That doesn't tell us how many people 
picked up and left the province, Mr. Speaker, because they 
can't afford to live in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and those who 
are interested in listening, those things don't just happen; 
they are caused . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they 
don't, Mr. Speaker.  People are forced onto welfare and lose 
jobs because of the negative government policies and 
programs. 
 
I have a letter on file, Mr. Speaker, from a man in the town 
of Macklin who tells me he is shutting down, or has shut 
down -- it was in January -- his storage business because he 
couldn't charge enough money to pay for the extra cost of 
keeping his warehouse warm.  He shut the place down.  
Now the members might say, well what's two or three jobs 
over alongside the Alberta border.  Well maybe those two or 
three jobs won't impact heavily on the government's 
programs, but that goes all across Saskatchewan.  And when 
you find out all of the little businesses that have to shut 
down or are forced to let off people because they can't pay 
the extra cost, it amounts up to a lot of people.  And those 
people either show up on welfare or they leave the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's no wonder that the government has been 
forced to earmark 4.4 million for children this session.  Mr. 
Speaker, I applaud that.  We all know that children suffer 
when parents are under stress, and the reason parents are 
under stress in most cases is they don't have a job.  So I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, it is a snowballing effect.  When you 
overtax people, the employer can't keep them on because he 
can't make a profit, so he lays people off and they end up on 
welfare, or UIC (Unemployment Insurance Commission), or 
out of the province.  Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't think this 
amount of money, 4.4, warranted a full-scale, four-minister 
press conference.  However I do think the amount, no matter 
what, will be welcome. 
 
And I'm not here to criticize the government for the amount 
of money.  That's their decision, and we're under constraints, 
and we'll accept that.  But I wonder, are we approaching the 
problem from the right end?  We're fixing the result and not 
the cause.  And I most sincerely hope that the lion's share of 
the money doesn't go toward the formation of another 
branch of bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Children's Advocate is important but I hope it doesn't 
take up the lion's share in salaries paid to patronage 
appointees, Mr. Speaker.  That would be unfortunate.  Mr. 
Speaker, the children are important and I hope they will 
benefit through the expanded programs.  Unfortunately, at 
first glance, this money seems to be spread too thin over too 
many areas.  However, Mr. Speaker, I will stop short of 
criticism and wait to see how well it works.  Perhaps we'll 
see it 

in estimates and perhaps we'll be able to congratulate the 
government further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year is the Year of the Family.  Today I'd 
like to mention a few things about families.  It is my hope, 
Mr. Speaker, that the government will take seriously some 
ideas that we have on this side of the House in regard to 
maintenance enforcement.  I may be stepping into the 
portfolio of Justice, but this area does overlap and in many, 
many instances with Social Services. 
 
(1500) 
 
Single parent families often struggle unnecessarily because a 
parent has fallen behind and has, or never had, paid any 
maintenance.  Parental responsibility is important; and 
unfortunately, more often than not, Mr. Speaker, it is the 
father who is not holding up his end of the deal.  And I 
certainly don't want to sound discriminatory, Mr. Speaker, 
but the facts as we read them indicate that that is true. 
 
Many single parent families headed up by women are forced 
into bankruptcy and welfare because fathers do not take the 
financial responsibilities for their children.  And again, Mr. 
Speaker, I do not want to make wide, sweeping statements 
that all fathers are negligent, because I know that they're not. 
 
However I think it's important to help in situations where the 
family is suffering from the lack of support from one parent 
or another.  Saskatchewan maintenance enforcement has 
been extremely successful.  Mr. Speaker, I understand that 
since 1986 this office has collected in the neighbourhood of 
$50 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister's office tell us the default rate in 
1993 is still 29 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, that is still too high.  
We in this legislature must assist in this regard, all of us.  
And I encourage and applaud pilot projects such as the one 
suggested back in September . . . or December, pardon me.  
And I know we have to be very careful in its 
implementation, and I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the 
maintenance office was considering a pilot project to prevent 
individuals who fail to make child support payments from 
renewing their driver's and business and professional 
licence.  And I think this would be a good idea if it was 
conducted on a case-by-case basis. 
 
We must be careful in trying to cure the disease that we 
don't kill the patient with the medicine.  Because if we take 
the wherewithal of a father to earn money, then it's pretty 
difficult for him to make his payments.  So while we 
encourage the government to take a hard look at this, we 
also caution you to do it right. 
 
Now I understand the maintenance enforcement office has 
announced it's not going to go ahead with this pilot project, 
and perhaps it's something that will be considered in the 
future, hopefully. 
 
Mr. Speaker, statistics indicate that families are in trouble.  
Poverty -- one of the things the Premier 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

promised in the election to eliminate, one of the things he 
knew very, very well he couldn't keep, impossible.  The 
Regina food bank statistics from January to October of 1993 
show that 3,206 children used the food bank.  Mr. Speaker, 
even one is too many, but that figure is outrageous.  Just 
imagine what the provincial statistics would look like; if 
over 3,000 children were forced to use Regina's food bank 
alone, just think of what the provincial statistics would be if 
we knew them all. 
 
This topic reminds me of another broken promise, Mr. 
Speaker, a promise made by the member from Riversdale, 
the Premier now.  He promised to eliminate poverty, and 
that was in the Star-Phoenix, November 9, 1987.  Mr. 
Speaker, that was a shameful promise.  It was shameful, Mr. 
Speaker, because it was made by a man who knew full well 
it could never be fulfilled. 
 
If this budget is entitled, Delivering the Promise, where is 
the promise to eliminate poverty?  That promise has not 
been filled.  That promise has fallen by the wayside, just like 
many others that I quoted as I went along, Mr. Speaker.  Just 
like the promise to create jobs and the promise to stimulate 
the economy, the promise to assist farmers and so on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be examining the budget more fully 
during estimates and committee meetings in days to come.  
And I look forward to questioning the ministers on many 
budgetary items and I anticipate their cooperation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we would like to know, for our own 
satisfaction, every person in Saskatchewan could ask this 
question.  When the Minister of Finance says, no cuts, no tax 
increases, no extra costs, ask yourself one question.  Is it 
going to cost me more money to live in the province of 
Saskatchewan in 1994 than it did in 1993? 
 
If you can answer that question and say no, it's not going to 
cost me any more, then the Finance minister is telling you 
the truth.  But if that answer is no, I cannot live at the same 
cost that I did in 1993, then I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that the minister was a shade less than truthful. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, we will be questioning the ministers 
a little further in committee, and as of now, I would thank 
you for the time, and I'm sure the people of Wilkie will be 
watching this budget debate very closely.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 
am pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate on the 
budget.  First of all, let me congratulate the Minister of 
Finance for delivering her budget both on time and on target 
and according to the government's balanced-budget plan. 
 
Before I get into the main part of my speech, I would just 
like to respond to a few things that the member 

from Wilkie was saying in his remarks.  The member from 
Wilkie indicated that the Minister of Finance had said there 
would be no increases.  And I would refer him to page 18 of 
the budget speech -- if he would want to read that -- and he 
would read in the first few paragraphs there where the 
minister clearly says there's: 
 

 no increase in the gas tax; no increase in personal income 
tax; and, no increase in the sales tax. 

 
And that's exactly what this government is delivering. 
 
A few other things that the member from Wilkie was saying 
that I think deserve a rebuttal.  He indicated that this 
government said -- this party said -- that they would live 
with $4.5 billion on the budget on the expenditure side.  
Well I would like to suggest to the member from Wilkie that 
we are living on $4.2 billion, and if he would take the time 
to turn to page 59 in the budget book, he would see that we 
are spending $4.2 billion on the operations of the province 
of Saskatchewan.  Unfortunately however we have to spend 
$850 million on interest charges on a debt that his 
government, when he was in the government benches, ran 
up over the nine and a half years that they were in 
government; but we are living within the $4.5 billion we 
said we would live within. 
 
On the utility side, the member from Wilkie indicates that 
the utility costs in Saskatchewan are way out of line; they're 
sky-rocketing.  Again I refer him to page 52 of the budget 
speech, where he can look for himself and see very clearly 
that in the $25,000 income bracket for a family, we have the 
lowest utility rates in all of Canada.  And if he looks beyond 
to the $50,000, the $75,000, he will see that we compare 
very favourably with the other provinces in Canada.  The 
only provinces that have excessive utility charges are the 
provinces that are governed by Liberal governments today. 
 
The one last thing that I want to correct that the member 
from Wilkie said -- and this requires a little bit of a lesson in 
mathematics but I'm sure that the member from 
Souris-Cannington will convey this message to his 
colleagues -- that last year we announced a 10 per cent 
deficit surtax on the people of Saskatchewan on their income 
tax but it was only implemented for half a year. 
 
Now for most people in Saskatchewan that was a fairly 
simple piece of arithmetic -- that one half of 10 per cent is 5 
per cent for 1993.  And this year, since it's implemented for 
the full year, obviously it is going to be the full 10 per cent.  
It's a simple exercise in arithmetic, and if they would take 
the time to do that arithmetic, they wouldn't be making these 
outrageous statements in the legislature, saying that we 
raised the surtax from 5 to 10 per cent.  It simply isn't a fact. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to go on to the main text 
of what I want to say here this afternoon.  This government, 
working together with the people of Saskatchewan, will 
accomplish the goals we have set 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
for ourselves. 
 
Since 1991 our government has taken some difficult 
decisions to solve the problems created by the Leader of the 
Opposition and his colleagues across the floor, but the 
results of the decisions we've made have given 
Saskatchewan a much-improved financial position.  Our 
balanced-budget plan is on target and our economy is 
growing.  And while we're clearly not out of the woods yet, 
the choices we face this year are nowhere near as difficult as 
they were in previous years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to start by thanking each and every 
resident of Saskatchewan.  Deficit reduction is not easy; we 
all know that and we thank the people of Saskatchewan for 
sticking with us and cooperating with us in this deficit 
reduction process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Now it's not only the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan that we need to have on our side; we also 
have to convince the investment bankers and the bond 
dealers that Saskatchewan's future is bright.  And over the 
past two years the people who evaluate our numbers and our 
future prospects are quite impressed that the people of this 
province have supported and lived with some very difficult 
choices. 
 
It's important to remember how far we have come.  When 
we took office in 1991, we faced the highest per capita debt 
in Canada.  The projected operating deficit that year, 
1991-92, was $1.3 billion.  That simply means that in one 
year the government was spending $1.3 billion more than it 
was collecting in revenue.  In less than a decade 
Saskatchewan fell from one of the strongest financial 
positions in the country to one of the weakest. 
 
Let's just put this into perspective.  Today every cent of the 
sales tax and almost half of the gasoline tax collected goes to 
pay the interest on the public debt.  Instead of giving this 
money to the money lenders, we would much rather be 
spending it in Saskatchewan on economic growth and on 
services to people. 
 
A proud history of balanced budgets under the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP was 
replaced by 10 consecutive deficit budgets in the 1980s.  A 
history of pragmatic cooperative approaches to economic 
development was replaced by lopsided deals for 
megaprojects and for big business. 
 
A history of compassionate policies for the less fortunate 
was replaced by a philosophy of every man and woman for 
themselves.  These practices of the 1980s were at odds with 
our Saskatchewan traditions.  Our goal is to restore those 
Saskatchewan traditions -- traditions of financial integrity, of 
community-based decision making, and a compassion for 
the less fortunate in our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has devised appropriate 
strategies to address our problems -- strategies which are 
consistent with our traditions.  One of these 

 strategies is a four-year, balanced-budget plan.  And as the 
1994-95 budget shows, this plan is right on track. 
 
We met our deficit target for '93-94, and with continued 
effort and determination we will introduce a balanced budget 
in 1996.  This will be the first balanced budget in 
Saskatchewan for 15 years.  Our economic plans are also 
showing results.  Small businesses and cooperatives are the 
main engines of economic growth and job creation in this 
province -- not the megaprojects of the '80s.  Our approach 
is based on the recognition of this reality. 
 
Our approach builds partnership among communities, local 
businesses, and cooperatives.  And already we can see some 
of the positive results.  We predicted that the provincial 
economy would grow by 2.8 per cent in 1993.  In the first 11 
months of 1993 manufacturing shipments rose by 6 per cent, 
retail sales went up by 5.7 per cent, and wholesale trade 
increased by 10.4 per cent. 
 
And our prospects for future economic growth are just as 
hopeful.  We can look forward to consistent, steady growth 
in all the key areas of our economy.  As the minister 
responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation, I am 
pleased that the Crown corporation sector will make a 
significant contribution to the growth of the Saskatchewan 
economy in 1994-95. 
 
(1515) 
 
Of the more than $700 million the government will spend on 
capital projects this year -- $140 million increase over last 
year, incidentally -- $517 million will be spent by the Crown 
corporations on capital projects.  It is important to note that 
this is all provincial money.  And I'd like to reinforce the 
fact that the Crown corporations sector will not be 
participating in the federal-provincial infrastructure 
program. 
 
Crown corporations capital expenditures are estimated to 
increase by 19 per cent in 1994-95.  I'd just like to give you 
some of the highlights of some of these expenditures. 
 
There was a major plant expansion project in the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation; system 
modernization by SaskTel in northern Saskatchewan; the 
expansion of SaskTel services to its customers; and several 
million dollars will be spent by SaskEnergy on the 
expansion of their system and also upgrading their system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, capital spending by the Crown corporations 
results in economic activity throughout the province -- 
economic activity that sustains our rural economy and 
creates well-paid jobs in the construction industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a comprehensive plan for health 
care.  While other provinces hack and slash at rising health 
care costs, we have been working with the Saskatchewan 
people to change our system for the better.  We have 
changed it by bringing in decision 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

making to the community level, where it rightfully belongs.  
We have provided funding directly to established district 
health boards by redirecting our precious resources away 
from expensive institutional acute care and toward 
community-based home care; and by focusing on prevention 
of disease rather than merely treating illness. 
 
Our goal is to ensure a quality, affordable, publicly funded 
health system for ourselves and for our children.  We have 
been adamant that despite our difficult financial 
circumstances, care is taken to ensure that adequate safety 
nets are in place for those most vulnerable in our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to discuss for a moment our long-term 
financial plan.  The first part of this plan was to open the 
books of Saskatchewan.  In the 1980s the previous 
administration formed secret corporations which invested 
millions of taxpayers' dollars in questionable projects.  The 
activities of these corporations were not even reported to the 
legislature.  This has changed dramatically.  As my 
colleague the Minister of Finance reported on February 17, 
our government is now very open and accountable. 
 
And I'll give you some examples.  Annual reports from all 
Crown corporations have now been presented to the 
legislature. A mid-year financial report is published to let 
people know the financial status of the province midway 
through the fiscal year. Summary financial statements are 
prepared each year to give a total picture of the province's 
financial situation. 
 
Our plan also entailed renegotiating the megadeals of the 
previous administration.  These deals were another very 
serious threat to our financial viability.  They meant that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers were facing serious future risks.  To 
date, new deals have been negotiated with the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
Crown Life, just to name a few.  And progress is being made 
on many other fronts. 
 
Altogether, so far in our two and a half years of government, 
we have reduced taxpayer exposure by $407 million on loan 
guarantees to large corporations. 
 
We have also taken write-downs in some of these projects, 
so that their true value is reflected on the province's books.  
And while there remains the potential for future problems in 
this area, we are in a much more solid position than we were 
two and a half years ago. 
 
A final part of our financial plan is the balanced-budget 
plan.  Last year we announced a four-year strategy to end 
deficits by 1996.  The plan was based on realistic projections 
about economic growth.  It set out deficit targets for each 
year.  The plan involved difficult choices and sacrifices. 
 
The third-party funding levels announced last year for 
1994-95 were confirmed in the minister's budget speech.  It 
was also confirmed that this is the last year 

third parties will have to make do with less money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've spoken of difficult choices and the 
sacrifices we've had to make as a result, but what about the 
benefits of these difficult choices?  As we gradually turn this 
province around the benefits will become more apparent and 
the budget we're debating now provides ample evidence of 
this.  We passed our 1993-94 operating deficit target by 
coming in $2 million below the projected figure.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, the 1994-95 projected operating deficit will be 
achieved without tax increases or further major program 
cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget provides financial support for key 
areas of the economy and society, for jobs, for economic 
development, for support to health care, and support for 
families.  We have heard the message from Saskatchewan 
people.  Further taxation would impose serious hardships.  
And that message has been front and centre in our decision 
making for this year's budget. 
 
Others outside the province are also recognizing our 
progress.  In its review of all provincial budgets last year, 
Salomon Brothers in New York, a New York financial 
agency, said this about Saskatchewan: 
 

 The province most beleaguered by the rating agencies is 
also the one with the most impressive attempt to attack its 
fiscal problems. 

 
Nesbitt Thomson, a Toronto financial agency, has added: 
 

 While all Canadian provinces face similar problems of 
large deficits and debt loads as well as high taxes, 
Saskatchewan is demonstrating leadership in finding and 
implementing solutions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are on the road to recovery.  Already we 
have come a remarkable distance.  When we came to office 
-- as I said earlier -- we inherited a projected deficit, annual 
deficit, of $1.3 billion.  In our first 18 months we brought 
that down to 592 million; the 1993-94 budget we reduced it 
to 294 million; and 1994-95 the operating deficit will be 
reduced to 189 million.  That's more than a billion-dollar 
turnaround in three years. 
 
But we still have difficult challenges ahead.  There are 
always unforeseen circumstances which can develop.  The 
impact of the federal government's budgetary 
announcements today have to be factored into our plan.  As 
well we have large loan guarantee exposures on one or two 
financially troubled megaprojects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we have a plan to balance the budget we 
are always open to ideas about how to improve it, just as we 
are about all our plans for the future -- whether it be in 
health, agriculture, or economic development.  Accordingly 
I welcome suggestions and comments from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan for ways in which we can improve these plans 
for the future, to further increase the 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
efficiency of government, to enhance program delivery, and 
to streamline our operations. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, this government believes in the 
need for strong leadership.  But it also believes in the 
necessity of listening and responding to the concerns of the 
people of Saskatchewan.  With this budget we have 
responded in a positive way; responded with a realistic and 
workable plan to reduce operating deficits and balance the 
budget.  We have responded with an economic development 
plan that is expected to add 5,000 jobs to our economy this 
year.  We have responded with more support for children, 
families, and communities; and responded with funding to 
improve the level of community-based health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I will be voting in 
support of this budget and I congratulate and thank the 
people of Saskatchewan for supporting this government in 
its many difficult choices. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very happy to 
enter the budget speech debate at this point.  Mr. Speaker, I 
want to look a bit further in the future perhaps than other 
members have done because I believe that is what this 
budget is all about.  It is about the future for Saskatchewan 
people and most particularly for the children of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In six years and ten months, minus one week, we will enter 
the new millennium, Mr. Speaker.  Not just the new century, 
but the next thousand years. 
 
Now I'm not predicting the apocalypse or anything, and I 
don't plan on climbing the nearest hill and wait to be carried 
off in the rush of a mighty wind.  But I do believe that 
something that happens only once every thousand years 
should at least give us pause.  I think we want to consider 
very carefully just how we're going to go through the doors 
into the new era of the new century and the new millennium. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, appropriately enough and for good or for 
ill, as we approach the year 2000, we are in the midst of a 
revolution -- a revolution whose significance we're only just 
beginning to understand in communications, in technology, 
in global trade, and so on. 
 
Again, for good or for ill, the world is becoming 
increasingly unrecognizable, especially if we continue to use 
the same tools, the same rhetoric, the same narrow 
partisanship as we prepare ourselves for the coming 
millennium.  We do not, Mr. Speaker, enter the information 
highway using only a quill pen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this budget plan and the 
government plan outlined in the throne speech are steps in 
the right direction.  I believe they provide us with the tools 
we need to join the revolution unencumbered by old 
attitudes and outdated 

approaches.  And because we are following the plan outlined 
in this budget, we'll be able to hit the new decade, the new 
century, the new millennium -- we'll be able to hit them 
running. 
 
And I want to talk a little bit about what I think are the 
virtues of this budget and this government's plan.  I want to 
talk a bit about the how and the why of this budget.  How it 
will position us to approach the millennium with eagerness 
and anticipation.  Why it is necessary for us to embark upon 
this journey of discovery. 
 
I'm going to quote once again, as I did last week when I 
spoke, from Marcel Proust.  He said:  the real voyage of 
discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes but in 
having new eyes.  To do that, Mr. Speaker, to look to the 
future, to its problems, its opportunities, challenges, and 
fears, it is imperative first of all to look back a bit over the 
last decade. 
 
Others have said it, and I would like to repeat that the budget 
miracle presented by the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount, the billion-dollar turnaround, was due in no 
small measure to the sacrifice of the people of 
Saskatchewan.  I truly believe that. 
 
And yet at the same time, I don't want to be merely 
congratulatory of the people.  I want to remind them, us, me, 
that the problems of the '80s, the deficit financing, the 
out-of-control government spending, the notion of tossing 
money into the wind and hoping for a blizzard of capital 
return was the result of an unholy combination of two 
unfortunate things. 
 
First, we had a group of politicians all too willing to say 
what people wanted to hear, to promise what people wanted 
to have, to jump for the voters and then only to ask, how 
high, on the way up.  Secondly, we had a privileged 
citizenry, mostly people like me from the baby-boom 
generation, who had grown up expecting that everything was 
possible, that things would just keep on getting bigger and 
bigger, better and better. 
 
These people created in the '80s a revolution of expectations, 
like an open-mouthed, hungry lion that can never be fed 
enough; people -- the voters -- demanded more and more of 
their politicians and their political systems.  And their 
politicians promised more and more until we arrived in 1991 
at the point where Saskatchewan recognized with bell-like 
clarity that it had to do something different. 
 
An illness, a disease, an economic malaise had our province 
in a death embrace.  This malaise was caused by politicians 
trying to use old-style economic solutions to cope with the 
revolution of expectations of consumers and corporate 
interests.  The solutions, the notion that you can solve any 
problem by throwing enough money at it, the notion that 
trickle-down economic theories feed the bird in the dung 
heap just as well as the horse with his muzzle in the oat bag, 
the solutions that centred on sexy, big megaprojects and 
big-business might, those solutions ran smack dab into the 
brick wall of reality. 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

The brick wall of change, the poverty and the deficits, 
created by old-style solutions for new-age problems.  For we 
are indeed, Mr. Speaker, in a new age.  An age of increasing 
technology.  An information age.  An age of globalization 
and transnational companies.  An age where the concepts of 
national sovereignty are being increasingly challenged and 
negated.  An age potentially of tribal anarchy. 
 
The debt and the deficit this government inherited from the 
previous administration is the result of simply trying to 
throw money irresponsibly and without plan at problems.  
The result of trying to woo voters with their own 30 pieces 
of silver. 
 
I said earlier on, Mr. Speaker, that the problem we've been 
dealing with in the past three budgets -- the problem of the 
deficit -- was the result of an unfortunate combination of 
voter expectations, politicians' eagerness to please, and stale, 
dated economic theories.  Luckily, the people of this 
province, and the New Democratic Party, realized the 
sterility of this economic approach early on.  We realized 
that we had to pull back from the edge of the cliff.  We 
recognized that our roots, our values, were deep and were 
planted firmly in the good old Saskatchewan soil. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we reaffirmed what any good social 
democratic knows -- thrift, good old-fashioned thrift is a 
socialist virtue.  We've always known that the underlying 
rationale for Tories and Liberals is their belief that 
governments are wasteful and inefficient.  While they're in 
power, it seems, they do their best to prove that that is so.  
And their best, as Saskatchewan became painfully aware, is 
sometimes overwhelmingly wonderful -- $12 billion in debt, 
$1.2 billion operating deficit. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, as New Democrats we 
believe that good government is probably the only lever of 
power that most Canadians will ever pull.  We have an 
enormous stake in being prudent, thrifty managers.  
Socialists simply cannot afford to be spendthrifts for we 
know all too keenly that there's nothing a money lender 
loves more than a socialist government at its mercy. 
 
(1530) 
 
And so, in tough times we made the tough choices.  We 
moved to protect the basic financial integrity of this 
province.  We worked to keep, or in some few instances to 
enhance, the good programs that dealt with the real needs of 
the people of this province. 
 
We listened to the people when they said, enough; we 
listened when the people said they were tired of having their 
left pocket picked just so that their right pocket could feel 
full; we listened to people's genuine fear and anxiety about 
out-of-control government spending. 
 
And we did more than listen; we did something about it.  We 
started on a careful, considered program of 

deficit reduction, slowly at first, to give people and 
businesses time to adjust; gradually picking up speed. 
Building on the virtue of thrift, building on shared values of 
community, consultation and cooperation -- the values that 
have kept this province going for the past 90 years.  Building 
on the wisdom of people, building on our social democratic 
values. 
 
I like to tell a story that Tommy Douglas used to relate about 
his early years in government.  It seems particularly 
appropriate now, as we look back in fondness at the 50th 
anniversary of the first CCF socialist government in North 
America.  It is especially timely to remember as we deal 
with this budget, a budget that positions us, like the Douglas 
government, on the verge of doing away with a deficit 
inherited from an old-line party. 
 
You know in 1944 Tommy Douglas beat the Saskatchewan 
Liberals, and he began an 18-year career as the head of 
Canada's social laboratory.  The Liberals, Tommy used to 
recall, went into that election warning the voters that if they 
let the socialist hordes in, their farms would be seized, their 
businesses would be nationalized, their homes would be 
expropriated.  Well, Tommy laughed, when we didn't do any 
of those things, they said we'd broken our promises. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today, in 1994, 50 years after the first 
election of the first socialist government in North America, 
we are not breaking our promises.  No, we're delivering our 
promises.  Make no mistake about it.  We've been dealing 
with the deficit -- successfully, I might add. We've created a 
billion-dollar turnaround in just two short years.  At the 
same time, we have also, without fanfare, without fuss, we 
have been protecting and enhancing those programs that 
fulfil our social democratic values -- our values of 
cooperation, community, compassion, economic and social 
justice. 
 
We've been doing this, Mr. Speaker, not out of our some 
blind, doctrinaire sense of self-righteousness.  No.  We've 
been doing this because we know that Saskatchewan is 
facing one of the most difficult challenges that it ever has in 
its short 90-year history.  We know that we have to have the 
foundation, the building blocks in place as we look to the 
next century.  And so, Mr. Speaker, the budget as presented 
by the member from Saskatoon Westmount is really part of a 
twofold plan. 
 
The first part, the part that most people know about already, 
is the part that deals with the deficit, the part that rights the 
excesses of the '80s.  Our challenge of course is to get the 
deficit under control, to make balanced budgets a shared 
community value so that no one -- not politicians, not 
anyone -- will ever go back to the old-style economic 
solution of throwing money into the winds of the blizzard.  
We must never let ourselves start over again on this silly, 
short-sighted, and wasteful spiral of debt. 
 
The second part though, Mr. Speaker, is the trickiest part, 
the most challenging, because that's the part that 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
focuses our government, this province, on the need to 
modernize ourselves; the changes needed to respond to the 
international forces of globalization and technology and the 
blurring of national borders. 
 
Forasmuch as most of us admit it only reluctantly, Mr. 
Speaker, we do have to modernize.  If we in Saskatchewan 
are going to survive and thrive, we have to become a real 
and meaningful part of the global village; and at the same 
time, we need to make sure that we're not deluding ourselves 
about the real nature of the global village, for it is not a 
kindly and genteel place. 
 
Most of us think, when we think at all, about a village as a 
friendly and a stable community; a place where good 
neighbours are always there to greet you, a place where the 
door's always open and coffee pot is always on.  But the real 
global village that we're seeing isn't kind and gentle at all.  
Instead it's a huge and scary megalopolis full of a few 
mansions for the rich and many slums for the poor; full of 
streets overflowing with squalid factories and further up a 
few gleaming skyscrapers and satellite dishes. 
 
The global village, as we are now experiencing it, consists of 
many busy streets shared by a few affluent consumers, too 
many workers rushing off to part-time jobs, too many 
unemployed beggars, and a growing number of angry bandit 
soldiers. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, we're lucky here in Canada.  
Although we may not like to admit it, we're living in the 
high rent district of this global village.  But if we're not 
careful, we'll move into the slums.  So we cannot blindly 
resist the push and pull of the global village.  We can't resist 
change no matter how much we dislike it.  We have to take 
stock right now from the comparative comfort of our 
insulated and isolated position.  As we observe the coming 
anarchy all around us in this planet, we have to take stock of 
who we are in Saskatchewan, of what we are, where we are, 
and why we are. 
 
We have advantages, Mr. Speaker, and we have to recognize 
these competitive advantages in the global village and plan 
for the future.  That's the second part of this budget -- the 
plan to position our province to be able to cope, to survive, 
to thrive with the changes that none of us like, that all of us 
know are coming. 
 
So consequently, new directions, new ways of looking at the 
landscape with new and fresh eyes are needed.  We need to 
renew Saskatchewan society and economy in all areas.  We 
need to do this with a sense of social democratic principles.  
We need to look at key aspects of life here in our little 
corner of this global village and build on our collective 
strengths. 
 
I'm talking here about how we respond to things like health 
care, the economy, agriculture, aboriginal relations, labour, 
and, most importantly, in the way we create opportunities 
and hope for children. 
 
We respond, as I've said earlier, by culling some of the easy 
rhetoric and pruning some of the divisive 

 attitudes that have characterized political debate for 
generations.  Then we can examine the set of values we 
supposedly operate on and decide if they're still relevant. 
 
Old solutions and old prejudices simply won't work.  Our 
challenge is to change them but to hold onto the timeless 
values and principles which have guided us from the 
beginning, even though sometimes we may occasionally lose 
sight of them.  The thing to remember, it seems to me, is that 
tactics are different from principles.  The one changes with 
the times; the other doesn't need to change at all. 
 
Also, it seems to me in Saskatchewan the commonly held 
principles are social democratic ones: compassion, 
cooperation, community, economic fairness, and social 
justice.  The difference in tactics, I think, is that now this 
government is using those principles and having them 
bubbling up from the bottom, not drifting down from the 
top.  As the Minister of Finance said, the people are leading 
this parade.  The government is simply playing the bass 
drum. 
 
In health, with the wellness model for instance, the 30 health 
boards are making their own decisions based on their own 
needs assessments.  Perhaps that's risky for politicians 
because we're not as in control as we might like.  But you 
can't pay lip service to community control and dictate at the 
same time. 
 
The main difference between the NDP government of today 
and those before us is simply that we are moving away from 
the comfort of centralized decision making.  If human nature 
is to be trusted, as we are always saying, we must give it the 
means to express itself. 
 
The same tactic cuts across the board for this government.  
In economic development we're creating the climate for 
communities to generate wealth.  We've moved beyond 
merely thinking about redistributing wealth.  We have 
REDAs (regional economic development authorities) who, 
like the health boards, understand their individual 
communities and what will work.  We are simply providing 
the assistance, when asked, to drop-kick them into the global 
economy, into areas such as eco-tourism and high 
technology. 
 
Saskatchewan's economy, even more than most, depends on 
international trade, and we're providing incentives and 
examples for traders to think globally.  It shouldn't be too 
difficult a task after all, merely a matter of encouraging a 
mind shift, a change in attitude, a change in the way we see 
things. 
 
For instance, how many people would believe that 
Saskatchewan, our little land-locked province, is already a 
major transnational trader.  In our province, 40 cents out of 
every dollar of our GDP (gross domestic product) comes 
from foreign markets.  One in three jobs -- a ratio higher 
than anywhere in Canada -- one in three is directly 
attributable to international sales. 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

Now so far those sales have been primarily bulk sales -- big 
boxcars of grain and so on. 
 
But what would happen, Mr. Speaker, if our already existing 
international traders, our farmers, started talking directly to 
their customers?  What would happen if they beefed up their 
marketing skills?  What would happen if they learned to read 
the market signals a little more clearly?  What would happen 
if they built on our great public educational system and 
learned how to speak the international trading languages of 
the world? 
 
(1545) 
 
We already have an excellent example -- look at SaskTel.  
The Douglas government knew very well that the Bell 
telephone monopoly was hardly likely to be interested in the 
needs and concerns of rural Saskatchewan.  So consequently 
we created our own telephone company.  But more than that, 
Mr. Speaker, when our current Premier realized that 
deregulation was coming in in the telephone industry, he 
moved prudently and aggressively to give us a competitive 
advantage and to create SaskTel International, a scrappy 
little company out-battling the big boys of the world in 
India, Indo-china, and England -- and doing it successfully.  
Saskatchewan's very own transnational company. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a great example of new, social 
democratic thinking and responses to the problems we 
anticipate for the future.  We have to, we will, stop looking 
internally.  We need to look outwards as well. 
 
The same tactic of looking for new solutions applies to the 
children's action plan, to our aboriginal self-government 
initiatives, and to agriculture.  We're looking at 
decentralization, community involvement, and cooperation.  
The children's action plan will cut across and into 
bureaucracies to create compassion, hope, and social justice 
for the most important people of this province. 
 
In agriculture we will encourage diversification and proper 
international marketing to encourage initiative and effort 
from farmers.  We will strengthen our opportunities for 
value added processing and we'll do this by seeing ourselves 
as winners, not beggars, in the strategies for the 21st 
century. 
 
For instance, Mr. Speaker, let's take a look at something 
we're already doing very well and let's do it even better.  Not 
many people in this province know that we're the 
lowest-cost producer of pork in North America.  We sold 3 
million hogs last year at prices competitive even with 
Mexico. 
 
Curiously, we produced only 1 million hogs.  We had to buy 
the balance from Ontario and Alberta and Manitoba.  And 
even then we were still able to sell them successfully.  The 
reason?  Because we have a natural advantage here in 
Saskatchewan.  We have access to feed, land, technology, 
genetics, and research capabilities.  We are a success in this 
area and we can build on our success to be even better.  It's 

not true that we have to fear the future. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention briefly our proposed 
labour legislation.  In my remarks today, I have been 
focusing on the budget and how it puts the key building 
blocks in place for us to approach the changes of the future 
with calm assurance. 
 
Our labour legislation will be pivotal in this task.  It is only 
if we have a secure and stable workforce where both 
business and labour recognize that they have the same goals, 
that we will be able to position Saskatchewan for the 21st 
century. 
 
Our labour legislation changes, occupational health and 
safety, Workers' Compensation Board changes, Labour 
Standards Act amendments, and finally, Trade Union Act 
will provide a comprehensive package to help Saskatchewan 
build on one of its greatest strengths -- the reputation of its 
hard-working, dedicated labour force.  They have initiative, 
ambition, and a collective sense of purpose.  The workers of 
our province will be strong and able to meet the demands of 
continentalism and globalization. 
 
In conclusion, all government speakers in these two debates 
always return to two basic themes, two basic and crucial 
themes.  One, we have to fix the deficit and debt problem, 
because it is choking us.  It was created by old-style thinking 
and would have resigned us to the historical dustbin if it had 
not been tackled.  Step one is being done. 
 
Two.  Step one is just that -- a step towards what we really 
want to accomplish. That, quite simply, is the creation of a 
society, a sustainable society, built on the endurable 
principles I mentioned earlier.  In order to approach that day, 
we have to create the infrastructure which will allow 
Saskatchewan to survive and thrive in the future. 
 
We can't just sit back and watch the 21st century come in 
like a tidal wave.  We have to meet it head on, openly, 
enthusiastically.  To do that, we have to look beyond our 
own provincial and national borders.  We have to 
concentrate on what we do best, exploit our natural 
advantages, and push like crazy.  We have the educational, 
research, and technological base.  We have the ability to 
generate prosperity in the new age.  We have the ethical 
foundation, based on our history, not to lose sight of why we 
are doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps Saskatchewan's greatest writer, 
Sinclair Ross, would be the appropriate person to quote from 
at this time.  One of his most memorable phrases in one of 
his most memorable novels is a very plain and profound one.  
One character tells another: "You've got to learn to read the 
signals.  Read them wrong and you perish.  Read them right 
and you survive." 
 
That advice, I think, captures the Saskatchewan spirit, the 
Saskatchewan way.  If we read the signals wrong, we end up 
with a $15 billion consequence.  If we read them right, as I 
believe we have done in this budget 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
and this throne speech, then we have a better-than-even 
chance of marching into the millennium with our heads high.  
In this world, a better-than-even chance is pretty good odds. 
 
I enthusiastically support this budget.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to say 
that I believe this budget confirms that the government's 
plan of fiscal management is working very well.  Our deficit 
reduction is exactly on target.  For all the reasons that have 
been expressed by my colleagues on this side of the House, I 
believe the government is clearly on the right track.  I will 
be very happy and proud to support this budget when it 
comes to a vote. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is with 
great pride that I enter into this debate, the debate on the 
budget speech.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to start out by 
congratulating our Minister of Finance on the very fine 
delivery of that budget speech and to thank her, and also to 
thank the former minister of Finance, to thank the Premier, 
the cabinet, and all of my government colleagues for the fine 
job of tackling a very tough situation. 
 
A little over two years ago when we took over the 
Government of Saskatchewan, a situation of a $1.3 billion 
deficit, and in just shortly over two years wrestling that to a 
deficit of $189 million -- a billion-dollar turnaround, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, one that I think we can all be very, very 
proud of. 
 
But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we have to give a lot of 
credit -- in fact, Mr. Speaker, all the credit -- to the fine 
people of Saskatchewan who through their determination 
saw this come into being. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, our government set forth a 
plan early in our term, a plan to reduce the deficit, to get the 
deficit under control so that we can regain financial freedom 
for Saskatchewan people.  I'm very proud, Mr. Speaker, that 
in this budget speech it shows that we kept our promise, the 
promise of meeting the deficit reduction targets, the promise 
of no major program cuts, and the promise of no new taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think in the short time that we've been in 
power, a tremendous job has been done on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Of course, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure everyone 
has an idea of the method that was used to tackle the deficit, 
but our method was a method of 

fairness, of honesty, and open government -- something 
Saskatchewan hadn't seen, Mr. Speaker, in a number of 
years. 
 
A common sense approach to financial management was the 
hallmark of the plan of this government in rebuilding 
Saskatchewan's economy -- common sense approach to 
fiscal management using the little things, using the principle, 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, that you watch the pennies and the 
dollars will take care of themselves. 
 
And some of the examples of that, Mr. Speaker, is cutting 
over $18 million out of the day-to-day operations of 
government.  One way of doing that, Mr. Speaker, was 
sending out little stickers for our health cards rather than 
brand-new cards. So those stickers could be applied to the 
health card and the health card could continue to be used, 
saving Saskatchewan taxpayers over $200,000. 
 
I also want to compliment the Minister of Highways in 
showing leadership in cutting down the costs of operating 
his department by simply using the signs, highway signs, for 
two years longer, saving over $12 million for Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the ways of turning the problem 
around in Saskatchewan.  And I'm very proud to say that our 
government has taken a leadership role in that. 
 
But open and honest government, Mr. Speaker, is something 
that Saskatchewan hasn't seen for some time, and something 
that we are re-establishing in this province -- open and 
honest government, making it available to the people. 
 
And I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that in the Provincial 
Auditor's report, in 1991-92 annual report, he stated that the 
government moved from providing what the Financial 
Management Review Commission viewed as the weakest 
and least useful financial statements in Canada to providing 
one of the most useful financial statements issued by any 
senior government in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, that is the 
beginnings of returning integrity and honesty to government.  
And I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, we are leading the way. 
 
As our budget has indicated, Mr. Speaker, that there have 
been very positive signs of the turnaround in the 
Saskatchewan economy.  It hasn't happened fast and it isn't 
going to happen fast.  But everybody knows in 
Saskatchewan, anything worth having takes time to acquire.  
And that, Mr. Speaker, is indicated in the Conference Board 
of Canada's estimate that our economy has grown faster than 
the national average, than the national economy has. 
 
In the first 11 months of last year manufacturing shipments 
rose 6 per cent here in Saskatchewan. 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

Retail sales have gone up 5.7 per cent and wholesale sales 
are up over 10 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, that is a clear 
turnaround in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
This didn't happen by accident.  It was a part of a plan, part 
of a plan put forward by our government, part of a plan of 
partnership of renewal. Provide the pillars of strength in our 
economy, the pillars of growth so that we can once again 
have a provincial economy that for the first time in a large 
number of years, 12 or 15 years, will once again offer the 
young in this province a province of opportunity and a 
province of prosperity. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, has to be the ultimate goal of all of us in 
this great House, is providing a climate, an economic 
climate, an economy where the young people of 
Saskatchewan will be able to stay here, build their homes 
here, raise their families here, and be a part of a province 
that offers them that hope and offers them the opportunity to 
prosperity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, as a farmer from the Pelly 
constituency . . . and my constituency primarily, Mr. 
Speaker, is made up of agriculture. And we all have 
experienced and have a vast knowledge of the tremendous 
financial pressures that agriculture has been under over the 
last number of years. 
 
But I'm proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that some 10 or 12 years 
ago when I would drive through the countryside in my 
constituency, I would look on either side of the grid roads 
that I drove through and I would see miles and miles of acres 
and acres of golden wheat.  And, Mr. Speaker, in those days 
wheat was king, and wheat was of good financial return to 
the farmer. 
 
But as we've seen agriculture change over the last number of 
years, we've seen greater global pressures, and we've seen a 
lot of changes that have affected agriculture directly.  No 
longer, Mr. Speaker, can we in Pelly constituency and in 
rural Saskatchewan sit back and rely on the production of 
wheat, barley, and canola as a sole means of revenue for our 
farming operations. 
 
The international market-place has changed.  The demands 
of the international market-place have changed.  And with 
that, Mr. Speaker, we have to change too.  And I'm proud, 
Mr. Speaker, to say that the Saskatchewan farmer has taken 
up that challenge of change and you can see that today as 
you drive through the countryside, a countryside that today 
looks like a patchwork quilt. 
 
For yes, you continue to see wheat production, but now you 
see canola, peas, lentils, and numerous of  other crops, that 
farmers have taken their farming operations and diversified 
them into the matching and meeting the needs and the 
demands of the international market-place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, change is about -- and I think that 

probably we're going to see change a lot faster now than 
we've ever seen it in the past.  And the name escapes me, 
Mr. Speaker, but there was a professor from McGill 
University a few years ago suggested that the amount of 
change that we've seen in our world in the last 100 years, we 
will see that much change again in the next 10. 
 
And if you look at, Mr. Speaker, what has happened, 
particularly in the technology of communications, I believe 
that could very well be a reality.  For 15 or 20 years ago 
much of the world was days if not weeks or perhaps even 
months away from us; but now, Mr. Speaker, any place in 
the world is only seconds away, either through a telephone, 
long-distance telephone call, through a fax, computer 
modem transmissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 20 years ago if you would have told me as an 
individual that I would be able to sit in my living-room in 
front of my TV and watch the Olympics taking place 
halfways around the world and be able to watch the events 
of those Olympics instantaneously via satellite 
communications, well, Mr. Speaker, I would have probably 
suggested you were smoking something. 
 
But those are the changes that we have seen in our society 
and those are the changes we have seen in communications.  
Those are the changes that we have seen in our economy.  
And, Mr. Speaker, we're in a situation where we must 
change with the times in order to stay with those times.  And 
agriculture will play a part of that change, and our 
Agriculture minister and his department has recognized that 
and they have laid out for us a road map for agriculture.  
That road map is called Agriculture 2000, and that 
emphasizes the strengths of Saskatchewan agriculture.  It 
emphasizes the stability, the growth, and the diversification 
of our industry. 
 
To match that change and to meet the challenges of the 
future, our budget contains some agriculture programs to 
support the new and growing concept here in Saskatchewan, 
and that's the concept of value adding to agriculture 
products.  And I'm proud, Mr. Speaker, that our government 
was able to put $20 million in a program over the next four 
years, a program called agriculture-food equity fund that 
will provide and help assist and search out new markets for 
Saskatchewan agriculture products, assist new export 
markets for Saskatchewan products and Saskatchewan 
economy, and in turn, Mr. Speaker, will create jobs here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud that in my constituency, a 
group of individuals who have the foresight, who are 
progressive individuals, who've seen these changes coming, 
were able to get in on the change and institute a value added 
project in my constituency -- and of course, Mr. Speaker, I'm 
referring to Norquay alfalfa processing plant at Norquay, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It was five years in getting up and running, Mr. Speaker, and 
the group that was in charge of it and worked hard at getting 
all the . . . jumping through all 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
the required hoops and putting all the funding in place, 
received a tremendous amount of support from the local 
community, the support not only verbally, Mr. Speaker, but 
financially.  They were able to raise over $1 million from 
local investments. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, they were able to attract 
funding from the aboriginal communities; the two Indian 
reserves close to Norquay, the Key Indian Band and the 
Cote Indian Band, formed Thunderhill Investments 
Corporation and invested in that project. 
 
The only stumbling block at that time, Mr. Speaker, was the 
provincial Conservative government who refused to assist 
getting that project off the ground in any manner, shape, or 
form.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, when the Norquay group would 
approach SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic and 
Development Corporation) at the time, they would get the 
pleasant reception but nothing but a run-around. 
 
And I'm proud, Mr. Speaker, to say that it was after our 
government took over power in October that the due 
diligence was done, that the project was looked at from a 
common sense point of view.  It was seen quite clearly that 
it was a viable project and a project that we supported to a 
tune of $1.8 million in a SEDCO loan. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, created the bridge financing so that the 
group could construct their plant and get it up producing a 
product.  Construction started on March 1, Mr. Speaker, of 
1992, and on July 1 they were producing an alfalfa pellet.  
And I want to take my hat off to those people involved in 
that group for the tremendous and tireless job that they did 
in getting this project off the ground. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- But just to show the viability of the project, 
Mr. Speaker, within a year of operation, Norquay Alfalfa 
Processors Ltd. was a strong corporation, strong enough to 
stand alone in the commercial market-place.  Standing alone 
meant they were able to refinance through the Royal Bank 
their SEDCO indebtedness, and pay SEDCO back so this 
government now has the $1.8 million to support another 
project with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- And, Mr. Speaker, in the first year of 
operation of Norquay Alfalfa, their gross sales was almost 
$3 million.  Mr. Speaker, that's $3 million worth of alfalfa 
that was sold abroad, primarily in the Pacific Rim countries 
of Japan and Korea.  Mr. Speaker, that was $3 million of 
new money that was brought into this province, and brought 
into the community and district of Norquay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that plant in the first year's operation harvested 
16,000 acres of alfalfa.  The payroll -- the payroll of nearly a 
million dollars, in fact it's a shade over $800,000 payroll -- 
was spent right in the Norquay community.  That project, 
Mr. Speaker, has 

created 55 jobs, of which 25 are full time.  A tremendous 
boost to that community. 
 
And the spin-off effect has benefited not only the farmers 
there, Mr. Speaker, where last year the farmers received 
$330,000 from the Norquay Alfalfa plant in return for the 
crops they produced, but the small business in Norquay and 
the surrounding community has benefited to the tune of 
$250,000 from parts and services purchased by the plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what this government is all about -- 
community-based industries that's owned and controlled by 
the community, where all the proceeds from those 
operations stay within the community and within the 
province.  Mr. Speaker, that is the key to the recovery of the 
Saskatchewan economy and a long-time survival of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that our government is 
taking a leadership role in assisting the beef industry in this 
province to further develop: through establishing a beef 
industry development fund that will continue to support a 
beef industry that is not only growing, but will continue to 
grow, Mr. Speaker; to fulfil the international demands for 
quality beef -- the quality beef that we produce here in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has recognized some of the 
inequities in the crop insurance and we have made moves in 
that particular department to reinstate spot loss hail that has . 
. . many farmers have been after that for some time.  We've 
also, Mr. Speaker, made moves to -- for the first time ever -- 
to allow farmers to purchase whole-farm crop insurance 
which will enable them to insure their entire farming 
cropping patterns, and the crops produced, with reduced 
premiums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the changes that will allow now -- 
under crop insurance crops that were previously not covered 
by crop insurance -- will now be able to be covered by crop 
insurance to assist farmers in their attempts to diversify. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if -- while I have the 
opportunity to be on my feet here -- if I didn't touch on 
health care for a few moments.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we very ambitiously started the reform of health care or 
we've started the reform of the delivery system of health 
care in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 
say that our government is the only government that has 
tackled this problem; that is couched in compassion and 
understanding; with the overall intentions of being able to 
provide the best possible health care services to the people 
of Saskatchewan while yet controlling it and keeping it as a 
publicly funded, publicly administrated program. 
 
Unlike other provinces, Mr. Speaker, where they have 
suggested that the way to address the health care costs is to 
privatize. 
 
We're all very much aware of what the Liberals have done in 
Nova Scotia and we're all very much aware  of what the 
Liberal leader in Alberta, Mr. Decore, has 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

suggested as a solution to their costs of medicare.  In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal suggestion in Alberta is to create a 
two-tier health care system, one for the rich and nothing for 
the poor. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we're not doing that.  And why, Mr. 
Speaker?  Because we are committed to maintaining the best 
possible, the most affordable, the most up-to-date health care 
system that is publicly funded, publicly administrated, that 
will allow all people fair and equal access to it regardless of 
their ability to pay.  That, Mr. Speaker, is not what the case 
is in other Liberal governments and Conservative 
governments.  What they want to see is Americanization of 
health care. 
 
(1615) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few moments to 
relate a little story that I had the opportunity of being 
involved in this fall.  Mr. Speaker, I had the rather wet 
harvest conditions this fall in my particular part of the 
constituency and on my farm, so I needed some extra 
assistance to get the crop off.  So I hired an American 
custom combiner to give me a hand.  And he was from 
Cedar Vale, Kansas; Lorne and Mary Jane Sweaney were 
the owners and operators.  Mr. Speaker, Lorne is 58 years of 
age and has never had any serious medical problems -- a 
touch of asthma but nothing more serious than that.  And 
Mary Jane is 56 and again has had no great medical problem 
except with a little bit of high blood pressure problem. 
 
But I had the opportunity to talk to them about their medical 
system, and I was, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker,  horrified to 
find out that they are carrying a private medical insurance 
for the two of them.  Their premiums, their premiums that 
they're paying for that medical insurance, is $800 a month.  
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it's $800 a month is their health 
care premiums.  And that insurance only covers them for 80 
per cent of their doctor costs and 80 per cent of their hospital 
costs.  They have a 20 per cent deductible on top of an 
$800-a-month premium.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is what the 
Liberal and Conservative Party of Saskatchewan would like 
to have here. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I even opened my eyes a little 
more when on this very same topic I had the opportunity to 
talk to one of the gentlemen that works for him, a gentleman 
by the name of Larry Albert. 
 
Larry is 48 years of age and three years ago when he was 45, 
Mr. Speaker, he had a heart attack.  He spent 14 days in a 
hospital in Wichita, Kansas and that visit to the hospital cost 
him $28,000.  He was fortunate, Mr. Speaker, at that time he 
too was carrying a medical insurance that covered him for 
80 per cent of those costs. 
 
But at the end of the year when it came time to renew his 
health insurance he found out that the company had put a 
rider on his policy that his heart was no longer covered.  So 
since he couldn't receive coverage for the situation and the 
condition that was troubling him the most he simply dropped 
his insurance. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, two years ago he had a second 
heart attack.  This heart attack caused him to be in the 
hospital nearly three weeks and a bill followed that of 
$38,000, of which quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, he is 
attempting to pay off by monthly payments to this very day. 
 
But it even gets sadder when you find out that as a result of 
this second heart attack the damage that was done to Larry's 
heart has now caused the two valves on the inside of the 
heart to leak.  One valve is leaking at an 18 per cent rate and 
the other valve is leaking at a 22 per cent rate. 
 
The doctors have told him that he needs corrective surgery 
to prevent that leakage because those valves are 
deteriorating, and as they deteriorate, it increases the 
percentage of leaking.  And the doctors have told him that if 
either one of those valves deteriorate to the point that he has 
a 33 per cent or more degree of leakage in that valve it could 
cause his death.  But that surgery, that corrective surgery 
that he requires, will cost in the U.S. (United States), at 
Wichita, Kansas, $70,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Larry is much like myself and many of 
the rest of us, he's just an ordinary guy.  He hasn't got U.S. 
medical insurance and he hasn't got $70,000.  And at 48 
years of age his options are very limited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very proud of the reforms that we are 
carrying out in this province of health care because I know 
those reforms will allow us to continue to be able to support 
a publicly funded, publicly administrated, health care system 
that will provide the services needed to all people in this 
province regardless of their ability to pay.  And that will be 
there as long as we're in power, Mr. Speaker, and as long as 
it's a New Democratic government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- And, Mr. Speaker, we're able to do all of 
these things, accomplish all these things, turn this economy 
around, and keep the promise.  Keep the promise of no 
major program cuts and no new taxes.  Mr. Speaker, I think 
that this government is on the right track and I'm proud to 
say, Mr. Speaker, spending the last week in my 
constituency, the vast majority of the people I have got in 
my constituency knows that this government's on the right 
track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of 
spending last Saturday afternoon in Kamsack, and of course 
as I usually do on Saturday afternoons, I spent a lot of time 
in the coffee shops. 
 
And I was in Toros' cafe in the mini-mall there in Kamsack 
and an old-time acquaintance of mine by the name of Harry 
Shukin came in there and ended up at the same table as 
myself.  And we were discussing the situation as it faces this 
province.  And Harry has 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
been a long-time member of this province, having been born 
in Veregin area some nearly 70 years ago and spent his 
entire life either in Veregin or at Kamsack. 
 
And Harry kept referring to the no-difference team.  And 
after he mentioned this about the third or fourth time I asked 
him what was this no-difference team.  He said: well that's 
the opposition in the Saskatchewan legislature.  There is no 
difference between the Liberals and the Conservatives. 
 
He said you can see that, Mr. Speaker, in most recent news 
events where you're seeing former Conservatives joining the 
Liberals and former Liberals joining the Conservatives.  It's 
just like our Premier has said on many occasions about the 
chickens standing in the snow bank.  The chicken stands in 
the snow bank on one foot until that foot gets cold and 
switches feet.  But at the end of the day what do you have?  
The same old chicken with cold feet.  The same old chicken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legacy that had been left in this province by 
the former Conservative government is interesting to 
compare to the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if we go back in the history of Saskatchewan, and we 
go back to the great event of 1944 and the election of the 
first socialist government, we find out at that time that 
Tommy Douglas defeated the Liberals in 1944 and inherited 
a province that was riddled with debt.  And in 1991, in 
October, when the New Democratic Party of that day 
defeated the Conservative government of that time, and 
inherited a province that is riddled with debt, that, Mr. 
Speaker, is what I mean when I say, same old chicken, only 
with cold feet. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference.  And a few days ago 
when I had the opportunity -- a brief opportunity at that -- to 
enter into the throne speech, I related at that time a story that 
my grandfather used to tell me.  My grandfather, who lived 
all his life in this province and raised his family in this 
province in the 1920s and 1930s, raised his family under 
Liberal and Conservative governments, used to dispute with 
some of his friends and neighbours when they would say 
that there was no difference between Liberals and 
Conservatives. 
 
My grandfather used to say that there was a difference -- a 
very slight difference, Mr. Speaker, but a difference.  My 
grandfather used to insist that a Conservative government 
would skin you from the top down while a Liberal 
government would skin you from the bottom up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: -- And, Mr. Speaker, they would then deliver 
that skin to the corporate sector to stretch and dry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with those wise remarks of my grandfather's 
and people like him who have buffeted 

 the storms in this province, the storms that were created by 
those parties such as the Liberals and the Conservatives, Mr. 
Speaker, I am very proud to say that we have turned the 
corner here in Saskatchewan.  The policies and the plans and 
direction put forward by our government has stopped the 
economy from nosediving into destruction, has turned it 
around and has now, Mr. Speaker . . . we can see some 
glimmer of hope and glimmer of light on the horizon that 
one day, though the road may be a bit rough between here 
and there, but one day we'll once again have financial 
freedom in this province and return Saskatchewan to its 
rightful place, a province of prosperity and a province of 
opportunity.  Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I 
support this budget speech.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to take 
part in the budget debate.  Delivering the promise is the 
theme and a very fitting theme it is.  Saskatchewan people 
were promised responsible government during the 1991 
election campaign and responsible government is what is 
and has been provided. 
 
When I listened to the budget delivered by the Minister of 
Finance, I was elated and very proud to be part of a 
government that has accomplished so much in such a short 
time.  The government deserves credit, but much of the 
credit goes to the third level of government and to all 
Saskatchewan people themselves.  They have shouldered a 
large portion of the tremendous load that we all inherited 
after the long period of confusion known as the Tory years. 
 
The people of this province have truly played their role in 
being part of the solution.  When I hear the reactionary 
responses of the Tory Party gasping for air as it goes through 
its death throes or when I hear the irresponsible right 
_wing ramblings of the third party, I cannot help but attempt 
to explain to them, that if they are not willing to be part of 
the solution, they are definitely still part of the problem. 
 
As we deal with personal as well as provincial debt -- and in 
many cases it has been a devastating debt to Saskatchewan 
families as it has been to our province -- I am reminded that 
it was the Liberal government of the day in Ottawa that 
allowed interest rates to go above 12 per cent.  I am 
convinced this move to appease their banker friends was a 
major reason for the problems that exist to this very day. 
 
I am pleased to say that the financial indicators that the 
minister drew to our attention in her speech prove that under 
her capable guidance we are in fact in a much better position 
than just two short years ago. 
 
I would like to compliment the minister on the fine job she is 
doing in the Department of Finance.  When the minister took 
over the reins from the now Deputy Premier, she had big 
shoes to fill.  Today the accomplishments of both these 
ministers have placed Saskatchewan well back on the road 
to recovery 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

We often refer to turning the corner when we talk about 
dealing with the financial planning for the province's future.  
Well I do not know if turning the corner is the correct 
description but I do know that the Tories had run 
Saskatchewan right off the road and into a very deep ditch.  
Fortunately the people of Saskatchewan knew this could not 
continue and are standing together as we get Saskatchewan 
back on the road. 
 
(1630) 
 
As I see it, it is a straight road -- straight to deficit reduction, 
straight to balanced budgets, straight to responsible 
government and, what is more important, straight with the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
When you listen to the favourable response from 
Saskatchewan people as they react to the budget address, it 
becomes very evident that Saskatchewan people are well 
aware that the Minister of Finance has the solution.  I would 
encourage every member in this House to stand in his or her 
place, when the vote on the budget is called, and support the 
minister in her efforts to provide that solution. 
 
I would encourage the official opposition to take this 
opportunity to at least partially redeem themselves for what 
they did to the people of this province in the 1980s.  As the 
member from Maple Creek is so quick to point out, he and 
some of his back-benchers are not really to blame as they 
were not part of the government in those Tory years.  Well I 
would like to offer the member from Maple Creek . . . in fact 
I would very much like to request that the member stand 
with us on this occasion and show the people of 
Saskatchewan that he realizes the problems created by his 
colleagues and now be prepared to become part of the 
solution as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess: -- The third party also has an opportunity to show 
whether they wish to be part of the solution or if they wish 
to be aligned with those that created the problem.  Not only 
in Saskatchewan but also aligned with the former Trudeau 
Liberals in Ottawa that paved the way for the high interest 
rates of the '80s that ground this province and this country to 
a halt. 
 
It will be very disappointing if after all the rhetoric about a 
new beginning from the Leader of the Liberal Party if we 
don't see her placing this province and Saskatchewan people 
ahead of political posturing for once. 
 
Yes, it would be nice to see all members in this House 
approach the financial management of this province with the 
same dedication and responsibility as the Finance minister 
and all join with the minister when she rises, to support not 
only the 1994 budget but also by doing so supports the plan 
to have Saskatchewan on the straight road once again. 
 
Fundamental principle of parliamentary government is that 
the Legislative Assembly exercises ultimatei 

control over the public's finances.  This is the principle that I 
am proud to say is being honoured by the hon. men and 
women of my government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget address promises three very 
important commitments.  To meet our deficit reduction 
targets, to create no additional program cuts, and perhaps the 
most important of all, no new taxes. 
 
I often try to imagine just what our government could do for 
the people of this province if we had the $850 million that 
we spend each and every year for interest -- for interest 
alone -- on the Tory debt.  Just imagine, more spent on 
interest on uncontrolled debt created by the previous 
government than on the amount of direct government 
salaries and operating for the entire province. 
 
Some suggest to me what should be done to the former 
leader to retaliate for what he and his advisers did to 
Saskatchewan people.  I wonder if perhaps we should not 
feel pity for him instead, when you consider that his chief 
advisers were Liberal retreads, their loyalty based on 
personal advantage, and if you care to notice, many are now 
moving back to the Liberal machine.  These former Tory 
players are much like the chameleon, as their colour changes 
just as easily. 
 
Some say that the Liberal tide is coming in.  Well if it is, it's 
bringing a lot of Tory debris.  The trash appears very 
familiar and the beach needs a major clean up. 
 
I was pleased to hear the minister say our priority is jobs, 
our plan is to act on all fronts to promote the economic 
recovery which is occurring in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the positive signs that Saskatchewan is back on 
the road, that long, straight road once again are many, as the 
Minister has outlined in her address.  But those are not the 
only signs.  Even more important signs are visible every day, 
and I encounter them as I travel about Redberry 
constituency.  People are optimistic and once again looking 
forward to a brighter future as their lives improve.  These 
signs bode well for the responsible approach of government, 
as outlined in the budget speech. 
 
Much more has to be done and much more will be done.  As 
the former premier used to say, there is so much more we 
could be.  Well if it was not for him and his recycled Liberal 
advisers, we would be out of debt, not paying over $2 
million a day in interest.  That is enough money to put a new 
school in one town in Redberry each and every day of the 
year.  Just imagine what we could do in 365 days with that 
kind of money to spend in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 
people.  Instead we are forced to tax our people to pay the 
Tory debt. 
 
My father's generation was faced with Bennett and 
Anderson governments; my generation had to cope with 
Mulroney and the member from Estevan, the former 
Conservative leader, in Saskatchewan.  Every 50 years, 
collectively, people forget, and collectively, 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
they have to reconsider and remove the Tories from office.  
However, the results are not entirely successful if they just 
move over to the Liberals, as many of the political 
opportunists have done before and appear to be doing once 
again.  Now we must make sure we don't get these same 
retreads back under another name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the response from the farming community is 
very favourable towards last week's budget.  The one item 
that really was pleasing to them -- and I have to give the new 
federal government some credit for cooperating, unlike the 
predecessors -- is spot loss hail insurance.  This is one item 
that is very important to the farmers of Redberry. 
 
Also over the next four years, $20 million will be invested in 
value added projects to strengthen rural Saskatchewan.  This 
is a very welcome move in Redberry as it not only may 
employ local people but also create better market 
opportunities for the farmers of Redberry. 
 
The Saskatchewan Farm Support Review Committee chaired 
by Redberry farmer, Dennis Banda, has recently completed a 
report on safety net design.  This report will be the basis for 
discussion with other provincial governments and the feds in 
the future. 
 
The major changes to crop insurance are considered by my 
constituents as a progressive move by a caring government.  
The additional funding of some $10 million to the health 
boards is very much appreciated by people of rural 
Saskatchewan and will aid a great deal in the progress and 
development of the wellness model in areas such as 
Redberry. 
 
As we took our place here just over two years ago and had 
the opportunity to open the books and view the serious state 
of this province, I am sure that I am not the only one that 
had some doubts as to whether we, as a provincial 
government, could in fact solve the problem. 
 
I am pleased to say that after listening carefully to the 
budget speech, that it is very clear that we have become part 
of the solution.  At the conclusion of this debate I will be 
proud to stand in my place in the legislature and vote in 
support of this budget.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 
first want to congratulate the Minister of Finance on all the 
hard work and dedication she has put into this budget, a 
budget that has Saskatchewan's deficit under control.  I 
sincerely hope that in the years ahead we can all turn our 
attentions and energies to make life better for all 
Saskatchewan residents and to tackle the large debt that 
haunts all of us.  This budget provides us with that freedom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to take this opportunity to 
congratulate all the athletes who are competing in the 17th 
Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway. 

What we see is athletes who are competing, many of the 
names we have never heard of before.  But, Mr. Speaker, 
there is another side to all the athletes, and that is many 
years of hard training, sacrifices, and complete dedication to 
reach the level of the Olympics.  There are thousands of 
athletes who go through this same process but suffer the 
disappointment of not quite making it. 
 
I personally know that feeling.  In 1956, I won the open light 
middleweight boxing championship of Saskatchewan and 
was picked to compete in the Olympic trials in Montreal.  I 
then suffered a freak accident in training just days before our 
team was to leave for Montreal.  This was a great 
disappointment for me.  All the athletes who did not make it, 
I congratulate them. 
 
I also want to congratulate the two gold medal winners, Mr. 
Speaker: Jean-Luc Brassard of Grande-Ile, Quebec, who 
won the freestyle moguls; and Myriam Bedard of 
Loretteville, Quebec, who won the 15-kilometre biathlon.  
When I watched them receive their gold medals, the 
Canadian flag was hoisted, and the Canadian national 
anthem was played, the whole world witnessed two young 
athletes from Quebec express their emotions and their pride 
at being Canadians.  I congratulate them and I thank them. 
 
I also want to, Mr. Speaker, indicate that on February 24 to 
27 of this year, the Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games will 
be held in Beauval and Meadow Lake.  And the theme is 
youth wellness to sports, culture and recreation.  I sincerely 
hope that this will be a successful event, and maybe in 1998 
in Japan some of these young athletes will be competing in 
the Olympics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also at this time thank Norway and 
the Norwegian people for the hospitality they are showing to 
all the athletes and visitors to their great country.  I also 
want to thank Norwegians for the contributions they have 
made to Canada and particularly Saskatchewan.  You will 
find Norwegians all through Saskatchewan.  In some areas 
there will be more than in others -- places like Canwood and 
Big River there are many Norwegians. 
 
But I want to give one specific example of the Norwegian 
families in Buffalo Narrows where I live.  They came to 
Buffalo Narrows, raised their families, and contributed so 
much to our society.  Mr. Speaker, here are some of the 
individuals who came just to the community of Buffalo 
Narrows.  I'm just going to give you the names of the family 
heads that came and settled and contributed to that one small 
town in Saskatchewan, and that being Buffalo Narrows: 
Sigvold Nelson, Louie Rimstad, Jacob and Hilda Halvorsen, 
Pete Pedersen, Tom Pedersen, Ryder Pedersen, John 
Pedersen.  And I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that John 
Pedersen, who came to Buffalo and raised a large family, 
was born and raised in Lillehammer, Norway.  Bjarne 
Fjelldal, Tony Swanson, Ivan Bakken, John Swanvik, Vigo 
Hansen, Olaf Larsen, John Jacobsen, Ollie Jacobsen, Martin 



February 22, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

Brunstead, and Maurice Gran. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's just to name the Norwegian families and 
what they mean to one small community in our great 
country.  Many of these individuals have passed on, but not 
all of them.  You can now find their sons and daughters and 
grandchildren and great-grandchildren living all over our 
great country, carrying on Norwegian traditions, and 
contributing to Canada. 
 
If you come into my constituency office, you will see an oil 
painting that was given to me by Hilda Halvorsen who now 
lives in Prince Albert.  She is 91 years old.  She still lives an 
independent life and the painting was done just last year 
when she was 90 years of age.  I thank you, Hilda, and all 
the Norwegians for their contributions to Canada. 
 
I now want to turn to my constituency and what I hope this 
budget will accomplish to solve the serious problems that 
they are facing such as high unemployment, a high 
percentage of individuals on social assistance, far greater 
than any other constituency, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Athabasca has the 
resources to be one of the richest constituencies in this 
country if they were developed to their full potential. 
 
I want to comment on the fishing aspect now.  We should 
be, as far as I'm concerned, Mr. Speaker, processing our fish 
up North, not in Winnipeg.  Jobs at home providing a fresh 
product for the consumers; superstores should be selling 
more Saskatchewan fish.  Now the majority is from the east 
and west coast.  And I think that, you know, if you go into 
the supermarkets and you take a look at the fish that's in the 
stores, very little Saskatchewan content in the fish, and that's 
just not fair.  We have millions and millions of pounds of 
beautiful, fresh fish in our province and we're just not 
handling it properly. 
 
We fish the fish up in our lakes and then we transport it by 
trucks over a thousand miles to Winnipeg, Manitoba, and 
that's where the processing takes place.  And there's 
absolutely no way that you can take perishable goods like 
fish, and fishermen who keep them in their camps for 
sometimes 24 to 48 hours, then they take them into the fish 
plant, and then you put them in a truck and transport them 
another thousand miles for processing. 
 
I think that that's just something that we have to put a stop 
to.  We have to turn some of that transportation money over 
to transporting the fish from our lakes to processing plants 
right in northern Saskatchewan.  And that will be creating 
good jobs and a quality product for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that the demand for our product would 
definitely grow.  We can let the Freshwater Fish Marketing 
Corporation sell their product through their central selling 
agencies, but if they do not do a good 

job of selling then the province should look at new ways of 
selling the product and maybe that should be done through 
cooperatives. 
 
As I indicated, we have millions of pounds of fish and if it 
was marketed properly and handled properly, it would be a 
tremendous industry for northern Saskatchewan, creating 
literally hundreds of jobs. 
 
I want to turn to mining, forestry, and education.  And I 
think that all three will play major roles in solving our 
unemployment problems in northern Saskatchewan and in 
the province as a whole.  I think the private sector has a very 
major role to play working closely in conjunction with the 
Department of Education in Saskatchewan. 
 
It is very important that the Department of Education work 
closely with industry so that our community colleges can 
provide the courses needed for our citizens to take 
advantages of the new jobs that are opening up.  And I speak 
specifically in northern Saskatchewan now, forestry and 
mining, and uranium mining in particular. 
 
The continuing operation of our present uranium mines and 
the development of new deposits will play a major role in 
Saskatchewan solving its economic and financial problems 
by creating large numbers of high-paying jobs with large 
financial returns to the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Hundreds of Northerners are now 
working in the uranium industry and hundreds more are 
looking at the new deposits for good jobs that will give them 
and their families the security and life that they want and 
deserve.  With world demand for uranium growing at a rapid 
pace to be used for peaceful uses, I say, Mr. Speaker, that we 
must take advantage of this resource in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- I now want to turn to forestry, Mr. 
Speaker.  Forestry will also play a major role in solving 
Saskatchewan's financial and unemployment problems.  But 
I caution, we have to be very careful how we harvest and 
manage our forests.  While it is a renewable resource we 
have to practice sustainable development. 
 
And what is sustainable development?  Mr. Speaker, 
sustainable development is development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs.  I am on record 
and I have always been opposed to clear-cutting of our 
forests.  I believe in selective cutting.  Most countries on our 
planet now stress selective cutting over clear-cutting, and 
you see more and more of this in the newspapers, where 
countries and groups are encouraging governments to 
selectively cut their forests and manage them properly. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard February 22, 1994 
 
As the results of clear-cutting became visible, harvesting 
methods will have to change to protect our forests and our 
environment.  With Saskatchewan climatic conditions, it is 
just as important here to selectively harvest our forest as it is 
in B.C. (British Columbia) and in the mountains. 
 
When you do not have a good forest cover to catch the 
rainfalls, then you will see the little bit of fragile topsoil that 
took millions of years to develop washed down the 
mountainsides, into the creeks and rivers, literally destroying 
water flow patterns and destroying fish spawning grounds 
that also took millions of years to create.  Mr. Speaker, this 
is a disastrous result. 
 
The same applies to Saskatchewan.  We have a very short 
growing season.  Small seedlings planted in a clear-cut area 
are exposed to all Saskatchewan's severe weather systems 
and will never mature. 
 
This is why selective cutting is so important, as only the 
mature trees are harvested.  This way we can always have a 
forest.  This is how we practice sustainable development of 
our forests, and then your forests look good compared to the 
clear-cutting areas.  It also provides a home for our animals 
and birds plus clean water in our rivers and lakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will continue to work to improve our 
harvesting methods, and in doing so, protecting jobs and our 
environment.  In one region, between Green Lake and La 
Loche, we could create hundreds of jobs by encouraging 
small-scale forestry operations -- saw mills, planers, fence 
posts, peeled and treated right in the North, railroad ties.  
What do we do, Mr. Speaker?  We handle the forest 
resources the same way as we handle our fish.  We send the 
full logs and posts south for processing.  Mr. Speaker, that 
has to stop because that's taking also the jobs with it. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, here I want to indicate some of the 
projects that I have been working for and will continue to 
work for:  roads and highways -- the road from Beauval to 
Jans Bay and Cole Bay and Canoe Narrows.  We spent close 
to $5 million on rebuilding a logging road from Meadow 
Lake north towards Keeley Lake in 1993 -- nothing on the 
narrow, crooked road to Canoe Narrows.  And this is not 
fair, Mr. Speaker.  This is a road that is used daily by school 
children and should be rebuilt, and it should have priority 
over the logging roads. 
 
The road to Black Lake, Stony Rapids, and Fond-du-Lac is 
an important artery for the far North and all of 
Saskatchewan.  The same applies to the road from La Loche 
to McMurray, a very important connection to both 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
I want to continue to work for a nursing home in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker.  It's, I believe, it's the only 
constituency out of maybe some urban ridings that does not 
have a nursing home.  And we have individuals who are in 
Prince Albert and North Battleford and Meadow Lake and 
Saskatoon and scattered all over.  And it's just not fair.  
Friends and relatives just cannot visit them. 

Health facilities are badly needed, education opportunities 
and facilities.  We have to provide education and training at 
all levels so Northerners can compete on an equal basis with 
the rest of society.  Sewer and water for Stony Rapids -- Mr. 
Speaker, here's a community in northern Saskatchewan that's 
pretty well the only community left that does not have sewer 
and water.  This cannot continue. 
 
We have to work to eliminate . . . elimination of the 20-week 
welfare job with good, high-paying jobs.  It's so degrading to 
have to work for 20 weeks and then go on UIC, and then 
UIC and back onto welfare.  This is something that we have 
to stop so that people can get their dignity back. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, if I had my wish list it would be to 
include the following.  To make some of the surplus 
hospitals from the South . . . to move some of the surplus 
hospitals from the South to La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, and to the far North of Fond-du-Lac, Stony 
Rapids and Black Lake where they are so badly needed.  I 
also wish that I was four or five years younger so that I 
could run for another term as there is so much to be done in 
my constituency, and the rest of this province, and I feel that 
time is starting to run out on me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, really what I wish for my 
constituency -- and for the province -- is for fairness and 
compassion as we tackle the major problems not only in my 
area but in Saskatchewan.  And I think that this budget -- if 
we handle it right, and all work together, and use that 
philosophy of fairness and compassion -- that this budget 
will turn out to be a good budget for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting for the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 
 
 


