




















































Hansard: March 07, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 659 

 March 7, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act (Appointments Review Committee). 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to other 

members in the Assembly, two guests in the west gallery -- Mr. 

Reg Briggs, president, and Mr. Dennis Paddock, executive 

director of the association of professional engineers for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Their visit is timely, Mr. Speaker, as March 5 to 12 marks 

National Engineering Week.  The objectives of National 

Engineering Week are to increase the public awareness of the 

importance of engineering in our everyday lives and to 

encourage young people to consider engineering as their career. 

 

So I would ask all members in the Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming Mr. Briggs and Mr. Paddock to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to join with the hon. minister in welcoming our two 

special guests today from the engineering society to the 

Legislative Assembly.  Later this week I will have the 

opportunity to meet with their association members and discuss 

a subject of mutual concern and understanding.  And as the 

minister said, everything in this province that has gotten built 

since we became a province, has had an engineer some place 

involved.  And what I'd like to see, Mr. Speaker, is more 

engineers involved lately. 

 

So we'd like to join in welcoming our guests on behalf of the 

official opposition. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- As members and the public may be aware, 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week has begun in Saskatchewan 

this week.  There isn't too much we need to be aware of when it 

comes to impaired driving.  We know it's a problem, and it's a 

big problem for Saskatchewan people inasmuch as almost half 

of the fatalities in this province are related to drinking and 

driving.  And that's too many -- far too many. 

I've had a constituent in my constituency office who has lost 

family members to drunk drivers.  And I say the time has come 

to do something about impaired driving in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Associate Minister of Health has announced consultations 

with the school system, through the school system, this last 

month, and hopes to bring legislation in to deal with this 

problem.  I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan, if we 

are to observe Impaired Driving Awareness Week in 

Saskatchewan this year, you need to write the Premier and your 

own personal member of the legislature and see that there's 

more than consultation, that there is legislation to deal with the 

problem of impaired drinking and driving in this province and 

that there's action from the government finally on this issue.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd 

like to pay tribute to all those who made Kinsmen Telemiracle 

18 a great success.  Year after year, during tough financial 

times, the people of this province continue to put the less 

fortunate ahead of themselves.  Thousands of hours of planning 

and fund-raising events generated the largest share of the $2.1 

million raised.  It is through the generosity of Saskatchewan 

people that our province exceeds all others in donations to 

assist those whose special circumstances merit a helping hand.  

All Saskatchewan citizens should be proud today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, there are still some few 

benighted, ill-informed people who do not think that curling is 

an exciting spectator sport, and those poor souls obviously did 

not see the final draw on Saturday of the Scott Tournament of 

Hearts where the Canadian women's championship . . . the 

draw between Regina's Sandra Peterson, and Manitoba's 

Connie Laliberte.  In particular they did not see the last 

incredible shot by Sandra Peterson which won the title for 

Team Canada. 

 

Everyone in Saskatchewan is proud of their accomplishment of 

course, but I have a particular pride of ownership because two 

members of the rink live in my constituency of Regina Victoria 

-- Sandra Peterson and  Joan McCusker.  We also congratulate 

Jan Betker, Marcia Gudereit, and fifth Anita Ford, and wish 

them all the best as they represent Canada next month and 

become the first Canadian woman's rink to repeat as world 

champions. 

 

We also congratulate Sherry Anderson and her Saskatchewan 

team from Prince Albert for an excellent first showing at the 

Scott Tournament of Hearts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I watched that last rock go ever so slowly 

down the ice towards that very small target I thought of that 

biblical phrase, let she without nerve 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

cast the last stone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I also 

would like to congratulate the Peterson curling team for 

winning another Canadian world's curling championship this 

weekend at the Scott Tournament of Hearts in Ontario. 

 

The Peterson team must have wanted to make the 

championship game against Manitoba a little bit more exciting, 

Mr. Speaker, since they waited until the 10th end to pull off a 5 

to 3 victory.  The Peterson team finished 10 and 1 at the Scott, 

defeating a two-time Canadian champion and a former world 

champion for the title. 

 

Sandra and her team-mates will be heading off to Germany 

next week to compete, and I'd like all members of the 

Assembly to join with me in congratulating Sandra Peterson, 

Jan Betker, Joan McCusker, Marcia Gudereit, and Anita Ford 

on their success and wish them the very best in Germany. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, it is not only the international 

players that need to be congratulated today.  Last week, and 

over the weekend, the town of Coronach in my constituency 

hosted the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 

provincial boys' curling championship.  The town, its sports 

organizations, the school, and a whole host of volunteers made 

this a very exciting and successful event.  I congratulate Kevin 

Vollet and his committee for taking on the event. 

 

Amateur sports has always been important in the lives of 

Saskatchewan people and certainly curling, the sport that's 

makes a pleasure of ice and cold, helps to define us as a people.  

Witness the great excitement at the previously mentioned 

curling event last weekend.  Saskatchewan produces champion 

curlers and champions begin to learn their skills early. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, most important is the number of people who 

participate in the sport, excellent curlers like the students of the 

tournament and even duffers like me.  The rotation of so many 

championships and so many sports to so many of our small 

towns is not only a boost to the local economy but exposes all 

participants, organizers, coaches, and fans to travel throughout 

our multifaceted province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, many 

people in the province over the last week have been very 

interested in the Karlee Kosolofski story -- a little two-year-old 

girl from my constituency of Rouleau who unfortunately came 

very close to death. 

 

And I would today like to commend some individuals who 

came to Karlee's assistance and I think deserve 

recognition for the work that they did in establishing medical 

history, not only in our province but indeed it appears around 

the world. 

 

And I wish to commend Caroline Peck from Rouleau.  Caroline 

is an RN (registered nurse) who ran a block and a half and 

started to administer CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) on 

Karlee.  Linda Benoit, another nurse from Rouleau who was 

two blocks away and came to Karlee's assistance. 

 

And then we have the ambulance paramedics, Mr. Speaker, 

Brenda Fry, Krista Rempel, and Jonas South who were able to 

quickly get Karlee into the Plains Health Centre where a 

waiting team of nurses and doctors had the heart-lung machine 

ready to go and helped Karlee on her way back to life. 

 

I think all of these individuals should be recognized because 

they do show that the Saskatchewan spirit is alive and well, that 

when people are in most need there are folks there to pick up 

the challenge. 

 

And Karlee as we all know is resting comfortably; had a little 

more surgery and has lost her left leg below the knee.  But I 

think all of these people deserve recognition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I too am 

thrilled to acknowledge the clean sweep made by the Sandra 

Peterson rink at the Tournament of Hearts this weekend.  Of 

course I admit to being very partial to any team that will carry 

Canada's red and white to the world championship because this 

has been a particularly good year for those colours so far.  

Although the Liberals are still one short of a curling team on 

this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was absolutely ecstatic to see Sandra make such 

a perfect shot to the end of the game.  And no matter how many 

tough shots the team made to get the final, the mark of true 

champions is meeting difficult challenges under pressure.  And 

Team Canada showed a great deal of class throughout the Scott 

tournament, right down to the very last rock in the 10th end. 

 

This victory has been a tremendous boost to the morale of our 

province.  And I believe that the true value of competitive 

sports is in the inspiration that it gives our society to pull 

together as a team, to work hard and to take advantages of the 

opportunities for success even when we sometimes have to plan 

and wait for them to emerge. 

 

So to Sandra, to Jan, Joan, Marcia, Anita, and to their families, 

I want to express our heartfelt thanks and congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

sure all of the members of the House know that the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

is holding their 89th annual convention at the Centre of the Arts 

here in the city of Regina on March 8, 9, 10, and 11.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this group of local government politicians do a 

tremendous job of community leaders in rural Saskatchewan.  

And a lot of their work is done, Mr. Speaker, more out of a 

commitment to the community than it is out of any other desire.  

And I think I can testify to that, Mr. Speaker, as having the 

privilege of being an RM (rural municipality) councillor in the 

RM of Clayton for 10 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to offer words of welcome to the 

delegates that are coming down to their convention here in the 

city of Regina this week.  And I wish them a very fruitful and 

productive convention, and a very safe trip home when they 

conclude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Ambulance Services 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we would 

once again like to present this House with a number of 

questions submitted to us by members of the public. 

 

Due to the tremendous response we have had to this initiative, 

the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association has offered 

to distribute both our questions and the government's responses 

to their member newspapers across the province.  In order to 

accommodate that, Mr. Speaker, we would like to move up our 

questioning on questions to the Premier from Wednesday to 

Monday, and we sincerely thank the Saskatchewan newspaper 

association for their interest. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, comes from Debbie Norton-Brown 

from Rocanville.  Mr. Premier, I want to know why, when the 

town of Rocanville has an equipped medical van and qualified 

EMTs (emergency medical technicians), we cannot transport 

our medical emergencies, but have to wait at least a half an 

hour for the ambulance from Moosomin.  What's most 

important here, money or lives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With respect to 

the issue surrounding Rocanville, in order to be an ambulance 

service there are certain criteria that have to be met.  And if the 

service there wishes to perform an ambulance service, they are 

of course able to make that application and they will have to 

meet the regulations and the rules and the criteria that have 

been set forth. 

 

They should of course discuss the matter with the district board 

and work in conjunction with the district board. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Leaseback Program 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier is a question sent to us from a gentlemen whose name 

is Jerry and it says: I would like to know if your government 

has anything in the works pertaining to the Saskatchewan farm 

land leaseback program, i.e., a longer-term solution once a 

farmer has used up his six-year leaseback option.  A 

longer-term solution is needed because most people on the 

leaseback program aren't able to save enough money, if any in 

today's economy and with the prices of grain where they are, to 

buy back their land thus undermining the usefulness of this 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank 

Jerry for that question.  The Department of Agriculture and this 

government is very concerned about keeping farmers on the 

land.  That was the reason for the six-year leaseback.  And that 

was thought, at the time that the committee struck it, to be a 

reasonable time period for farmers to hopefully have a chance 

to buy back the land. 

 

Certainly as we come closer to the end of that period, we will 

be looking at alternate solutions to keep people on the land.  

We have been looking at a potential for community-based land 

trust and some other solutions but we certainly hope that there 

is some turnaround in agriculture that most of these farmers, if 

not all of them, will be able to remain on their land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower White City Office 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is, as well, 

to the Premier from Kay Ollinger from Southey.  Mr. Premier, I 

want to know why SaskPower is moving their employees from 

the district office in White City to Regina when the government 

will have to continue to pay the lease on the White City facility 

for another three years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Mr. Speaker, the question is phrased on 

the premiss that the White City office is going to be closed.  

The White City office, it's my understanding, is not going to be 

closed.  And I hope that pleases the person who wrote in the 

question.  Thank you. 

 

Unemployment 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question for 

the Premier.  This question comes from Gloria L. Kohlman 

from the town of Major, and she writes: Mr. Premier, I want to 

know why I can't find a job now that I will be receiving my 

Bachelor of 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Commerce degree.  When will I be able to find a job?  Where 

am I going to go to find a job?  Will I have to leave 

Saskatchewan?  And what else can I do if I don't find a job, to 

avoid more assistance, and how am I going to pay back my 

student loan without a job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

thank the individual for that question.  The individual should be 

quite pleased with the recent budget because what we 

announced in that budget were a number of short-term 

measures to create jobs such as a dramatic increase in our 

capital funding and our participation in the infrastructure 

program. 

 

We also announced a number of initiatives which represent our 

long-term approach to job creation.  One which will be 

particularly interesting to highly educated people, like I'm sure 

this individual is, is our ag equity fund in which we will be 

taking primary products, agricultural products, using the 

expertise we have here at the university and at places like 

Innovation Place to further process those products and then 

export them so people in Saskatchewan will get jobs, farmers 

will get markets for their products, and the economy of 

Saskatchewan and of Canada will get more exports. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Transportation for French Immersion 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

to the Premier comes from Les Winter, of Regina: Mr. Premier, 

I want to know why children from Moose Jaw are being 

transported by taxi to take French immersion classes.  

According to a news report I saw, two children are being 

transported from Moose Jaw to Regina; one by taxi at a cost of 

$13,000 a year, the other is driven by his mother who is given 

$7,000 a year by the government.  That's a total of $20,000 a 

year the government is spending on two children.  That's 

enough to feed an entire family for a year. 

 

I want to know why the government is wasting money in this 

matter at this time of fiscal restraint. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank Mr. Winter for the 

question.  Let me say this: that all members of this House 

lobbied very hard to ensure that we saved the Canadian Air 

Force base at Moose Jaw, and we were successful at doing that. 

 

We were successful because one of the constitutional 

obligations of any province is to ensure that those people who 

come from Quebec to Saskatchewan, for instance, are 

guaranteed their rights under the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms, and that is that francophone parents have the right to 

have their child educated in French. 

 

Now let me say this, that I am advised that the director of 

education in Moose Jaw was not aware that there were children 

being transferred from the base to Regina.  The director of 

education in Moose Jaw has 

negotiated the transportation of the full-time student.  That 

person will now be travelling with the air force base bus to the 

city of Regina.  Because the kindergarten student is a half-time 

student, her parent will continue to drive her to and from 

Regina.  And that is the answer to the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Investment in Economic Development 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Economic Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, you often tell us how hard you are working to 

encourage investment in Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 

projects.  You say that you have identified dozens of terrific 

opportunities in our province and your approach to economic 

development will soon be paying dividends in terms of 

economic activity and jobs in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, if someone were to come to you with 30 to $35 

million to invest and they wanted to put it into a good, sound 

investment opportunity in Saskatchewan, one that would give 

them a good return on their money, what would you 

recommend and does that opportunity exist in Saskatchewan 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, to suggest where the 

member may be going here, he may be referring to an article in 

the paper about the Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan.  

Let me begin by telling the member opposite that those sorts of 

funds, which I think is what the Leader of the Opposition is 

talking about -- pension funds -- are invested by the Investment 

Corporation of Saskatchewan independent of the government.  

So they make their decisions independent of what the 

government's approach to these decisions are. 

 

The other point I would like to make, in light of where I think 

the member's heading here, is that they invest across Canada 

because they have to spread their risk in the best interest of 

their members.  They cannot put all of their eggs in one basket. 

 

So if somebody came to me about the investment of things like 

pension funds or funds of that nature, that's the beginning of the 

answer I would give them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'll direct the next 

question to the Minister of Finance.  Madam Minister, the issue 

is not ICS's (Investment Corporation of Saskatchewan) 

independence at all but you did hit it on the . . . the nail on the 

head.  It's the lack of eggs in the basket called Saskatchewan 

that we're concerned about. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you're right.  They do manage pension 

funds, pension funds that are generated by people in this 

province, you and I included because 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

our MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pension funds 

are invested by these people.  And we don't question their 

competence at all.  They are to get the highest possible return 

for their investors which is the proper mandate. 

 

But the fact is, Madam Minister, the 34 million bucks is being 

invested in a shopping mall, the Westhills Towne Centre in 

Calgary, Alberta.  That's probably a good investment, Madam 

Minister.  They had 34 million to invest in an economic 

development project and yet they couldn't find one in 

Saskatchewan to put it in. 

 

Madam Minister, did ICS ever talk to you about making a 

similar investment in the province of Saskatchewan, and if so, 

why were they not able to find some place for their $34 

million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the 

Leader of the Opposition through some basic facts here.  First 

of all, the source of the information, Moira Wright, former 

executive assistant to the Conservative minister of Finance and 

the Association of Saskatchewan Taxpayers. 

 

I don't often mention a particular association and say that their 

familiarity with the facts is often very vague, but I will say that 

about this group.  They are notorious for playing fast and loose 

with facts. 

 

And here's another example.  They start out with the assertion 

that 30-some million dollars has been invested in a Calgary 

shopping plaza.  Don Black of ICS says listen, this is 

confidential.  But I can tell you they're not right, first point. 

 

Second point, they relate that investment to the tax rates in the 

different provinces.  Absolutely . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to ask the member from 

Estevan to please quit interrupting when the minister is trying 

to answer the question.  Order.  Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- They relate that particular 

investment to the tax rates in the two provinces.  Again the 

Saskatchewan association of taxpayers is dead wrong.  There's 

no relationship.  Even if the investment did occur, which Don 

Black is disputing, at least in terms of the numbers, there is no 

relationship to the tax rate in the province because these are not 

taxable benefits.  So once again the members opposite are using 

information from an agency; I'm telling you this particular 

information is not reliable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, my information comes from 

the Calgary Herald, and to my knowledge Ms. Wright isn't an 

employee of the Calgary Herald. 

 

I'm wondering, Madam Minister, why you don't have 

a better working relationship with ICS, especially when you 

consider one of the directors is the former premier of the 

province, the Hon. Allan Blakeney. 

 

The bottom line, Madam Minister, is this: 34 million to invest 

in a project that's going to create jobs and opportunity and 

economic development and they simply couldn't find one here 

even though your Minister of Economic Development claims 

he has dozens waiting. 

 

Now it's significant that that amount of money left 

Saskatchewan to Alberta, and even Allan Blakeney recognizes 

that Alberta is a better investment than Saskatchewan.  And, 

Madam Minister, that's a direct result, I think, of your 

destructive high-tax, anti-business agenda in this province. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, if ICS recognizes this, if Allan 

Blakeney recognizes this, why can't you recognize it and 

change some of these policies so the next time they've got $34 

million of money generated in this province, they'll invest it in 

this province?  Why don't you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all, a general 

point.  I guess the members opposite don't believe that in the 

Alberta budget when there was a 20 per cent increase in health 

care premiums for the average family, whereby the average 

family will be paying more than $800 a year in health care 

premiums, this isn't a tax increase. 

 

But back again, if the members opposite would only consider 

some facts instead of launching off in a particular direction.  

The two main pension plans in this province actually have three 

times as much money invested in a Saskatchewan shopping 

plaza than they ever projected, even according to these 

somewhat suspicious figures, to invest in Alberta.  So they 

have already invested here.  These pension funds are 

independent and they have the capacity and the need to invest 

in all parts of Canada -- as do other pension funds invest from 

outside the province in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Same minister:  

Madam Minister, the bottom line is if your policies were 

working, your minister wouldn't have to stand up and 

embarrass himself on co-generation.  That would be a fact of 

life. 

 

Your other minister wouldn't have to stand up and embarrass 

himself about hiring Reggie Gross to build airplanes because 

you'd be building the airplanes here, Madam Minister. 

 

You wouldn't have 21,000 more people on welfare than you 

had in 1991 and you wouldn't have 12,000 less working than 

you had in '91. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what we're asking you is: the next time 

that ICS, who are very smart managers, the 10th largest 

consortium of their kind in Canada, have 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

$34 million to invest, could you please find a place in 

Saskatchewan for them to do that?  Can you do that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, we monitor the ICS 

investments to ensure that Saskatchewan is getting a reasonable 

level of investment from ICS, and we speak to them regularly 

about this.  I would actually say when you look at investments 

in Saskatchewan, they're probably a little bit heavy on that side. 

 

But I will also say this to the member opposite -- and this is 

something that I'm sure there is no understanding of over there 

-- we will allow an agency that is supposed to be independent 

of government to operate independent of government.  We will 

not try to influence them for our own political purposes 

because we believe in open, honest, and accountable 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskEnergy Rate Increase 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

directed to the Minister of Energy.  Mr. Minister, SaskEnergy 

recently increased natural gas rates to its subscribers by 9.5 per 

cent.  Can you tell us if all SaskEnergy customers had their 

meters read prior to the increase taking effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I would have to assume that all 

customers have had their meters read some time prior to the 

prices taking effect.  I'm sure that's the case.  There's a system 

whereby there's a couple of months of estimate, then there's an 

actual reading.  The timing of the reading that was done as an 

actual reading rather than estimate, I can't assure the minister of 

the exact date.  But if that's important to you, if you 

communicate with my office, I'd be more than happy to provide 

that to you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, because meters are not read 

every month, as you say, it is typical practice for SaskEnergy to 

estimate usage of natural gas on its billings.  I have here a copy 

of a bill from a SaskEnergy customer who used more natural 

gas at the old rate than SaskEnergy estimated on his January 

bill.  Although the natural gas was consumed before the 9.5 per 

cent rate hike, he was not billed for that consumption until his 

meter was read in January after rates had increased. 

 

Can the minister explain why customers were billed at the new 

rate for gas consumed before the rate increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I don't believe that to be the case.  The 

charge came into effect on January 1.  Especially people who 

were on equalization payments will vary from year to year, but 

there's an adjustment made at the end of 

the year or the end of the estimate period.  People who are on 

equalized rates will have an adjustment at the end of the year 

either up or down based on the previous year's consumption. 

 

So it depends.  You'd have to give me more specifics on the 

actual case before I can tell you whether it's an equalized 

payment system or whether or not it's an averaging system.  

But the rate increase came into effect January 1, 1994. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, it should not be up to 

SaskEnergy customers to study their bills each month to 

determine whether they have been overcharged. 

 

Can the minister tell us whether a notice has gone out to all 

customers about this miscalculation and can you explain how it 

is possible to determine from their meter readings how much 

gas they actually consumed under the old rate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I think it's prudent of anyone to 

check bills they get on anything, whether it's for natural gas or 

electricity.  Or if you go to the grocery store when you get 

home you should check your list to make sure you were 

charged properly. 

 

I believe there is good integrity in the system of billing and 

charges put out by SaskPower, SaskEnergy, SaskTel.  And if 

there is an inaccuracy in some particular billing, we'd be more 

than happy to deal with that.  And if the customer has been 

inaccurately billed we would be more than happy to make that 

adjustment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, I do have an actual case here.  

The customer I refer to will get a credit on his bill of $40 

because he was alert in catching the error by SaskEnergy. 

 

How many more SaskEnergy customers were over-billed in the 

same manner, and what is the amount of refunds you will be 

issuing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I'm quite sure that by the member 

alerting the public in Saskatchewan to this incident of someone 

being credited with an overpayment that Saskatchewan people 

will be alerted to the situation. 

 

As I say, I believe in the integrity of the billing system at 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy.  And if people have been 

incorrectly billed, we'd be more than happy to correct that.  

You have to appreciate there are several tens of thousands of 

customers in the province, and from time to time there may be 

an error.  That's why I think it's prudent of any consumer to 

check the bills for services that they've paid for.  If there are 

other incidents of this, we'd be more than happy to look at it for 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Minister, it's your Crown corporation 

which is doing the billing, and I believe it's your responsibility, 

not the responsibility of the consumer in this particular case. 

 

Can you detail what the costs are of processing the credits?  

And what is the total amount of refunds that will be issued to 

SaskEnergy customers who have the same experience? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I don't know the person who is 

writing those questions for you, but if you want detailed 

answers to detailed questions I would appreciate that you 

would advise me prior to question period and I'd have that 

information here for you.  Or if you don't want to political 

grandstand on something that is not a major problem, then I 

would contact the people at SaskEnergy. 

 

I appreciate what you're trying to do on behalf of the 

consumers in the province of Saskatchewan, but I think you 

have a lot to learn in how you go about asking questions in the 

House.  You give me the details, I'll provide you detailed 

answers.  But I don't carry that kind of detail around with me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Co-generation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, last week 

we saw the government's decision to nix co-generation, what it 

had done to the Biggar area. 

 

Each day we receive information in our office from around the 

province indicating the anger and frustration that has resulted 

from that decision. 

 

The latest reaction comes from the North Battleford area, and 

I'll direct my question to the minister from The Battlefords. 

 

A newspaper talked to the steering committee in Glaslyn about 

the co-generation proposal they had put together when the 

government announced the go-ahead.  Mr. Minister, this 

community is out $40,000, 30,000 of which was raised through 

community auctions and other fund-raising activities.  Mr. 

Minister, while this community wasn't able to submit a 

proposal because they ran out of money, they believed that you 

and your government were sincere in asking for proposals. 

 

Mr. Minister, you indicated that you would consider returning 

the funds to the communities if they requested it.  So on their 

behalf, will you consider returning at least the deposit portion 

of their commitment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- If I understand the member's question 

correctly, he's asking about the community of Glaslyn?  Was 

that correct?  I would inform the member that the community 

of Glaslyn never did put in an application to the request for 

proposals and so I 

don't know what it's asking for you to refund.  If a community 

wants to do a project and they've invested some money into it, 

it's not SaskPower's responsibility to search out companies or 

groups to refund money to. 

 

I again stress that they did not indicate through the request for 

proposals that they were interested in a co-generation project.  

And I'm happy to see that they were enthusiastic enough, by 

what you say, to have done some work, but they never 

participated in the process, so no, I have no intention of 

refunding some money to Glaslyn. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

reason why they didn't participate is really quite simple.  

You've nixed the program, and they put $40,000 into investing 

in it and then they realized that you weren't going to go ahead 

with it, Mr. Minister. 

 

And here's what the people of that community say.  Gordon 

Mayor, the mayor of the community, said: we all feel like we 

were led down the tube.  To me I think it was a political 

smokescreen.  Mr. Mayor goes on to say: they indicated when 

they put these proposals out that they were going to go ahead 

with it.  I don't think they were ever interested in going ahead 

with it, Mr. Mayor says. 

 

Mr. Minister, is that not the truth?  Did you have any intention 

of going ahead with these plans, or if you did, will you tell us 

about that today, Mr. Minister?  Did you or did you not have 

any intention of going ahead with the plans, as you laid out 

earlier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I find it interesting you get your 

information from Gordie Mayor, who was the former PC 

candidate running in that area for you.  Mr. Mayor must still be 

trying to make some political hay for an opposition that has 

nowhere to go except the direction they're going right now.  

Playing politics with the community of Glaslyn is not to the 

advantage of this House or to the people of the village of 

Glaslyn. 

 

And I would say to the member that if a community or group 

did not have pockets deep enough to follow through with 

request for proposals they certainly wouldn't have had enough 

money to carry off a major co-generation project that would 

cost in the millions of dollars when construction eventually 

proceeds.  And I don't think you should be trying to make gains 

on the back of Glaslyn on the advice of Mr. Mayor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Souris-Cannington, why is 

he on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, to make a 

member's statement, unrelated to my constituency. 

 

Leave granted. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Education Week 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  March 7 to 13 

marks Education Week in Saskatchewan.  This year's theme: 

Home--School: Make the Connection, stresses not only the 

importance of parent involvement in a child's schooling, but 

also education in a way to improve family life.  Since it is the 

Year of the Family, the theme of it is quite fitting.  Most 

schools are planning special activities and events to 

commemorate Education Week.  The doors are wide open for 

all members of the community to become more familiar with 

their local schools.  Saskatchewan people take a lot of pride 

and interest in our education and I believe that will never 

change. 

 

It is important that, while we acknowledge our hard-working 

teachers, parents and school boards, that we also acknowledge 

the struggle Saskatchewan education is facing.  Last year's 

massive cut-backs in funding meant increases in 

teacher-student ratios, strict quotas, lay-offs, school closures, 

program cuts and large hikes in tuitions.  This year will be 

much the same, except the cuts will be much, much deeper.  

Schools are now facing operating grant cut-backs of 14.3 

million this year alone.  Operating grants for the 1994-95 

school year are more than $5 million below the 1989 level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, school boards are struggling to provide basic 

education to Saskatchewan students and fluffy compliments 

won't do anything to solve this problem.  So while we celebrate 

the achievements of Saskatchewan throughout the years, let us 

make sure that steps are taken to alleviate some of the suffering 

education is experiencing today.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I too would like to 

recognize Education Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a time to pay tribute to 

the thousands of teachers in our province who work tirelessly 

each and every day to ensure that children's needs are met. 

 

Education is our main weapon against poverty and 

unemployment.  We must ensure that children remain the 

priority in our educational system and that they have access to 

quality education no matter where they live.  Urban and rural 

families must have an educational model that prepares them for 

the kind of world that lies ahead.  And first nations people must 

have a fast track to educational opportunities as Saskatchewan's 

future depends largely upon their success. 

 

The Liberal Party would like to give top marks to all of those 

who go beyond the call of duty. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act respecting Public Health 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

Public Health be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act respecting the Health Services 

Utilization and Research Commission 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

the Health Services Utilization and Research Commission be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like 

to, at the conclusion of my remarks, introduce a condolence 

motion. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the Premier has to ask for leave. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm asking for leave, Mr. Speaker, 

please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1415) 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of 

sadness that I rise today to note the sudden passing of a former 

colleague and member of this Assembly, Walter Robert 

Johnson.  On Saturday, February 19, 1994 Mr. Johnson was 

very tragically killed in a car accident in Coolidge, Arizona, in 

the United States.  And today, Mr. Speaker, our hearts go out to 

his wife, Dorathea, who is still recovering from injuries 

resulting from the accident, and their children, Kenneth, Karen, 

Terry Neil and Laura. 

 

Walter Johnson represented the constituency of Saltcoats from 

1982 until 1991.  The people of his constituency, which is a 

largely rural one, I'm sure will join us today in recognizing the 

role, the valuable role, that he played as an advocate for 

agriculture and for Saskatchewan farm families. 

 

He operated a grain and pure-bred Hereford cattle farm in the 

Spy Hill area.  And he'll be remembered for his personal insight 

into agricultural problems and for his forceful contributions to 

discussions pertaining to agricultural policy. 

 

The government of the day recognized the contributions of Mr. 

Johnson, that we would be able to 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

make in development of agricultural policy, and in 1983 he was 

appointed by my predecessor, the member from Estevan, 

legislative secretary to the minister of Agriculture.  After he 

was re-elected in 1986, he became the legislative secretary to 

the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Johnson was also very active in his community, belonging 

to the Esterhazy Legion, the Masonic Lodge, and the Wa-Wa 

Shrine Temple.  He was also a director of the Saskatchewan 

Livestock Association and the Saskatchewan Hereford 

Association, and a director of the Tantallon Agricultural 

Society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend my own heartfelt sympathy and 

condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Johnson.  His 

contribution to Saskatchewan public life is greatly appreciated 

and he will be sadly missed. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that all members will join 

me in supporting the following motion which I'm going to 

move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member 

from Thunder Creek.  Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly, and express its 

grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Walter Robert Johnson who died at Coolidge, Arizona, on 

February 19, 1994, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly for the constituency of Saltcoats from 1982 until 

1991.  Mr. Johnson was born on September 27, 1927, at Spy 

Hill. 

 

 He received his education in the Spy Hill area before 

establishing a grain and pure-bred Hereford farm. 

 

 In 1951 he married Dorathea Olson. 

 

 Mr. Johnson took a leadership role in the cattle industry, 

serving variously as a director of the Saskatchewan Hereford 

Association, a director of the Tantallon Agricultural Society, 

and as a director of the Saskatchewan Livestock Association. 

 

 Mr. Johnson was also an active participant in his community 

affairs.  He was a member of the Esterhazy branch of the 

Royal Canadian Legion, the Masonic Lodge, and the Shrine 

Temple. 

 

 Mr. Johnson entered provincial politics in 1982 by winning 

the Saltcoats seat.  In 1983 he was appointed legislative 

secretary to the minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Johnson was 

re-elected in the provincial general election of 1986, and was 

appointed legislative secretary to the minister responsible for 

the Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation.  Mr. Johnson also served as a 

member of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

 Before the general election of 1991, Mr. Johnson decided to 

retire and announced that he would not seek re-election. 

 

 In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with the 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

with a great deal of honour that I rise to second the motion by 

the Hon. Premier in sending the condolence motion to the 

family of a friend of many of us, Mr. Walter Johnson, who 

served in this Assembly from 1982 until 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Walter was more than a colleague to all of us that 

had the opportunity to serve with him.  Walter was the kind of 

person that always ended up being a friend.  And that's a 

quality, I think, that some of us who maybe aren't as fortunate 

at meeting people so easily as Walter find very admirable. 

 

Walter spent all of his years that he was in this Assembly on a 

committee called the ag caucus.  And I'm sure that other 

governments have had them, but I can tell you that our ag 

caucus was unique, I think, because it was the body that set 

agricultural policy in those years.  And Walter's contribution to 

agriculture has never been questioned by anyone in this 

province, whether it be on the livestock side or, as the Premier 

mentioned, in the areas of crop insurance; Walter was just so 

genuine. 

 

And as the Premier said, he was involved in a lot of things in 

his own community that were also very genuine.  And I think 

that's why when I had the opportunity last Friday to go to the 

memorial service, that the hall was filled to overflowing with 

people from Esterhazy and area, both people who were there to 

pay their respects to a man who had served them in a public 

way in this Assembly for all those years, but also in so many 

other ways, and a man who I think most would consider to call 

friend -- and it was very evident. 

 

And I think the family really appreciated, Mr. Speaker, that so 

many would come and express to Dorathea and her children 

and grandchildren that fact, that what we were there honouring 

last Friday was indeed a friend. 

 

And I think it says to all of us that enter this place and enter 

public life, that we should treat each other with respect and that 

there should be a degree of friendship amongst people, no 

matter what their political stripe.  Certainly that was the way 

that Walter treated it.  And I think politics was better in 

Saskatchewan because Walter had that attitude and passed that 

on to others. 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say to Dorathea and the family that 

we miss him, we honour him, and he made a very special 

contribution to the people of Saskatchewan by them giving up 

their time so that Walter could be serving the people of this 

province. 

 

And it is so unfortunate, as always in these cases, when people 

finally get the opportunity to spend time together, to go into 

retirement and plan on doing all of those things that you've 

always wanted to do in life but you've always been too busy 

and worked too hard to get to, that when you finally get doing 

that and then a very tragic accident happens and that 

relationship is broken apart.  And we want to say to Dorathea, 

get well soon, and we will always be friends because of the role 

that Walter played. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I second the motion with a great deal of 

humility and honour. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

with great sadness that I join with members of this House as we 

pay tribute to the former member, Mr. Walter Johnson.  On 

behalf of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan and the members 

of our caucus, I extend to the family of Walter our most sincere 

and heartfelt sympathy.  The loss of such a respected and 

caring husband, father, and grandfather, has been a tremendous 

blow to this close-knit family. 

 

And Walter's professional and political accomplishments have 

been so capably addressed by both the Premier and the Leader 

of Opposition that I'll put that aside and say that what I fear 

perhaps is that we are missing acknowledging Walter Johnson, 

the kind, the compassionate, the very fine individual who was a 

very close friend of my partner and myself. 

 

Walter's tragic and sudden passing robbed he and Dorathea of 

the wonderful retirement years that they had worked toward 

and planned for their entire lives.  And Walter's death leaves a 

great void in the lives of those who knew and loved him.  I will 

miss this kind man, whose encouragement and support meant 

so much to me during my early years in this arena, where too 

often we measure our success by others' loss.  Walter was one 

of those individuals who passed through this place without 

losing his conviction and his commitment to those he served 

and those he cared for.  For that and for his very gentle nature, 

he will be remembered by everyone. 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On 

behalf of the Saltcoats constituents, I rise to add my sincere 

condolences to Dorathea Johnson and her family, Ken and 

Shirley, Karen and Robert, Terry, Dawn and Corey, and their 

families. 

 

I would also like to express my sincere sympathy to Walter's 

brothers and sisters, Sam, Adolph -- known to many as Shorty 

-- Swana, Anna, and Emily, on the loss on their dear brother. 

 

In thinking about what happened over the last two 

weeks to the Johnson family, I guess three things pop into my 

mind when thinking about Walter and Walter's character.  I 

think first and foremost, was Walter's love for his wife, 

Dorathea, and for their immediate family who over the years 

have become active members and leaders in their communities, 

following in the footsteps of their father and mother. 

 

Those qualities of family love and leadership were evident 

when, as a teacher, in my former life, I had the opportunity to 

teach Dawn -- Walter and Dorathea's youngest daughter -- and 

Jason, one of Walter's grandsons.  That was one quality that I 

think has been passed on to all of Walter's family members. 

 

Walter spent most of his life farming and ranching in the Spy 

Hill, Tantallon area.  It was his love of farming and his 

dedication and hard work in raising pure-bred polled Herefords 

that earned Walter great respect over the years in the beef and 

cattle breeding industry. 

 

As mentioned, Walter was involved in several farm 

organizations, adding his expertise wherever possible. 

 

Walter had a great compassion for people, and hence his 

becoming involved in politics.  Walter first ran for the 

Conservative Party in 1978 and was first elected in 1982, 

defeating Edgar Kaeding in that election. 

 

My first encounter with Walter on political grounds was in 

1986, in the 1986 election, and of course the pre-election 

period.  I was his opposition at that time.  It was a closely 

contested campaign which saw Walter return for his second 

term.  Walter retired and did not run in the 1991 election.  And 

once again, looked forward to his involvement in farming and 

towards his retirement. 

 

Walter was and will be respected for his friendliness, sincerity, 

and compassion for people.  This was evident by the several 

hundred constituents and friends who paid tribute to Walter and 

to his family last Friday. 

 

I guess one could say that Walter's identification was his warm, 

friendly smile.  And of course, how could one forget the 

cowboy hat that he often wore. 

 

I want to thank Walter for his contribution to Saskatchewan 

and to agriculture.  And I'd also like to thank his family for 

sharing his life with others. 

 

I would like to conclude my comments of condolence to 

Walter's family and this tribute to Walter by using a phrase that 

he often used for others and that simply was, hats off to you, 

Walter.  Thank you. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my honour to join 

with the Premier and other members of the Legislative 

Assembly to add a few words of respect for Walter Johnson. 

 

I knew Walter as a fellow member of the legislature, as 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

a friend, and as a very fascinating individual.  One way people 

have summarized Walter is that he was everybody's man.  He 

was a man's man in that he would share his competitive stories 

with his fellow colleagues, in particular, men.  He was very 

competitive.  He liked to tell stories.  And he was 

straightforward. 

 

He was a woman's man because he was admired and respected 

as a compassionate person.  And I can recall campaigning in a 

senior citizens' home with Walter and this senior lady came up 

to him and said, well hello, young fellow, how are you?  And 

Walter, he did a jig and off came his hat and he was very 

friendly.  And they loved him.  They really thought he was a 

fine individual. 

 

He was a children's man because children indeed loved him.  

And that's very evident not only in his grandchildren, but other 

children talking about him.  And children aren't easily fooled.  

They see right through people's faades or masks.  And what 

they saw in Walter, Mr. Speaker, was a very open, big-hearted 

individual.  A man who wore his heart on his sleeve as easily as 

he did wear his hat on his head. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he was a fine fellow man, and we see that in 

all walks of life whether it was involved at the local 4-H or in 

the Shrine club or in politics or at the church level or in the 

community or with his family or with his friends. 

 

They say that he had three great passions in life.  One was to 

date they're closer to his . . . recently it was his grandchildren 

and of course his family.  He was very passionate about that 

and he loved them and wanted to spend more and more time 

with them.  The second passion was politics and really that's 

just an extension of being involved with people, and he really 

was good with people.  He genuinely believed he could do 

better.  He loved a challenge and that meant dealing with 

people. 

 

His third passion was the livestock industry, and particularly 

his Hereford cattle, and I can say that he was a fantastic 

ambassador for Saskatchewan and for Canada.  I've had people 

tell me that even internationally when he was there marketing 

Saskatchewan livestock that while he couldn't speak the 

language -- perhaps it was in Bulgaria or some place -- he sold 

the livestock.  They knew that he represented quality.  And he 

did it genuinely and with enthusiasm, and that capacity and that 

affection and that respect he had for the livestock industry as 

his source of Saskatchewan strength came through. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, he was admired; he was respected; he was a 

tenacious competitor.  One unique characteristic of Walter that 

people will appreciate that I did because I'm involved with the 

public service in various walks of life -- in government, in 

university, and various places across Canada, and some of the 

United States -- Walter really abhorred red tape.  He didn't like 

to see things get in the way.  He just said, well that sounds too 

complicated.  And he didn't much care for bureaucracy.  He 

always sort of brought 

common sense; he said I think we could just clean that out, and 

so forth. 

 

And given that attitude, it was quite unique, I found, in that the 

bureaucrats really liked him.  They really liked him.  And you 

can go into the Department of Agriculture today, and you can 

go to people who have dealt with him across the country, and 

lifetime civil servants, and they liked Walter Johnson.  They 

had time for him because his dislike for red tape and 

bureaucracy was non-partisan.  It was just, he said I think we 

can do this better.  I think we can get to the nub of this and he 

enjoyed getting through and cutting through the bush and 

getting to the point. 

 

I think that says a lot about Walter the man.  So I'm saddened 

to be here speaking in this way of Walter Johnson but, Mr. 

Speaker, we don't know when we're called, and while we're 

here, we give it our very best.  And we can say for Walter, he 

was a very loving individual.  He cheered a lot of people up.  

Sometimes we wonder who cheered Walter up and we know 

who that was; it was mostly his wife, Dorathea, and his family 

because he was very close to them. 

 

I extend my very best wishes to his family.  We'll really honour 

and remember the spirit of Walter Johnson.  He represented a 

lot of what is really good about Saskatchewan and Canadians.  

And indeed, thank God, for his life with us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to say a 

few things about a friend of mine, Mr. Walter Johnson.  One of 

the things that I believe that Walter did well -- he served people 

well.  He came to this Legislative Assembly, and I would say 

he was a person who went out and went to work to serve his 

constituents; he went to work to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that Walter didn't like to do, he didn't like to 

speak in this Assembly, and it was difficult as a whip to 

encourage him to do his public duty in this Assembly.  But I'll 

tell you that when he went to the international lounge at 

Agribition, he had no trouble speaking with people.  It was just 

the atmosphere here intimidated him until he said no, I don't 

think I'll want to do this. 

 

But when he went to speak to the farmers and ranchers at 

Agribition, there wasn't one thing that he loved more than that, 

except his family, and that was to go there and visit with his 

bigger family, that was the people in the livestock industry.  

And he did that very well.  People there appreciated him very 

much. 

 

He could tell stories about how he sold livestock all through the 

United States and all through Canada, how he hauled them all 

over the United States and Canada.  And then he would break 

into stories about how he would, as a young man, had 

transported livestock in a trucking business that he was 

involved with, and he recounted many stories about that to us 

in ag caucus and to anyone that would listen. 

 

And I remember one distinct story that he had that 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

dealt with him moving livestock, and it dealt with pigs.  And he 

said, you know, a pig is the most difficult thing to get into a 

semi-trailer.  And, he said, they'd always be backing in.  In fact, 

he said, God probably put the head at the wrong end.  And that 

was his line as to the solution to the problem.  He was always 

trying to find a solution, trying to make the thing work out well 

so that everybody could be well served. 

 

Walter did that everywhere he went.  He was a kind, 

considerate individual who I believe served his constituency 

and the people around there well.  He worked hard for the 

various kinds of things that he wanted done in his constituency, 

and he was always marketing.  He was marketing wherever he 

went.  He would sell bulls, he would sell livestock, he would 

sell his political party, he would sell the well-being of the 

people of the province.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, we all will 

remember that about Walter. 

 

And I particularly want to say this: he was a business associate 

of mine for a while because he had livestock at our ranch in 

south-west Saskatchewan.  And he had 60 cows there for a 

while, and there was probably the most amiable businessman 

that I've ever had to deal with in my life.  Never overpowering, 

never overwhelming by the demands that he made on us, and 

we didn't on him either -- but that was a very significant part 

about who Walter was. 

 

And so as we recognize him as a colleague in this Assembly 

and say to his family that he will be missed, he will be missed 

by those people who were his colleagues in business as well. 

 

And he never ran short of talking about his children, but he 

always talked about his brother, Shorty.  We always heard that 

from him, all over this province.  It was Shorty who was 

working at the farm there, doing the work for him; it was 

Shorty doing this, and then his sons and his sons-in-law.  And 

they were always working on his behalf, and he never 

underestimated the value of his family in relation to his service 

here.  And we want to acknowledge that as a part of who he is 

and who he was, and we want to say to the family, we will miss 

him as well.  And thank you for giving him to this Assembly 

and to the people of the province for the period of time that he 

served us here. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to add a few comments in memory of Mr. Johnson.  

I guess, Mr. Speaker, my first impression of Walter was shortly 

after I was nominated as a Conservative candidate in the 

Moosomin constituency.  And Walter was one of those 

individuals who . . . and a number of people have talked of his 

compassion and how he just became a friend, and he was one 

of the first MLAs to welcome me as a candidate and just made 

me feel at home.  And it felt good to be around him, and maybe 

even sort of, kind of covered by that big hat that he wore, by 

the shadow it cast over you. 

 

But as I indicated to the family, Mr. Speaker, one thing about 

Walter that will always stick out in my mind is he reminded me 

a bit of my father.  And that was at 

times when you got into heated argument or heated debate, 

whether it was caucus or it didn't matter where you were, there 

were times where Walter could be very exuberant and really 

speak his mind and his opinion, but there were other times 

when he'd just be sitting back and all of a sudden Walter would 

speak up in kind of a quiet manner and bring a bit of control to 

the discussion, kind of bring the discussion to a head, 

something that I really admire in my father. 

 

And I indicated that to Dorathea the other day, that that was 

something that really stuck out in my mind about Walter -- his 

ability not only to speak up but just to be able to be there and 

almost be a fatherly figure to many of us who were fairly 

young rookies at the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well just extend my condolences to Dorathea 

and the family.  And at this time we think of, I just am aware of 

the fact that Dorathea lost her mother just before Christmas.  

And so my situation a couple of years ago when my mother left 

so suddenly and so dramatically.  And when you're not 

expecting, it's really hard to understand why.  We can always 

ask the question why. 

 

But as I talked to people at the memorial service the other day, 

Walter's life, he lived it to the full.  And I would almost think 

though that the fact that Walter left this life's . . . in our minds it 

would be so suddenly.  But also if you were to ask Walter 

today, he would probably say that that was the way he would 

like to leave life. 

 

And as I stopped just to visit a gentleman who's just going 

downhill with cancer, when you see how some people struggle 

and suffer through life, we certainly don't like to see life come 

to an end, but I think most people at the end of the day want to 

think that they will be remembered for the good things, be 

remembered for their input and how they . . . the significant 

aspect they played and the role they played.  And I think each 

and every one of us, when our time comes, would almost as 

well think that to be taken in that sudden moment is maybe the 

more preferable way to leave life. 

 

But our hearts go out to Dorathea and the family because we all 

know what it feels like to lose someone so suddenly.  And so I 

express my condolences on behalf of myself and my wife and 

family as well to Dorathea and the family, each one involved in 

their remembrance of Walter Johnson. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

move, seconded by the member from Morse constituency: 

 

 By leave of the Assembly, that the resolution just passed, 

together with a transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased, be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf 

of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to Amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I will at the 

conclusion of my remarks move second reading of a Bill to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 

1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1984 the legislature has entertained at least 

five Bills to provide for or to amend early retirement programs.  

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, provides for retirement at a time earlier 

than what is otherwise provided in the pension plans to whom 

the Act pertains.  The retirement option and any payments to be 

made to the employee are at the discretion of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. 

 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act pertains 

to a number of public sector pension plans, namely the public 

employees government contributory superannuation plan, the 

public service superannuation plan, the Liquor Board 

superannuation plan, the Power Corporation superannuation 

plan, the Saskatchewan Telecommunications superannuation 

plan, and the Workers' Compensation Board superannuation 

plan. 

 

Except for the public employees government contributory 

superannuation plan, each plan has its own legislation.  The 

major purpose of The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act is to deal with all those issues that are common 

to all plans. 

 

At present, 30,000 active and inactive members are enrolled in 

the plans.  It is fair and reasonable, Mr. Speaker, to offer an 

early retirement option to those employees who have been 

affected by downsizing or those whose provisions have been 

abolished. 

 

Those are brief comments, Mr. Speaker.  I move second 

reading of An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not 

going to take a lot of time this afternoon to discuss the Bills.  

I'd like to have an opportunity to review the comments that 

were made by the minister, and we'd like as an opposition to 

follow up with any interested parties.  I would think, just from 

listening to the minister, that certainly some of the 

superannuates out there would be looking forward to the Bill 

and have already offered some ideas, and hopefully the ideas 

have been included in the Bill. 

 

So therefore at this time to allow for the debate, I move 

adjournment of debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Pringle that Bill No. 12 -- An Act to 

amend The Ombudsman Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I again 

rise to speak on this Bill, An Act to amend The Ombudsman 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that this Bill will establish a 

Children's Advocate in the province, which will be associated 

with the Office of the Ombudsman.  And as I indicated the 

other day, my colleague, the member from Rosthern, when he 

was minister of Social Services for a while, had looked at such 

a program of bringing forward an agency or an individual into 

play that would be able to be available to children or young 

people who would be looking for someone that they could 

speak to on a very quiet level and confidential level regarding 

problems that they may face in their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I look forward to further 

debate in the Bill when we get to committee, and we have a 

number of specific questions that we would like to bring to the 

minister's attention as we discuss the Bill further in committee. 

 

It's my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Children's Advocate 

will accomplish what the minister has indicated and the 

government is indicating that they hope it will. 

 

I don't think there is anyone who will dispute the fact that there 

are no worse crimes than those against children.  And if the 

Children's Advocate can in any way alleviate a child's pain and 

suffering, I welcome that position to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the years it's just an ongoing thing.  We 

have witnessed some horrific treatment of children in this 

province, but they're not unique.  They're problems that happen 

worldwide.  It's all too often that you turn on the news and are 

subjected to violence against children across this land and 

indeed the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're aware of the fact that the New Democratic 

Party promised to establish a child's ombudsman before they 

formed government, when they sat on this side of the House.  

And so it's gratifying to see that the government is finally 

moving in this direction, although we would ask why we've 

waited almost two and a half years to bring forward this 

legislation.  But at the same time I commend the minister for 

coming forward with that legislation. 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that in the Year of the Family it's 

appropriate that we address this issue, as it is something that is 

very important.  And of course it's on the minds of people right 

across this province as we think of the most recent scandal that 

has arisen out of the Martensville case, the Martensville sexual 

scandal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one thing though I think is very important that 

we have some very definite guidelines for the child advocate to 

follow.  Last night there was a disturbing news item on the 

news and I'm not sure how many individuals happened to catch 

the late news.  In fact I'm not sure, it may even be coming on 

tonight.  But it was talking about children taking their parents 

to court. And we've just witnessed, I believe it was down in the 

States, where a 12-year-old child took his parents to court and 

actually won in the court and won a large settlement. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, when we look at listening to children and 

giving children an avenue in which they can voice their 

concerns regarding what's happening in the home, we better be 

careful that we don't totally usurp the responsibility of parents.  

I think children must, as adults must, be responsible and held 

accountable for their actions. 

 

Sometimes things can be said by children, as they can by 

adults, that can be said in a point position of anger, or when a 

child is maybe angered over a decision by a parent 

administering discipline, that could at the end of the day 

become an avenue whereby a family is really taken through a 

very difficult circumstance. 

 

So I trust that, Mr. Speaker, as we look further into this Bill, as 

we look at the responsibility of the child's advocate, that we're 

not just setting up another avenue whereby we're opening up a 

whole new kettle of worms and we're usurping the total 

responsibility and maybe destroying the family life and the 

family relationship even to a greater mode than we already 

have it happening in our province today and across our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister reported on some of the task force's 

findings, specifically that people want an advocate who will be 

a voice for children and youth in crisis, will have a role in 

community education and prevention, is independent of control 

or influence of any government department or minister, is 

visible and accessible to the community. And I certainly do not 

object to these four themes or ideals. 

 

We agree with the fact that the individual should be totally 

removed from government.  We most particularly agree that 

this should be an independent body, one who is not bound to 

the government's ideals.  In other words, no patronage.  A 

political person will not be acceptable.  The minister himself 

agrees that this individual must be free of any political or other 

outside interference. 

 

And I trust that and I believe that as we have seen in recent 

days, that the government will consult with the opposition 

parties and the third party prior to this 

individual being hired, so that at the end of the day the public 

in general will have a strong feeling that whoever fills this role 

is a person who has very solid qualifications to meet the 

guidelines, that a person who is beyond the political 

interference atmosphere that may follow, a person who will 

have the ability and the freedom to really be out there and to 

listen to the needs of children as they are brought before him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I believe that even though 

we're still waiting for some responses from third-party interest 

groups that we can allow this Bill to proceed to committee. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have 

just a very brief comment.  And I want to attach myself to some 

of the comments made by the member from Moosomin because 

I do think it's important that we don't replace the role of the 

family but work as much as possible in this type of legislation 

to support the good functioning of the family in cooperation 

with the good functioning of government. 

 

But I do want to say that I think this Bill's important because it 

illustrates a point of view.  It says we care about our children 

and that we're prepared to illustrate that caring by providing 

children and their care-givers with a stronger voice in the 

community. 

 

And even more importantly, it says that spending is choosing 

because we all know there's no new money and yet we have 

still been able to place a priority on spending that affects family 

and children.  I have this discussion fairly frequently with 

people these days where they say, well if there's no more 

money, we throw up our hands.  And obviously in the 

circumstances in Saskatchewan and Canada we can't take that 

point of view because if there's no more money and we throw 

up our hands, what does that then say about the ongoing 

development of our society and our communities? 

 

So I appreciate that this kind of a Bill comes forward at a time 

when money is scarce.  And there was other examples of these 

kinds of choices, I think, in the '94-95 budget in the areas of 

child nutrition, initiatives to deal with preventing family 

violence, and young offenders programing to deal with more 

prevention that keeps kids again in the mainstream of their 

schools and their families rather than being moved off into 

institutions and out of school.  So these are all good examples. 

 

But in returning to The Ombudsman Act, I have a little bit of 

an example from this morning.  I was speaking to a group of 

grade 3, 4, and 5 students from Athabasca School, and the 

students had their own question period there where I was the 

only target for their questions.  And they asked what our job is 

as an MLA.  What do you do as an MLA? 

 

And I replied that MLAs can work with individuals and 

communities to solve problems and to improve the way 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

the government works for people.  This is the intention of The 

Ombudsman Act, is to provide an avenue to solve problems 

and to improve the way government works for people, 

particularly for young people. 

 

So I speak in support of this Bill, and I'm grateful that we still 

have our priorities in order.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to rise 

today to support The Ombudsman Act of 1994.  Shortly after 

forming the government in 1991, we made an important 

decision, a decision which has improved and will continue to 

improve the lives of thousands of children and families 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

That decision was to make the well-being of Saskatchewan 

children, youth, and their families a priority.  This in the face of 

a great deal of financial restraint -- we made this conscious 

decision.  And in the background we are working towards these 

three goals, Mr. Speaker:  prevention, early intervention, and 

support enhancements. 

 

This government recently announced a series of initiatives 

under Saskatchewan's action plan for children, something that I 

am very proud of.  These initiatives underline the importance 

we place on prevention services for children and support to 

vulnerable families. 

 

Being a teacher, a mother, and a grandmother, I am personally 

concerned with our children in Saskatchewan, their well-being 

and their security.  Prevention is most important; support to 

children and families at the right time.  And my mother used to 

say, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.  And this 

is still true today. 

 

These initiatives resulted from consultation and planning 

involving many government departments, agencies, private 

organizations, many NGOs (non-governmental organizations), 

and individuals. 

 

Establishment of a child's advocate as an independent voice for 

children and youth is a key component of the Saskatchewan 

action plan.  Saskatchewan people want a child's advocate who 

will do these things: will be a voice for children and youth in 

crisis, will have a role in community education and prevention 

-- again, the word prevention is important; is independent of 

control or influence by any government department or minister, 

and that should allay the fears of the opposition in that 

department, and is visible and accessible to the community. 

 

As a result, we are proposing implementation of a child's 

advocate to be associated with the Office of the Ombudsman.  

And again, to the members opposite, let me say that most 

children have at least one, if not many, natural advocates, 

including their parents and others who love and care for them 

on a day-to-day basis.  They know there is someone they can 

turn to for help, someone who will listen to their concerns and 

who will take action when it is necessary.  But the child's 

advocate is not intended to 

replace the role played by these individuals. 

 

There are other children, Mr. Speaker, who have no such 

independent voice.  They may be children who are living away 

from home because of abuse or neglect within the family.  

They may be children who find themselves growing up in 

families where their parents, through fear, family belief 

systems, are unable or unwilling to speak on their behalf.  They 

may be youth serving in custody in a young offender facility, 

far away from home and with little family contact.  These are 

the children and youth who will most benefit from the presence 

of a child's advocate. 

 

The purpose of the advocate, Mr. Speaker, will be to protect the 

interests of children and youth receiving services from the 

government and to ensure the services provided are 

appropriate.  This includes children of foster care and group 

homes. 

 

The advocate will be appointed in the same manner as the 

provincial Ombudsman and will be associated with that office.  

I was surprised to hear the member opposite even insinuate that 

it would be used in a political way.  The Ombudsman will have 

overall responsibility for ensuring the efficient and effective 

administration of both parts of the office.  The Children's 

Advocate will play a significant role in ensuring the rights of 

Saskatchewan children and the youth and see that these rights 

are protected. 

 

(1500) 

 

To recruit the most suitable candidate, the government is 

committed to holding a public competition for this important 

office.  Over the past few years the knowledge we know about 

what causes children and youth to drop out of schools, become 

violent, break the law or display antisocial behaviour has 

grown rapidly.  We have much information. 

 

Invariably the findings of research and studies emphasize the 

importance of strong, healthy families who are able to 

consistently and adequately meet the developmental needs of 

children and youth.  So this is the most important thing, is to 

give support to these families at a critical time. 

 

Today, for a number of reasons, many families are 

experiencing levels of stress which they are ill-equipped to 

cope with.  The results can be conflict, dysfunction, and in 

many cases, abuse of children.  Often these results could be 

avoided simply by making parents more aware of what 

constitutes normal childhood development.  Again this is 

prevention, education, and awareness.  Also providing parents 

with effective parenting and conflict resolution skills is critical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amendments to The Ombudsman Act provides the 

advocate with the power and responsibility to become involved 

in public education regarding the needs and interests and 

well-being of the Saskatchewan children and youth.  This 

provides the advocate with the ability to educate the public and 

to help reduce the number of children requiring 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

services. 

 

It is fair to say that we are committed to a compassionate 

package, Mr. Speaker, since there was a 9.3 per cent increase in 

funding to social programs; a 1.6 per cent increase in health in 

the 1994-95 budget when all other provinces are going exactly 

in the opposite direction. 

 

And certainly we are providing more leadership than the 

Leader of the Third Party from Greystone who effectively, 

when she voted against the budget, she voted against SIP 

(Saskatchewan Income Plan) increases; she voted against SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) increases; she voted against 

the child action plan; she voted against labour legislation, 

occupational health; she voted against minimum wage 

increases; she voted against increases to day care grants; she 

voted against assistance to teenage mothers in schools which 

keeps moms in school.  So I want to say . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- So I want to say, in contrast to this, we are 

proposing plans that are going to help and assist the youth of 

this province. So I will be voting for this Bill.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to begin by 

saying that there has been far too little emphasis placed on the 

rights of children in our society to a safe and protected start in 

life.  The Liberal Party is pleased to see that this legislation has 

finally come to the floor of the Assembly for debate.  As is the 

case with any new undertaking, we must approach this issue 

with objectivity, and I think a great deal of optimism.  I will 

offer some critical analysis today, but I hope that the members 

opposite will take this constructively and not personally. 

 

I believe that after nine years of sitting in opposition, many of 

the members opposite should have an appreciation for the value 

of input from this side of the House and a sense of challenge 

that it is to . . . the sense of the challenge it is to review 

legislation without the benefit of having worked through all of 

the stages in its development. 

 

So I want the members opposite to know that we in the Liberal 

Party care a great deal about this proposal and are genuinely 

interested in contributing our perspective on what are the 

positive elements and also in fulfilling our obligations to 

question those aspects of the Bill which should perhaps be 

examined more fully before proceeding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spent a long time talking with people who 

deal with children through non-government agencies and 

others, people who counsel children.  And I have personally 

been involved in therapy for children for many years, and I've 

talked with educators and lawyers and people in social services.  

The minister will know that I have 

appreciated the opportunities he has extended to meet and 

discuss issues of concern, and our caucus is committed to doing 

what we can with the resources at our disposal to participate 

fully. 

 

I have undertaken to review the report of the task force on the 

child advocate and I have spoken with people involved in the 

preparation of the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it was unfortunate that after having nine 

years to contemplate the direction it would take in government, 

and then following the election having power to act since 1991, 

the New Democrats opposite would strike a task force that had 

just five months to investigate and prepare its final report. 

 

I am particularly astonished that the task force, in establishing 

the Children's Advocate, was given less time to do its work 

than the commission on judges' salaries, the Electoral 

Boundaries Commission, and others.  It does give me pause to 

wonder about the importance placed on this task force when 

they were hampered by such unreasonable time constraints. 

 

The report clearly states that there were no consultations with 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations or the Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan.  I know the minister recognizes the 

significance of that exclusion from the consultation process, 

and I wonder just why the department would not allow for 

sufficient time for that process to be undertaken. 

 

The other alarming trend for which this government has 

become notorious in its other commissions is the accusation, 

and I quote from page 1 of the task force report: that the 

department had a preconceived notion about the role of the 

provincial advocate and that the task force was a means of 

rubber-stamping that process. 

 

In spite of those difficulties, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 

individuals involved delivered a pretty good piece of work.  I 

believe it is significant that the child advocate differs 

significantly in mandate from the Office of the Ombudsman, 

and I am satisfied that this legislation will achieve that 

separation which is of critical importance. 

 

I appreciate the empowerment of the advocate to be able to take 

initiatives in public education and in initiating investigations 

and challenges to the status quo where agencies are involved in 

delivering services to children and youth.  What is of concern 

to me, Mr. Speaker, is that the legislation appears to be 

deficient in some critical areas when it is held up against the 

recommendations of the task force, and I hope that we will 

have considerable time to do some further consultation about 

these discrepancies before the Bill is voted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the task force on the establishment of the child 

advocate raised something which I believe is absolutely crucial 

to the advocate's role in defending and advocating for the rights 

of children in Saskatchewan.  The force recommended, and I 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

heartily concur with this, that the advocacy process must be 

available to all children and youth. 

 

It is apparent from the way in which the legislation is worded 

that the New Democrat child advocate model is definitely 

restricted to serving those children receiving services from 

departments and agencies of the government.  I suggest that 

there are many circumstances in which a child who is not 

receiving services from a government department might need 

those services. 

 

For example, I refer to a recent incident in a Saskatoon school 

where there was an incident of violence after hours in a park 

between two schools.  At the time, neither the victim nor the 

party accused of perpetrating the act were receiving services 

from a government agency or department. 

 

Some time after the incident a youth was held after class and 

drilled by police about the incident, accusing him of 

committing the violence and asking for his alibi.  The youth 

was proven innocent but was visibly distraught by the actions 

of the police constable. 

 

The parents were not informed that the questioning was taking 

place and were thus unavailable to offer support and 

reassurance to their child after he was released.  The youth's 

parents have challenged this police procedure with the 

Saskatoon police department and have been told it is routine to 

question children without obligation to inform the parents until 

charges are being laid. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it the responsibility of the parent to initiate a 

review of this process, or is she able to turn to the child 

advocate in this situation, given that her child is not receiving a 

service from the government agency or department? 

 

Clearly the Saskatoon City Police is not considered a 

government agency or department, so would the child advocate 

be able to initiate a review of this policy, which clearly does 

not serve the best interests of children who are subjected to 

such interrogation without their parents being aware that it is 

happening. 

 

I think we have to be very specific about what we want to see 

result from the creation of this department.  I believe that those 

involved in the task force, as well as those of us who support 

the creation of a child advocate, do not simply want another 

level of bureaucracy in which unresolved situations can rattle 

around outside the purview of agencies which have set them 

aside. 

 

I believe we all want to see, all of us in government and 

opposition and the NGOs, we want an effective instrument to 

address and promote the well-being of our children, Mr. 

Minister.  What is of concern here is that the legislation 

actually create what we expect and needed to create. 

 

Mr. Minister, the legislation itself is only one component of 

producing the results.  What is of equal 

significance is the resources provided to the department which 

will actually empower the advocate to do the work outlined in 

the mandate. 

 

The legislation refers to receiving letters from children which 

will be forwarded unopened to the Children's Advocate.  I think 

it is commendable to offer that kind of respect for the 

confidentiality of approaches made by children.  At the same 

time, we are unable to see from the legislation how children 

will be made aware that the Children's Advocate exists, what 

protection that the department provides for children. 

 

I think it is important that we be made aware prior to enacting 

this legislation just what resources are going to be made 

available to this advocate, so that we can judge whether this 

department will be truly empowered to do its work. 

 

I note that other provinces provide for a very extensive 

awareness process to make children aware of the function of 

the child advocate.  And I echo the concerns of the task force 

that children should have first call on the resources of society. 

 

I have talked with many people about the legislation itself, and 

there is considerable concern that without seeing the funding 

proposal for the advocate, we are unable to assess whether this 

will be more figurehead than functionary. 

 

There were many recommendations made by the task force 

which do not appear in the legislation, and it is extremely 

difficult to assess whether the advocate will be able to address 

those recommendations unless sufficient resources are 

provided.  The task force specifically recommends that the 

principles outlined in the report become part of the operational 

policies and practices of the child and youth advocacy 

commission.  It is regrettable that the legislation does not 

indicate that those principles will become the foundation for the 

operation of the department. 

 

I note as well that the task force specifically indicates that the 

advocate must report to the legislature.  However, it is 

somewhat vague as to how that process should take place and 

the legislation itself seems to avoid the process of reporting to 

the legislature completely. 

 

That concerns me, Mr. Speaker, because I believe there is a 

useful function here in having an advocate report to an all-party 

committee that represents the Legislative Assembly.  I say that 

because the child advocate may indeed need an advocate when 

it comes to requesting appropriate funding and resources to 

carry out the mandate on behalf of children. 

 

Obviously there has been some study of what budget would be 

required to fund the advocate, but I believe it is important for 

that information to be made public so that we can determine 

whether there will be adequate money provided for test case 

litigation for instance.  If we cannot have that assurance, then it 

should be included in the legislation that provision be 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

made for those resources. 

 

In examining the proposed budget put forward by the task 

force, I note that a budget of 1.7 million has been put forward, 

and that budget is specifically tailored to the model the task 

force has suggested.  In comparison, the provision of resources 

for the Ombudsman department which will encompass this 

department has risen by just $247,000.  So I question just what 

divergence there is between the recommended model and what 

the government intends to deliver. 

 

I urge the minister to take note of warning issued by the task 

force on page 46 of its report, and I quote: 

 

 If the government creates a voice without giving it the 

resources to speak, it will simply result in false hope and 

another broken promise to children. 

 

I certainly hope this will not be the case and I would like to 

have some assurance of that for the children of Saskatchewan 

before this legislation is implemented. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that this is an important first step 

towards protecting the rights of children and indeed advocating 

on their behalf.  I remain unconvinced, however, that the Bill in 

its present form accurately reflects the model proposed by the 

task force.  Further, I question the wisdom of commissioning a 

task force if we are then going to ignore its recommendations 

when enacting legislation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I will be undertaking further consultation with 

those affected by this legislation and will have further input 

when this Bill reaches Committee of the Whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, I rise in this debate today to indicate support for 

the general overall thrust of the Bill.  I think it's clear that even 

from the remarks of the member opposite that it's an initiative 

that has been overdue in the province, and it's with some pride 

that members on this side of the House take a great deal of 

pride in having this legislation come forward.  I mean after all, 

I don't think there's anybody in this Assembly who would put a 

price tag on the life of a child, of any child in this province.  

And in the enhancement of children's lives, we feel that this 

Bill moves their right to protection under the law, to develop 

their full potential as individuals, as individual human beings, 

is enhanced by this.  And therefore we see it as a good step 

forward. 

 

But I'd like to speak for just a couple of minutes about some of 

the issues that the member has raised.  First of all is the 

question of time line.  She said that the report of the task force . 

. . the task force did not have enough time to report or to do an 

in-depth study or to develop 

its mandate in a proper time frame.  And that I think is a 

debatable point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I'd like to bring it to the attention of the hon. member that 

the task force which brought forward this legislation had a lot 

greater period of time to deal with its report than the provincial 

departments of Social Services, Education, manpower and 

training have to deal with the two-month, restricted time line 

put forward by the federal Liberal government who wants to 

reform the whole social safety net system in two months. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, without any consultation, without a period 

by which the resources of the people of this country can be 

brought to bear on that problem, the Liberals there stand.  And 

I believe it's somewhat hypocritical of them to talk about, well, 

we're going to have five months for this task force to bring 

forth its report, yet in terms of trying to reform the whole social 

safety net system in this country that that is limited to two 

months. 

 

And perhaps the member would write the Prime Minister and 

ask for a greater extension on behalf of all the people who deal 

with the social safety net, not only in her constituency but on 

behalf of the people of this province.  Perhaps she would take 

pen to paper and ask for a greater extension so that as we're 

designing a new social safety net for the people of this country, 

we have a greater period of time than two months. 

 

So you can't have it both ways.  It's either too short or too long.  

Perhaps it is . . . perhaps the task force didn't have a long 

enough period of time, but if that's the case then certainly the 

reform of the whole social safety net system in this country 

needs greater than two months, a greater period of time than 

two months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. members raise the 

question of the reportage to the Ombudsman when incidents 

arise other than dealing with government departments or 

government agencies.  And while certainly, certainly 

somewhere down the road that may prove to be a deficiency 

and a weakness in the particular Bill, I might say, Mr. Speaker, 

that in terms of the incidents that she raises, there are other 

agencies to which those kind of complaints . . . those kind of 

complaints can be brought forward.  I'm sure that the minister 

will have much more to say on that at a future date, so I won't 

go on. 

 

But I do want to take up the issue of resources because the 

comments of the member centred on the resources that will be 

provided to the ombudsperson -- the children's ombudsperson 

-- and the question of how much; what's the quantity? 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, it's plain that nobody in this 

Assembly puts a price tag on a child's life.  I think that that's 

clear.  But there are some practical realities that one must deal 

with in terms of developing a program.  And while the 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

legislation . . . while the legislation outlines a general 

framework for the activities of the ombudsperson, what is not 

known, first of all, is precisely how much activity that the 

ombudsperson will have in terms of developing the function.  

This is an evolutionary process by which the office will unfold 

and the role of the children's ombudsperson will mature, if you 

like, over time, so one does not know exactly how much it's 

going to cost us to run it. 

 

But secondly, secondly, the member seems to criticize this 

legislation based on the fact that she does not know or does not 

think that there will be enough resources given to the children's 

ombudsperson to run it.  And I would ask the hon. member to 

be a little more precise.  Either the hon. member or perhaps the 

Leader of the Third Party would be a little bit more precise into 

the dollar figures that they would provide. 

 

If they criticize the government for not putting enough 

resources into the children's ombudsperson, the question 

remains, how much is enough and how much would they put 

into it?  How much would a Liberal government, should they 

form the government, how much would they allocate to the 

children's ombudsperson?  I don't think we'll get an answer. 

 

I don't think we'll get an answer to that because, like the 

member from Shaunavon's flippant use of a write-off of $167 

million when it comes to farm debt, we're not going to get them 

to try to precise the amount of money that is needed to run the 

program.  All I would say to the hon. member is, prior to 

throwing . . . or prior to criticizing the amount of resources 

dedicated to the position, perhaps it would do her and her party 

a much better service to watch and see how the program 

unfolds, how much is needed and how much indeed may or 

may not be lacking in the future. 

 

And it's surprising though, Mr. Speaker, finally -- let me just 

say this -- that I find it somewhat surprising the enthusiasm that 

the member exhibits for this legislation, given the activities of 

her leader towards other children's initiatives and other 

initiatives that this government has brought forward that in fact 

deal with some of the problems faced by children in this 

province. 

 

After all, it was the Leader of the Third Party who voted 

against the child action plan.  She voted against the FIP 

(Family Income Plan) and SAP increases.  She is taking a 

position regarding the minimum wage for working families.  

And we'll see as time unfolds what her position is on the new 

labour legislation as it relates to those at the bottom of the 

economic heap when it comes to working. 

 

We want to see what position the Liberals take when it comes 

to the new labour standards initiatives that this government is 

going to put forward, and whose side she stands with.  Will she 

stand with the children of working people of this province or 

will she stand with her corporate masters -- those who pay the 

coffers of the Liberal Party?  You know the proof of this 

pudding 

will be in the eating, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to 

seeing that. 

 

But not to be totally uncharitable, I must say that it's good to 

see that at least there's a preliminary indication that the 

members of the Liberals support this particular initiative, and 

look forward to hearing the response from those of the 

Progressive Conservatives. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we move in to the next item, I would 

like to draw members' attention . . . during the last debate I had 

three people cross between the Chair and the member speaking.  

I would like to draw members' attention to your own handbook 

on page 69, under decorum in the Assembly, which says, no. 

(4): 

 

 A Member must not pass between a member speaking and 

the Chair. 

 

I would appreciate, members, if you would abide by your own 

rules.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Pringle that Bill No. 13 -- An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Assistance Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated the other day, I agree 

with the minister in his general assessment that the social 

assistance plan has to be reworked.  And I applaud 

Saskatchewan's decision to participate in the intergovernmental 

review of social programs recently announced by the federal 

government. 

 

During such trying economic times, Mr. Speaker, reform is 

necessary.  It is especially important to develop and impose 

reform programs when the number of people on welfare 

sky-rockets, as it has here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're all aware of the welfare rate in 

Saskatchewan, how it has increased dramatically in the last two 

or three years and again in December.  Mr. Speaker, let me 

remind you the number of people on welfare in Saskatchewan 

has jumped to 78,406 in December -- an increase of over 1,600 

from one month earlier and over 21,000 since this 

administration took office. 

 

These numbers, Mr. Speaker, are an indication of the 

government's failed economic policies and the devastating 

effect they are having on our province's families.  Members 

opposite would have everyone believe that the increase is due 

to the federal 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

government's decision to stop funding Indians living off 

reserves.  The downloading did have some effect, Mr. Speaker, 

but accounts for less than half of the total increase in welfare 

increase cases through the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have always maintained that people don't want 

a cheque from government; they want a cheque from an 

employer.  Education and training are integral in achieving this 

goal.  Being the members opposite are talking about reform in 

this area, we hope to see some movement in this regard. 

 

I understand that essentially this Bill will allow the department 

to enter into an agreement with Indian bands, tribal councils, 

and others to deliver the social assistance programs.  It will 

allow first nations people to assume some or greater control 

over the delivery of programs and services to their people. 

 

The minister noted in his second reading speech that 

departmental officials are currently holding discussions with 

the Prince Albert Tribal Council for the establishment of 

agreements with five northern bands to continue to deliver 

social assistance to their members.  Lac la Ronge, Peter 

Ballantyne, Montreal Lake, Hatchet Lake, and Black Lake 

bands have delivered the social assistance program since the 

federal government withdrew from providing social assistance 

to Indian people living off reserve. 

 

The minister noted that discussions are also under way with 

other bands throughout Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, we have 

some questions on this which we will address during 

committee. 

 

The Bill also removes all references to municipalities and their 

power to administer social assistance programs.  Mr. Speaker, 

we have not discussed this with the municipalities, how they 

feel about being removed from this legislation. However, being 

no municipality has delivered the social assistance program 

since 1989, it may not be a problem.  We will continue on with 

our consultations and report back to the Assembly if there is a 

problem in this regard. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I look forward to 

further debate in the House regarding the Bill before us, and we 

will have more questions to bring before the minister regarding 

this Bill.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education, Training and Employment 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would like to ask the minister to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here today. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chair.  To my right is Dr. Brij Mathur, who is the associate 

deputy minister of Education, Training and Employment; 

immediately behind me is Robin Johnson, acting executive 

director of finance and operations for the department; and to 

Mr. Johnson's right is Jim Benning, who is the CEO (chief 

executive officer) for the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network which is the distance education and broadcast 

network. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, officials, thank you for coming in today.  It's 

appropriate that we be discussing Department of Education on 

Education Week. 

 

Education is very important in this province.  Without it we 

will have no future.  It's the future of our children that 

education is all about.  It's what they learn throughout the 

whole education system that provides for our future. 

 

Madam Minister, I believe that today education is in jeopardy.  

We look at various cuts that have taken place in the funding for 

education over the years and those funding cuts, Madam 

Minister, cannot fail to have an impact on the quality of our 

education.  When you take a 2 per cent cut, followed by a 2 per 

cent cut, followed now by a 4 per cent cut, something has to 

give, Madam Minister. 

 

If the people of Saskatchewan could be assured that all of these 

cut-backs took place within administration, within the so-called 

waste and mismanagement of the department, I'm sure they 

would be happy about it.  But when they look at their own 

school systems, they find that that is indeed not the case. 

 

Let's take a look at one example of what this budget means to 

our province's K to 12 education system because of the 4 per 

cent cut to operating grants in this budget.  Now that's 4 per 

cent projected cuts, Madam Minister.  In approximately 66 per 

cent of the school divisions within Saskatchewan that cut is 

above 4 per cent.  In some cases as much as 100 per cent. 

 

That is going to have an impact, Madam Minister.  Now if you 

lose 100 per cent but it's only $1,000, that won't have a major 

impact.  But in some of these divisions, Madam Minister, 

they're losing millions of dollars.  And that will have an impact. 

 

Most of the cases, Madam Minister, as I've said, will take 

place.  The cuts will be between 5 and 30 per cent for the K to 

12 education system.  And these cuts total up to $14.3 million 

-- $14.3 million out of the operating grants of the K to 12 

education system in this year alone. 

 

And it gets worse.  In addition to the loss of these operating 

grants, Madam Minister, the boards will face additional costs of 

$3 million in teacher salary increases, and new benefits are 

estimated for teachers which will cost an additional 250,000; 

salary 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

increases for non-teaching staff estimated at some two and a 

half million; natural gas increases of 390,000; UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission) and CPP (Canada 

Pension Plan) increases in excess of one and a half million. 

 

(1530) 

 

Now those may change, Madam Minister, because of the 

federal government's budget where they cut the cost of UIC.  

So I'd like to know when we get to this point, Madam Minister, 

just what impact those changes will have. 

 

Workers' compensation increases of 125,000 this year, and the 

list goes on, Madam Minister, particularly when you take into 

account the other utility rate increases that have occurred -- 

SaskPower, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 

SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) says that you cannot remove more than $20 

million from an education system in a province the size of 

Saskatchewan and not expect that there will be consequences.  

We already see some of those consequences taking place across 

this province.  The SSTA says that children in classrooms are 

going to feel the effects of funding cut-backs.  School boards 

cannot take the hit like this and deliver the same services and 

opportunities to students that they have in the past.  Further, 

this year's budget is jeopardizing the ability of communities to 

provide high quality education. 

 

Those aren't my words, Madam Minister, these are quotes 

directly from the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association.  

They say that program cuts are inevitable; they say that 

education is in jeopardy  The SSTA says that most school 

boards will have no choice except to make significant increases 

in their mill rates which mean that local property taxes will be 

going up. 

 

And, Madam Minister, when you go out and talk to the 

property taxpayers of this province, it doesn't matter whether 

they're urban or rural, they will tell you that they cannot afford 

to pay any more.  In fact, if you take a look at the budgets of 

most municipalities, you will find that as the property tax rates 

increase, they pick up very little new money because what they 

gain from those who can afford to pay, they lose from those 

who can no longer afford to pay their property taxes. 

 

And, Madam Minister, that's what you called no program cuts.  

This is what the NDP (New Democratic Party) have called 

delivering the promise.  Maybe the member opposite has 

forgotten the kinds of promises that they made regarding 

education when they were sitting on the opposite side of the 

House, Madam Minister, on this side. 

 

The Premier, the member from Riversdale, said in the Yorkton 

This Week newspaper of October 16, 1990: Increased 

education spending is a priority for the NDP.  All I can say is 

that we simply have to find the money. 

 And that's a quote from our current Premier, Madam Minister.  

We have to simply find the money. 

 

The SSTA says that there's been a decrease in K to 12 funding 

of $20 million or more, and yet this government has found $25 

million for casinos -- $25 million to buy VLTs (video lottery 

terminal), Madam Minister.  There seems to be some sort of a 

priority error here with the government.  And yet the Premier 

said that we simply have to find the money for education. 

 

Again a quote from the member from Riversdale, April 19, 

1990 in Hansard.  After a 3 per cent increase in operating 

grants to university, the Premier said in this legislature that the 

government was cutting back on their own responsibility for 

education and loading it up on the local property taxpayers and 

that's wrong. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, if it was wrong in 1990 when the 

member from Riversdale said it, why is it right today?  What's 

the difference?  The mere fact that now the NDP sit on the 

government side on the government benches that it's right to 

offload onto the property tax base?  I think not, Madam 

Minister.  I think if it was wrong in 1990, it's still wrong today. 

 

Again, he said, and I quote again, this is the member from 

Riversdale: 

 

 . . . you're passing the buck from Regina right on to the 

ratepayers and the local property taxpayers, putting the 

crunch not only on the teachers but on the trustees. 

 

April 19, 1990 from Hansard. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Good speech.  Just a little out of time 

though.  Things have changed since then. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: --  Well the member from Regina Churchill 

Downs says things have changed.  And indeed they have. 

 

In 1990, when the member from Riversdale spoke those words, 

he didn't have to deliver.  But all of a sudden come October 21, 

1991, the people of this province elected him based on these 

words. 

 

And yet when it comes time to deliver, all of a sudden those 

promises are not met.  Those words were hollow, Mr. Minister, 

and the Premier should not have said that if he didn't mean to 

follow through.  And, Mr. Chairman, these comments were 

made after an increase of 3 per cent, an increase of 3 per cent in 

the operating grants to the K to 12 system.  Again I quote the 

member from Riversdale, May 7, 1990, from Hansard: 

 

 I think every one of us in this House understands that these 

cut-backs to higher learning university education by the 

government opposite are not only an attack on education and 

the opportunities of our youth for tomorrow, but it's really an 

attack on one of the largest economic engines in our economy 

in Saskatchewan. 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Well at a time when the minister responsible for Economic 

Development has difficulty coming up with examples of 

economic growth within this province, the Minister of 

Education is cutting what the member from Riversdale claimed 

was one of the largest economic engines in our province.  It 

seems strange that if this large economic engine was so 

important in 1990, why it isn't that important today, why the 

minister allows the Finance minister to cut her budgets. 

 

I quote again from Hansard, March 21, 1990, from the 

member from Riversdale.  So when the NDP talk about 

delivering promises, how about this one?  The Premier 

promised that the NDP were going to, and I quote: "We're 

going to give education the top priority." 

 

That's what he said, Mr. Chairman -- the top priority.  Well if 

education is receiving the top priority under this government, 

how do they explain a 2 per cent cut and a 2 per cent and then a 

4 per cent cut?  Perhaps what is really happening here is that 

the ministers of Education don't have the clout to maintain their 

departments and to provide the best service that they can for 

education within Saskatchewan. 

 

And what's happened to all these promises?  What happened 

when the Premier was asking the then minister of Education: 

 

 How could you allow education funding to deteriorate to this 

state of affairs such that your government's underfunding at 

the university has left people like Dr. Ivany in a position 

where he had to say that there is nothing which is sacred, 

nothing that can be protected? 

 

And this is from May 7, 1990, again from Hansard. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, perhaps it would be 

interesting to talk to the presidents of the University of Regina 

and the university of saskatoon, Saskatchewan.  What is 

happening to their programing with your funding cuts?  

They've already had to hike tuition fees up significantly last 

year. I believe the number was 13 per cent.  And that was under 

the NDP that said education must be a top priority.  Some 

priority. 

 

Mr. Chairman, again this was after increases to operating 

grants, and the NDP said it was not enough.  They said they 

would do better. But that wasn't enough, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier of today went on to say: 

 

 Don't let any government tell you (that) they don't have 

enough funds for education.  The money is there. 

 

I'll read it again. 

 

 Don't let any government tell you (that) they don't have 

enough funds for education.  The money is there. 

 

And that's a quote out of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald 

of February 19, 1988. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, it doesn't seem like the 

money is here.  Significant decreases to funding; more than $20 

million cut from the K to 12 system.  What's happening to 

those promises that were made back when the Premier was 

sitting on this side of the House, when the Minister of 

Education was sitting on this side of the House.  What's 

happening to our operating grants in the system today? 

 

Last year's budget cut operating grants for universities, regional 

and federated colleges and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) by 2 per cent.  And this 

year's budget, the budget of supposedly no program cuts and no 

tax increases, slashes the operating grants by a further 4 per 

cent on average, 4 per cent on average.  It's certainly a lot more 

than that for individual institutions. 

 

Promises were made by the members opposite, Mr. Chairman, 

and those promises have been broken.  And this budget is no 

exception.  The present Minister of Education was no different 

while in opposition from her leader, the member from 

Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman.  She also had a lot to 

say about education.  Addressing the increase in operating 

grant she said: 

 

 . . . how on earth can you say to the public of this province 

that education is a priority of your government when we see 

massive school closures in rural Saskatchewan, massive 

teacher lay-offs in rural Saskatchewan . . . 

 

And that was a quote from the current Minister of Education on 

April 25, 1991 in Hansard. 

 

(1545) 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, if we take a look at what's happening in 

the education system today across this province, we see school 

closures.  They don't seem to have slowed down a lot since this 

member became the Minister of Education.  We continue to see 

massive teacher lay-offs.  I believe last year it was 288 teachers 

less in the system than there was the year before. 

 

And how many more are going to be gone, Mr. Chairman, 

when this supposed 4 per cent cut hits the school boards, when 

those school boards, a good number of them, are looking at 10, 

20, 30, 40 per cent decreases in their grants? They're either 

going to have to go to their property taxpayer who can't afford 

to pay any longer or they're going to have to cut programs.  If 

they cut programs, which the government says isn't going to 

happen, then they're going to lay off teachers. 

 

So you're going to have less programs and less teachers.  And 

in the long run that means less income for the government and 

the whole cycle keeps on going again.  When those teachers no 

longer have employment in those communities, are they going 

to stay there?  Maybe some, but a good many of them will pull 

up stakes and move elsewhere looking for jobs. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

And so that means the property tax base goes down -- less 

income for the school divisions and again the cycle rolls on.  In 

the end it means that education is going to be hurt in this 

province. 

 

The Minister of Finance, and I'd like to quote another quote 

from her: 

 

 When you take all of the rhetoric out of the budget speech, 

we learn that the operating grants to universities, technical 

schools, and the school system have only increased by 2.9 per 

cent at a time when inflation is running at 4.8 . . . I would like 

you to explain to the young people of this province how you 

(can) justify your government's decision to cut educational 

funding. 

 

That was from April 2, 1990. 

 

And perhaps that's a good question that that member asked at 

that time, and perhaps she can explain it today.  How do you 

explain to the young people of this province, when you're 

cutting the K to 12 system by 4 per cent when inflation is only 

running at about one and a half?  You seemed to be seriously 

concerned there, Madam Minister, about a decrease of 1.9 per 

cent less than the inflation rate.  Well if you take a look at your 

budget, Madam Minister, you're looking there at a five and a 

half per cent difference between your cuts and the inflation 

rate. 

 

And even if you say the inflation rate is zero today, that's still 4 

per cent -- more than twice the cut you were complaining about 

in 1990.  Madam Minister, I think you have a lot of explaining 

to do to the people of Saskatchewan as to what your cuts are 

doing to education today and what you were talking about in 

1990. 

 

The same member that made that quote is now the minister 

responsible for Education, and she's the one that's handing out 

the 4 per cent cuts.  And that's going to mean quotas.  It's going 

to mean school closures.  It's going to mean teacher lay-offs 

and program cuts.  And, Mr. Chairman, the minister knows it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we've already seen headlines in newspapers that 

read: trustees still scrambling; fees up, job cuts at the U of R 

(University of Regina); schools face reductions; quality of 

education threatened by cuts; school cuts will be felt; U of R 

prepares to make major cuts; school officials fret about 

previous cuts; and many, many more. 

 

And the members opposite say that there will be no program 

cuts and no tax increases.  Well, Mr. Chairman, if that's 

delivering the promise, I think they rate a zero, a failure mark, 

because programs will be cut.  And while the government . . . 

the Minister of Finance might not be signing her name to the 

tax increases, her cuts will certainly mean tax increases to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan through their property taxes.  It also 

means that there will be increases through utility rates, and that 

in turn will be offloaded onto the property tax base. 

I guess the Minister of Finance thinks that because her cuts are 

4 per cent, and the Minister of Education, that these cuts were 

announced last year, that they don't count this year.  Well, 

Madam Minister, you may not count them but the people of 

Saskatchewan are certainly counting every dollar extra that will 

be taken out of their pockets to make up this difference, and 

they are counting every dollar that's taken out of their school 

divisions because their children are suffering because of it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Dorothy Fortier of the SSTA says, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the fact that school boards were warned about the cut 

doesn't make it any easier. 

 

From the Star-Phoenix, February 18, 1994.  She says that: 

 

 Boards can't keep providing the services they are now 

without an increase in education funding. 

 

Either the programs are cut or education funding from the 

province is increased.  Well it doesn't appear that the minister 

has the capabilities of increasing the funding, as she failed to 

convince the Minister of Finance that education did have an 

importance in this province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is no way the board can escape program 

cuts.  A representative from the Saskatoon trustees says, and I 

quote: 

 

 Previous cuts in funding resulted in two school closures, 

trimming 13 staff . . . and a cut in student transportation last 

year . . . 

 

 Material and equipment budgets have already been cut this 

year and the board won't be contributing as much to the 

capital . . . (projects). 

 

And this is out of the Star-Phoenix of February 18 of 1994. 

 

When the minister made the announcement last year that 

education funding was to be cut 4 per cent this year, a number 

of the boards went ahead and cut their staff, they cut their 

programs, they cut their material purchases, they cut their 

transportation in preparation of this.  So some of that hit is 

happening.  They've projected that in their budgets and it's 

taking effect this year.  But there will be further increases 

because of the change to the formula which raised up the mill 

rates.  And that is going to have a serious impact also. 

 

How can the member opposite claim that this budget means no 

program cuts?  How can the government say that this budget is 

a good news budget and that there will be no adverse effects? 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I think there will be 

serious adverse effects in this year's . . . from 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

this year's budget to education in Saskatchewan.  There will be 

a good number -- although I use the term "good" advisedly 

because it will mean school closures.  There will be schools 

across this province that close as a direct result of your 4 per 

cent cut.  Your 4 per cent cut.  There will be teachers who are 

losing their positions because of your 4 per cent cut.  And there 

will be students, Madam Minister, who can no longer carry 

forward with their program because that particular part of their 

program will be gone. 

 

And, Madam Minister, how do you explain your rhetoric of the 

1990s and the actions you're carrying forward today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to thank the member for those 

serious . . . a series of questions. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And they were serious questions. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- And they were serious questions.  And 

they certainly are questions that I would expect the member to 

raise. 

 

Now let me say this to the member.  That when our government 

came to office in October of 1991, it became clear to us after 

the Gass Commission that this province during the previous 11, 

10, 9 years -- 9 years under the former Devine administration, 

had become somewhat of a financial basket case.  And in fact 

at that time it appeared as though the deficit was going to be 

some $1.3 billion for the fiscal year 1991-92.  Our Finance 

minister and our cabinet at the time got busy and we were able 

to reduce that deficit to some $800 million. 

 

We then decided that if we were going to maintain the solvency 

of this province, that we had to come in with a fiscal plan over 

a period of time that would allow us to maintain ourselves as a 

solvent jurisdiction, that being the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if you look at the budget estimates, in this fiscal year our 

department, the Department of Education, Training and 

Employment, has a budget of $888.7 million.  If you look at 

what we are going to pay for servicing the public debt, and this 

can be found on page 8 of the Saskatchewan Estimates for 

1994-95, we will pay $842.5 million on servicing the public 

debt. 

 

Now basically if you go through your Estimates book, you will 

see that the largest expenditure in this province is in the area of 

health care.  The people of this province consider our health 

care system to be of primary importance to them.  And in this 

fiscal year we will spend $1.5 billion as a people on the 

collective health of our citizens. 

 

The next important priority item for the people of our province 

is the area of education, training and employment, and we will 

spend $888.5 million on education. 

 

And then of course one would expect that it would be 

some other government department that we would be spending 

the next budget item on.  But no, in fact it isn't.  Servicing the 

public debt, $842.5 million.  Now why would this be?  It is 

because of the financial incompetence of the previous 

government. 

 

Now our government made a decision that we were going to 

get to a balanced budget by 1996-97. And we set forward a 

plan.  And if you look to other provinces across this country, 

and even if you look to the federal government, after we laid 

out our plan to get to a zero budget, no deficit, balanced budget, 

all other provinces have begun to do the same thing. 

 

Because what we have learned in this exercise of spending a lot 

of money, money that we didn't have, is that we were basically 

mortgaging the future of our children and our youth.  And that's 

why we see some of the difficulties in Canadian society, 

particularly when it comes to our ability as a people to deliver 

services and programs that are important to our people. 

 

Now our government has decided that education and health 

care will remain priorities of the people of this province.  And 

that's why you see the commitment that we've made to these 

two particular government departments. 

 

We think it is important that we educate our young people for 

the future of this province.  And you would think that, based on 

the member's comments, that our education system is going to 

hell in a hand basket.  But I want to assure the member it's not. 

 

Our department just released a provincial indicators' report that 

shows, among other things, that Saskatchewan students are 

doing very well in comparison to other parts of the country.  In 

fact Saskatchewan students excel at English language.  We 

excel.  We have the most literate population in the country.  

Regina, Saskatoon were named the reading capitals of North 

America. 

 

And why is that?  Because of the emphasis that all governments 

in this province, including the previous Conservative 

government, the previous Liberal government, and CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) governments before 

that, have put on the education of our people.  That is important 

to the people of this province and that is found through the 

people that they elect, education is important. 

 

Now if you look at what other jurisdictions are doing, I just 

want to say this.  And I've had the opportunity to meet with my 

provincial counterparts from various parts of the country, all 

the way from Liberal Nova Scotia, Liberal Newfoundland, 

Liberal New Brunswick, Liberal Quebec, NDP Ontario, 

Conservative Manitoba, NDP Saskatchewan, Conservative 

Alberta, and NDP British Columbia.  And what struck me is 

what Premier Ralph Klein has done. 

 

(1600) 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

And what has struck all of our educational partners in this 

province, because there's no question, we have had a minus 

two, a minus two and a minus four in the last three years -- but 

what has struck our educational partners is this: "Klein could 

take education lesson from Saskatchewan." This is a headline 

in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, February 21, 1994.  Because 

what Ralph Klein, Conservative Premier of Alberta, has 

decided to do is take his scythe and making sweeping, 

sweeping cuts in education -- some 12.4 per cent cuts, over 10 

per cent in this year alone to the K to 12 system. 

 

We've decided not to do that.  What Ralph Klein has decided to 

do with the stroke of a pen is reduce the number of school 

boards in his province from 142 to 60.  We're decided not to do 

that.  What we have said to school boards who are interested in 

amalgamation, that there are three to five pilot projects that will 

be available and we want to evaluate those pilot projects to see 

whether in fact it does mean better education for our students, 

and whether in fact it does mean a reduction in administrative 

costs. 

 

As well, I should point out that parents of kindergarten children 

now in Alberta will pay some $800 in order for their children to 

attend kindergarten.  In this province, parents don't have to pay 

for their kids to go to kindergarten.  Kindergarten is provided 

as a public service on behalf of all taxpayers in this province. 

 

Now the member will say that the NDP government could have 

done it differently.  I would say to you that having had the 

opportunity to visit with six, I guess you would call them bond 

dealers and bankers from New York city on the day of the 

budget, they said this to me -- that Saskatchewan will be the 

first province in this country to come out of the fiscal madness 

that we've undergone in the last 20 years in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That we will be the first province to 

have the economic turnaround which the people of this 

province so rightly deserve, because of the prudent fiscal 

approach that we have taken to our massive deficit. 

 

And may I also say this to you, that as a result of meeting our 

budget targets for the last two budgets, we've come in on target 

as a result of our desire to meet our fiscal target for this year of 

$189 million deficit. That we have been able to announce to all 

school boards in this province, all teachers in this province, all 

taxpayers in this province and, most of all, all students of this 

province, that barring some unforeseen circumstance like major 

Liberal federal offloading, that we will not have any further 

funding reductions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I have to 

comment on your last statement about the federal offloading.  I 

think Mr. Martin and Mr. Chrtien were taking lessons from 

the Minister of Finance here.  Because if there is one 

government that is an expert at offloading in Canada, it has to 

be this government. 

Because they've certainly been at it ever since they became 

elected -- offloading onto the municipalities and everyone else 

in the province. 

 

Talk about offloading. When you increase natural gas prices 

nine and a half per cent, that's offloading, Madam Minister, 

because every school board has to pay that nine and a half per 

cent increase.  And yet there is not corresponding increase . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And I hear one of the members 

wants to get up and speak too.  Perhaps she'll have her 

opportunity later.  But that nine and a half per cent increase, 

Madam Minister, which took effect on January 1, there's no 

place in the budget that allows for that kind of an increase.  

That cost is simply going to be offloaded onto the property 

taxpayer. 

 

The minister was talking about Alberta.  Well, Madam 

Minister, even in your own indicators, little pamphlets you sent 

out, Saskatchewan takes second place in most occasions to 

Alberta.  There are some areas though, Madam Minister, where 

Saskatchewan is on the left-hand side of these graphs, which in 

some cases is better and in some cases is worse. 

 

But when you look at expenditures on education per capita, 

Alberta exceeds ours.  When you look at expenditures on 

education cost per student, Alberta exceeds ours.  Even with 

the cuts, Madam Minister, in Alberta -- of which I believe it's 

13 per cent to education -- even with those cuts, Alberta will 

continue to be ahead of Saskatchewan because of the cuts here 

of 2, 2, and 4. 

 

Now these numbers in your indicators are for 1989 and '90.  

This indicator program studied children in 1990-91 and a small 

portion of 1992.  So the results that come forward in this 

program, Madam Minister, are before your cuts.  It would be 

very interesting to see what impact those cuts will have on the 

numbers that are generated through the indicators' study.  I 

would hope that you would continue this program.  In fact, I 

would hope that you would expand it so that we have a 

comparison to what is going on in the rest of Canada. 

 

Now it's fine to say that we study ourselves and we think we're 

doing great.  But how do we compare to what everybody else is 

doing?  And I hope, Madam Minister, that it is favourable 

because we do spend a significant amount of money even 

though you have been cutting the budgets. 

 

There are a number of people around this province who would 

like to see education in this province move to standardized 

testing as an indicator of how we're doing in comparison to 

everyone else across Canada and around the world, how we're 

doing within our own communities.  A good many parents have 

apprehension when their child graduates from grade 12 and 

didn't have to write a test.  How does that measure up against 

the other student?  How does it measure up against the school 

down the road?  And how does it measure up with anyone else 

in the province, for that matter? 

 

If you talk to people in universities, they seem to have 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

a great deal of concern that people coming out of our K to 12 

system cannot function in university.  They don't have the 

abilities to read and write.  They don't put their English 

structures together properly, and yet you quoted that we are 

doing very well in English. 

 

And yet the high school review committee, Madam Minister, is 

recommending that we cut two credits out of education in 

grades 10, 11, and 12.  And I know that there's a good number 

of people across this province are very apprehensive about that 

happening.  And perhaps some of those people are 

apprehensive because they're English teachers. 

 

But I think there's a good many of them that are apprehensive 

because they see people coming to work at their locations, their 

businesses, that cannot properly read and write, prepare a 

report, write a memo, whatever it might be.  Or the same things 

in university. 

 

That's why universities have English entrance exams, to find 

out whether or not people are capable of performing in 

university at a level that they should, coming out of the K to 12 

system. 

 

So that's one of the reasons, Madam Minister, that people 

would like to see standardized testing implemented so that they 

can measure what is happening in the system that they are 

paying for.  And in fact, a system that they are paying 

individually, directly more and more for. 

 

SSTA now tells me that they're paying approximately 60 per 

cent of the funding for education.  The ratios are 60 per cent on 

property taxes and 40 per cent paid through by the government.  

And as people pay more and more, Madam Minister, they want 

more and more say.  And that's one of the reasons they're 

talking about standardized testing. 

 

Also one of the other things that parents are talking about, 

Madam Minister, that they want to see happen within education 

in this system, is more direct parental involvement in the 

education system, more actual hands-on control. 

 

And one of the things that the SSTA did bring out in their 

convention last fall was the -- it's already in place in a lot of 

cases in the rural areas but not in the urban areas -- is direct 

parental involvement with the individual schools and their 

communities.  And I would hope that you would take a very 

serious look at that recommendation, Madam Minister, because 

it is important. 

 

It allows parents within that individual school community to 

have an involvement -- and not just selling cookies at the door 

at some event, raising funds for the basketball team, or 

whatever it might be, but actual hands-on involvement in the 

hiring of teachers, in the curriculum within the school, and the 

whole, entire operation of the school. 

 

In the rural areas we have the local school boards.  But, Madam 

Minister, there are times when those local 

school boards are simply there to provide the assistance and 

that kind of funding, such as selling cookies at the door, that 

the local school division needs.  I think that all of the schools 

across this province, the individual schools, need to have the 

hands-on, direct control by the parents. 

 

Now I wouldn't want to necessarily say that they should have 

all the funding, the budgetary powers, but they need some, 

Madam Minister.  They need some involvement.  So I would 

ask, what are your plans, dealing with that particular issue, and 

on the standardized testing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  When you said 

earlier that you think it's important that we know how we're 

doing relative to the rest of the country, I agree with you.  And 

at the ministers of Education meeting last Monday in Toronto, 

all of the ministers of Education in other provinces agreed that 

they would do a program similar to ours, where you would look 

at indicators, not just testing, pencil and paper testing, but they 

would look at drop-out rates, teacher/student ratios, 

administrative costs, gender equity issues, aboriginal drop-out 

rates -- all of those other indicators that assist us in determining 

how well our education system is doing. 

 

On your assumption that funding will determine the quality of 

the system, I think I have to somewhat take issue with that.  I 

think if you look at our province over the last number of 

decades, just because you didn't have all of the amenities of 

say, big city, Canada, did not mean that you weren't adequately 

educated and weren't prepared to go on and take the challenges 

of the world on. 

 

So I don't know if I agree with your argument that dollars 

determine outcomes.  I think what determines outcomes are 

several factors.  One of the key factors is the commitment of 

the family to that child's education.  Another factor is the 

quality of the teaching that takes place in the classroom.  

Another factor is the kind of value that communities and 

families put on education and the importance of education.  It 

seems to me that despite spending and throwing money at a 

situation, does not necessarily mean that you get high quality 

outcomes.  So I guess I would somewhat disagree with you on 

that point. 

 

I think the other point that you raised in terms of the high 

school review, it is true that the High School Advisory 

Committee has recommended the reduction of English 

language credits from six to four.  It is also true that they are 

recommending some standardized testing, particularly for grade 

12 students.  I think they're recommending 50 per cent of the 

mark would come from standardized tests and 50 per cent of 

the mark would come from the work that the teacher was able 

to do in terms of testing. 

 

I've said to all educators in this province that we want to take 

some time to look at the implications of that report, and it is my 

expectation that we will respond to that report by the end of 

March or sometime in April because we want to respond to it 

quickly because as 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

you probably know a lot of work has been done on curriculum 

development for the lower and middle years but no work has 

been done in curriculum development for the high school years.  

And before that work can begin we have to know where we are 

going in terms of high school credits, and that's why we intend 

to respond to the high school review very quickly in order that 

we can get on with the job of doing curriculum renewal in the 

province. 

 

The other point that you raised was the issue of direct parental 

involvement.  The Saskatchewan School Trustees Association 

made that recommendation in the context of reducing the 

number of school divisions in the province to 35.  We have said 

this, that we are not prepared to go forward with full-fledged, 

full-scale amalgamation of school divisions.  What we are 

prepared to do is enter into three to five pilot projects for only 

those school divisions that are ready to amalgamate. 

 

(1615) 

 

Obviously there are many, many issues that have to be 

considered in terms of going to larger school divisions, and we 

want the pilots to, I guess allow us to take a look at what 

amalgamated school divisions might look like, because of the 

very issue that you raise. 

 

We have communities complaining right now that they do not 

have input into decisions of their local school board, which is 

much smaller than what is being looked at in terms of some of 

the amalgamations that are being proposed. 

 

And so the key question will be, how do we make sure that 

parents are in fact involved in the education of their children.  

And obviously that will be one of the criteria that will have to 

be met, in terms of going forward with amalgamations that are 

presently being proposed to the government. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm glad to hear 

you state that the value of education is not merely in the dollars 

that are spent there; that the community involvement and 

community life are part of education.  Because when I look 

back at your comments in previous years while you were the 

opposition member responsible for Education, it seemed to be 

then that it was merely a matter of dollars that met the quality 

of education. 

 

And I really have to wonder when you became a born-again 

fiscal conservative.  It seems to have been a dramatic change in 

your rhetoric from October 20, 1991 to October 22, 1991 -- that 

now it's no longer the dollar bills that matter in education, but 

the value. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, there are a large number of 

communities across this province that believe the value of 

education is indeed tied up with the community.  And when, 

because of your budget cuts, those schools close in those 

communities, what impact does that have on the quality of 

education that those children are going to receive?  Now they're 

going to be riding the buses longer hours, and all the other 

types of things associated with that school closure.  What 

impact does that have on their education, Madam Minister, 

when you take into account the value of the community? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- In terms of your question, when did I 

become a born-again fiscal conservative? I became a 

born-again fiscal conservative, to use your words, when this 

government was confronted with the very real possibility that 

we weren't going to be able to renegotiate any of the long-term 

debt that your relatives on the Conservative benches had racked 

up in the last 11 years.  And as a social democrat I think it's 

important -- and I consider myself a social democrat -- that in 

order for a province to remain sovereign that you have control 

over your own fiscal resources and you do not want the bankers 

and the bond dealers calling the shots. 

 

So it's much better to take control of the financial situation in 

this province in order to have freedom from New York and 

Zrich and London and Tokyo telling this province what to do.  

And so if that means in order to have a sovereign province that 

is not subjected to the outside whims of bond dealers and 

bankers, by making some cuts now in order to have that 

financial freedom, sir, then I guess I am a born-again fiscal 

conservative. 

 

Had we known the kind of debt that you folks were busy 

racking up in the 11 years -- we knew it was bad but we did not 

know it was $15 billion.  We did not know that it was going to 

be difficult for you guys to float your bonds, and we inherited 

the mess.  And so what we have done is gone very 

systematically through all of the budgets of all of the 

government departments in order to arrive at our targets.  And 

because we've been able to do that, we're going to have a 

balanced budget in 1996-97.  And as a result of what we have 

done, we can now renegotiate some of your bummer deals at 

lower interest rates. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, thank you for 

that revisionist history lesson, but I'm afraid it's falling on deaf 

ears throughout Saskatchewan today.  But I'd like to raise with 

you a couple of matters that are of specific concern to my 

constituency, particularly the Dodsland School in Dodsland and 

the Eatonia School, the Eaton High School in Eatonia, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I'm not sure whether you're familiar with the situations, 

Madam Minister, or not. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes she is. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Good, I'm pleased to hear that she has acquainted 

herself with it. 

 

The situation in Dodsland, as I understand it, Madam Minister . 

. . And I'm just simply looking for comment from the 

department about I guess asking on behalf of those people for 

direction from your department and your government as to 

what they see the future is for this particular school.  We'll deal 

with the Dodsland 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

one first of all if you wouldn't mind, please. 

 

As I understand the situation, Madam Minister, there is some 

concern that the Rosetown School Division is giving 

consideration to closing out the school at Dodsland.  Now that's 

of particular concern to the people of Dodsland, particularly in 

light of the fact that they've had their hospital closed by your 

administration and now they're looking at their school 

potentially being closed as well.  So they're obviously 

concerned about the future of their community, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And as I understand the arguments, at least as they've been 

advanced to me, they're saying that their school unit, I believe 

it's something in the neighbourhood of 7 or $800,000 they 

contribute to the Rosetown School Division, and in return, to 

operate their school, the Rosetown School Division provides 

them with something in the order . . . magnitude of $320,000.  

So essentially the Rosetown School Division is a net benefactor 

from the RM of Winslow, which the school is within. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm wondering what your position and 

your department's position is on things of this nature.  It's of 

grave concern to the people of the Dodsland area, and I wonder 

if you'd comment, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, I am familiar with the situation 

because I happen to be from that part of Saskatchewan 

originally.  So I have had contact with people from Dodsland 

who have contacted me personally about their concerns. 

 

As I understand the situation, it's not the closure of the school; 

they are talking about sending grade 7 and 8 students to Plenty, 

which is 8 miles from the Dodsland School. 

 

As you know, decisions regarding school closures and 

administrative matters are within the purview of the local 

school division.  Board members are democratically elected by 

ratepayers in the Rosetown School Division No. 43.  Elected 

trustees have the authority and the responsibility to make 

decisions as they see in the best interests of their division as a 

whole. 

 

I certainly can appreciate the concerns that are being expressed 

by some people in the Dodsland community, and it is of 

particular concern to several local residents.  But I am not in a 

position, because of The Education Act and because of the 

position that local school boards have local autonomy, to 

interfere in that decision.  And I'm sure you'll understand that. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  While I understand 

what you're saying and I believe you're correct when you say 

that initially the school is not scheduled to be closed, they fear 

that that will be the end result; ship a few grades off to Plenty 

and then after that it's a short, slippery slope to a closed school 

is what they fear, Madam Minister. 

So, Madam Minister, I'm just wondering then, do you have the 

authority or do you not have the authority to overturn that if 

you wanted to? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I understand it, decisions of this 

nature are under the purview of the local school board.  Local 

school board trustees are democratically elected by the local 

property taxpayers.  As I understand it, I think elections are 

coming this fall so we can all once again elect our local school 

division trustees, and elected trustees have the authority and the 

responsibility to make decisions regarding how they determine 

or how they best think that they can administer their local 

school division. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  As you probably 

are also aware, they're considering a number of options relative 

to their position.  They are considering pulling their school out 

of the division; they're considering maybe even . . . the thought 

has crossed their mind to look at operating a private school, 

things of that nature. 

 

And I would like some comment from you with respect to that.  

Is there some kind of a procedure that they can go through or 

do they have to have ministerial approval to withdraw their 

school from that division?  Or exactly how does that process 

work?  I just want to I guess get it on record for the people of 

the Dodsland area so if they . . . when considering their options, 

they have the blessing of the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm advised by my officials that they 

could make application for a boundary revision, and at that 

time we would consider their proposal. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- When you say a boundary revision, does that 

mean they could withdraw from the Rosetown School 

Division? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Yes, that's what I mean.  They could 

apply for a revision to the boundary and at that time we would 

consider their application. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So do they form their own division then or do 

they go shopping for a division to locate into?  Or how exactly 

does that process work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm told by my officials it would be a 

boundary revision with another school division. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So they would have to have essentially the 

agreement of another school division prior to making 

application? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- That is my understanding. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Does it have to be an adjacent school division or 

can they opt into a school division elsewhere? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- It would have to be an adjacent school 

division. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Is this becoming a matter of more and 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

more concern in rural Saskatchewan?  I know that the other 

school that we're going to deal with after this is finding pretty 

much the same circumstances.  They're uncomfortable about 

their position within the school unit they presently are in. 

 

And I'm just wondering whether we're starting to see this 

happening more and more.  Is it an increasing problem 

particularly where schools have declining enrolments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- As I am advised by the department, that 

rural school closures is not a recent phenomenon, that rural 

school closures have occurred over several years.  

Communities will do whatever they can in order to prevent 

their schools from being closed.  For instance, in the last 10 

years, I'm advised, from 1981 to 1991 we saw the number of 

rural schools drop from 578 to 512.  So over the years closures 

have occurred, and obviously different communities attempt 

different strategies in order to save their school. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Madam Minister, it does seem like it's an 

ongoing and a problem that seems to be getting perhaps worse 

-- I don't know.  Or whether it's just what's happening in the 

Kindersley and Rosetown school divisions at the moment. 

 

But it's something I guess that's of particular concern to those 

communities when you find that . . . particularly when they put 

in a net surplus into a school division and then are operating 

their school on a relatively low cost basis. 

 

For example, in the Dodsland School, as I'm aware, they tell 

me that their academic standing within the division is excellent 

compared . . . relative to the rest of the division, they're high, 

very high.  Their cost per student of operations in something in 

the neighbourhood of $900 less per student than the other 

schools within the division. 

 

They also find themselves in a circumstance where the division 

is looking at closing out or scaling down, shall we say, their 

school and they're also looking at the rest of the division and 

they see expenditures of, say, 40,000 I think I was quoted the 

figure of for underground sprinklers for a baseball field or a 

track field or something of that nature. 

 

And I think, you know, under today's economic conditions, 

they look at that kind of an expenditure by the school division 

and they wonder whether that's a very good cost benefit type of 

an expenditure when the division is actively pursuing and 

looking at school reductions. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I know what you're saying, that 

increasingly the public is scrutinizing expenditures of not only 

governments but also local authorities such as municipal 

governments and school divisions as an example, and that we 

all have to be vigilant as elected people -- and I include 

provincial politicians as well 

as local politicians -- about our decision-making process and 

the importance of including our respective constituencies in 

those decision-making processes. 

 

But as I said earlier, as the Minister of Education, obviously 

I'm charged with the task of overseeing education training in 

the province of Saskatchewan, but The Education Act is very 

clear that I am not in a position to administer school divisions 

and nor do we want to go that route.  That is a decision of the 

local property taxpayers. 

 

They democratically elect their school division trustees.  They 

charge those school division trustees with the administration of 

the school division and all of the schools within the school 

division.  They have the authority and the responsibility. 

 

And while I recognize that there are many local ratepayers who 

have concerns in the Dodsland area, my only suggestion, given 

my limited ability, is to continue to work with the local school 

division to determine whether there is some other alternative. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that's fine, and I accept your answer, 

Madam Minister.  I guess, you know, if you have any more 

advice that you might be prepared to . . . Do you advise them, 

quite frankly, when they call you up and say to you, what are 

our options, do you provide them with the answers, essentially 

the answers being that you can look at moving to other 

divisions or that sort of nature, or do you just say it's a local 

school board decision and leave it at that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- There's no question that I've met with 

many people from across the province on many issues -- local 

parents, local ratepayers -- who may have concerns, because 

I've tried to be as open and accessible as possible as the 

Minister of Education. 

 

I'm not in a position of offering any kind of legal advice or 

those kinds of things, but certainly if questions are asked about 

what can we do, my message has been to go back to the local 

school division and see whether some things can be worked 

out. 

 

We have regional directors in various parts of the province and 

we've had regional directors often working with directors of 

education, trustees, and parents to see whether there are 

compromises.  So we've tended to take more of a mediation 

role than a role of trying to get in there and direct what are in 

essence a locally autonomous, elected people 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I'm sure the good 

folks of the Dodsland area will be interested in your comments. 

 

Now if we could move to the other school that I had some 

questions asked of me and promised to ask of you, which were 

the school in Eatonia, Saskatchewan, the Eaton High School.  

And while it's not a specific concern of that school, it's more of 

a 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

general nature concern of that particular area within the 

division. 

 

What is being contemplated at the moment by the Kindersley 

school division is reducing the number of wards or divisions 

within that school division.  And what the people over in that 

south-west corner of the Kindersley school division feel is 

going to happen to them is essentially that they will be left with 

one less representative than they currently have.  And 

Kindersley, town of Kindersley, will receive another 

representative -- move from two representatives up to three. 

 

And while I have no particular position one way or another on 

this, Madam Minister, the fact of the matter is it obviously 

raises a great deal of concern with the people out there, 

naturally.  They feel that their . . . It's basically the same type of 

issue. They see it as a situation where they are losing some of 

the levers of control that they had, and they also are concerned 

about the . . . that their tax dollars essentially not seeming to 

balance with what the . . . the representation they feel they 

should have. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I'm wanting some comment on those 

types of situations as well with respect to the Eaton High 

School and then Dodsland . . . or pardon me, the 

Eatonia-Mantario area of the constituency. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well I can understand why you would 

have no opinion on this matter.  You happen to be the member 

of the legislature from Kindersley and Eatonia and so obviously 

you wouldn't want to take a position because you might offend 

someone. 

 

What I can say is this, that I had the opportunity to read Ken 

Clarke's editorial in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix.  That's as 

deep as my knowledge goes on this matter. I also had an 

opportunity to briefly speak to the director of education for the 

Kindersley school division last night at a LEADS (League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) 

conference so I'm not fully familiar with this issue and neither 

are my officials. 

 

So I'm not really in a position to say what the government's 

position is.  But I think I would agree with you that when we 

see shifts in population, that these kinds of issues I think are 

going to emerge as issues for people living in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

At this stage Eatonia, as I understand, does have a school.  It's 

not as though they don't have a school.  This is an issue outside 

of the city of Saskatoon where a group of parents don't have 

representation on the local school board and they obviously 

want representation.  They don't have a school. 

 

But I can assure you of this, that I will try and get the 

information for you.  I don't know if we'll be able to get it 

today, but certainly I'll get the information for you so that you 

can pass the information on to your constituents in both 

Kindersley and Eatonia. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  What is the 

procedure, shall we say, that they would be going through?  I 

want some sort of guidance for those folks, I guess, if . . . Do 

you have to give ministerial direction when they are planning 

on reducing the number of divisions within the Rosetown 

school . . . or Kindersley school unit I mean, or ministerial 

approval, or how exactly does that process work? Or does the 

board simply have the authority to reduce the number of 

divisions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I'm not in a position to answer your 

question.  We don't have the official here that can help me with 

that question.  But as I said, I will get that information for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Yes, thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 

that. 

 

You'll be interested to know as well that the good folks of the 

Eatonia and Mantario area are planning on having a public 

meeting on Thursday, this coming Thursday, in Eatonia I 

believe it is, at the school -- probably the school gymnasium, I 

would guess -- to raise the awareness of it, and also to I think 

put together a brief or something to present to the Kindersley 

school unit public meeting that they are planning on hosting, 

which is the following Monday.  I believe that would be March 

14. 

 

So the time is sort of of essence here.  I think people in that 

area are looking for some direction, Madam Minister, and are 

wanting to know what their options are.  I think the primary 

concern is, can this be done without ministerial approval or can 

it be done . . . is it a board decision?  And I appreciate you 

taking the time to look into that and getting back to us as soon 

as possible on that.  And the people out there are obviously 

concerned about it and want some kind of direction as soon as 

possible. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- I will take an undertaking that we will 

get this information for you tonight.  The official who is 

knowledgeable in this area is up at the LEADS convention in 

Saskatoon, but we'll get that information for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Just to wrap up 

and turn it over back to my colleague, I think these are certainly 

serious matters of concern that are happening in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And you're indeed correct when you say it's an 

ongoing process that's happened over 30, 40 years.  I remember 

rural schools closing all over the place, little one-room 

schoolhouse types of things.  But I think we're getting into 

something of more significance perhaps than then. 

 

While they were . . . you know, the old country school type of 

thing, now we're talking about in a lot of cases the lifeblood of 

small communities.  If they see their school close as well as 

their hospital, that some of these communities are seeing, 

witnessing, and actually happening in places like Dodsland, it 

becomes an issue . . . tremendously emotional and an issue that 

the residents of that community feel is, you know, the final 

death knell within their community. 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

I think your department should be really thinking about some 

kind of strategy of how you're going to deal with these kinds of 

things in the upcoming years, because I anticipate when you 

start looking at school board amalgamations, it will make . . . it 

will exacerbate the problem even more than we have today, 

Madam Minister.  So I think perhaps you should be looking at 

some kind of direction to communities and to school units 

when they are doing these kinds of things, because it creates a 

great deal of problems in particularly smaller communities. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Well I want to thank the member for 

the advice.  As I said earlier to your colleague, the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, at their annual 

convention, passed a number of recommendations about 

amalgamation of school divisions in the province.  And they 

were recommending that we reduce the numbers to 35. 

 

I think that as a result of a number of questions that are raised 

by massive restructuring of education in this province, K to 12, 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan, our government chose to 

proceed cautiously and deliberately.  We are going to look at 

three to five pilot projects because there are school divisions in 

various parts of rural Saskatchewan that are interested in 

coming together in an amalgamation process.  They believe 

that it will lead to a better quality of education for their 

students, and they also believe that with the savings they can 

redirect that money into the classroom. 

 

We have said that we will agree to three to five amalgamations 

that are voluntary, that go through a public consultation 

process.  But we want to evaluate those amalgamations to 

determine whether some of the things that you're talking about 

in fact could possibly come true. 

 

So I know that there are major challenges for people living in 

rural Saskatchewan.  The demographics are changing; there's 

no question.  If you look at the numbers in the annual report, 

we have declining enrolment in rural Saskatchewan.  It 

becomes a real challenge.  How do you deliver a broadly based 

education system to decreasing numbers of people? 

 

We are doing some more work in the whole area of distance 

education because we do have the problem of distance and 

geography in this province.  We do have the problem of small 

numbers of people in certain parts of the province.  But I can 

say this, that our government is committed to a public 

education system for all of our citizens, regardless of where 

they live in this province, because education is important. 

 

And I agree with you that there are some challenges for people 

in rural Saskatchewan and for some of the locally elected 

trustees in rural Saskatchewan.  But I think that with distance 

education and some other possibilities, we will ensure that 

students residing in rural Saskatchewan have access to the kind 

of education that is of high quality and will allow them to go 

anywhere in the world and be successful. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, I think in the discussions of amalgamations I think we 

should be very clear that any amalgamations be voluntary. 

 

And I'm not necessarily sure I agree with my colleague when 

he says amalgamations will exacerbate the problems of school 

closures.  In my own mind, I think if a school is going to close, 

it's going to close regardless of whether or not you're in a larger 

or a smaller school division; that the amalgamation itself will 

not close the school. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked earlier about the fiscal 

responsibility, or irresponsibility as the case may be, during the 

previous administration -- that you didn't know what the 

circumstances were.  Your own Gass Commission pointed out 

that the books were always open, that the figures were there to 

be looked at if you wanted to see them.  In fact, the Premier in 

the election television debate stated that the debt was greater 

than $14 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- So he knew. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So he knew.  Now whether he told you 

or not, I don't know.  But he knew that the debt was $14 billion 

plus. 

 

So when you stood up in 1990 and 1991 saying that you needed 

to spend more money on education, if there was fiscal 

irresponsibility taking place in spending those dollars, then, 

Madam Minister, you were a direct part of it.  It may not have 

been your name on the cheque that went out to the school 

boards, but you were part of the group, Madam Minister, that 

was pushing the provincial government of the day to spend 

more and more and more. 

 

It was never . . . I haven't found a single quote, Madam 

Minister, from you that said, cut back more.  Not one.  Lots that 

say spend, spend, spend, but none that say, hold back, you're 

spending too much.  Not one. 

 

So, Madam Minister, when you talk about fiscal responsibility 

or fiscal irresponsibility you, along with everyone else in this 

province, have to bear some of the blame.  Perhaps a large 

portion of it has to be put on the government of that day for not 

having said no. 

 

But everyone else in the province also has to bear some of the 

responsibility.  Myself too; I never said don't spend any more 

on education, so I have to bear some of the responsibility also 

-- as we all do.  But you, Madam Minister, stood up in the 

House in those days and said spend more, more, more. 

 

I go back to the question I asked you that precipitated this.  

Madam Minister, in light of what my colleague brought up 

about the school closures, and I asked you then, how the 

closures of those schools will impact on the quality of 

education to those students whose schools, whose community 

school has closed. 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 7, 1994 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Right.  Just to clarify a point, I would 

say this, that I don't think we can say that education spending in 

this province led to the horrendous deficit that was built up 

over the nine years of your administration.  What we can say is 

that there were some very bad deals that were made -- 

Supercart, GigaText, just to name a few -- some bad 

privatizations that were made; some problems with the heavy 

oil upgrader here in Regina. 

 

I think swimming pools . . . people could build swimming 

pools in garages and put in saunas and carpets.  And the home 

program, I think that might have added to it.  I think maybe 

taking off the gas tax may have added to it because it wasn't a 

tax that we could take off because we really couldn't afford it. 

 

I don't think spending money on education, in my view, 

contributed to the massive $15 billion deficit, because if you 

look at education funding over your years in office it was small 

- very small -- relative to other areas of government.  You spent 

big bucks in agriculture, big bucks in economic development, 

quite significant dollars in health care, but a less significant 

amount in the whole area of education.  And I think if you look 

at my remarks of the time, they will tell you that I was of the 

view that you could spend lots of money over here, but you 

couldn't spend money on education. 

 

Now the times have changed.  We're cutting, every government 

. . . every department of government and we've had cuts all 

across the board, member.  It's not as if there was spending 

going on, and we're spending lots of money in Agriculture and 

lots of money in Economic Development and no money in 

Education.  We are cutting everywhere, and we have had to 

make reductions everywhere because of the horrific deficit that 

was run up under your tenure. 

 

Now in terms of school closures you asked the question, you 

know, what does this mean to the community.  And there's no 

question.  I come from a community where the school closed 

and it's significant . . . I will say it significantly changed the 

community. 

 

But every summer there's a home-coming in that community.  

People still say they're from Springwater, Saskatchewan.  They 

still get together.  There's still people that enjoy the community 

hall.  There's still the ladies' aid in that community. 

 

Community isn't necessarily, sir, an institution.  Community, 

from my point of view, is the people who live there and work 

there and have their families there. 

 

And so I guess I will say to you that community in this 

province is much more, from my point of view, than a local 

government institution -- community is the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, it's indeed 

interesting that you said you didn't call for more spending in 

those other areas.  You mention a 

number of different things, such as GigaText, $5 million; that's 

only six 0's on GigaText and yet that was the reason for the 

huge deficit.  And it is huge; there's no doubt about it, a huge 

debt. 

 

Your members, when in opposition, you talked about the large 

spending in agriculture.  Your members over here were calling 

for more and more spending in agriculture; that the government 

of the day was not doing enough.  And fact is your Premier 

went to Rosetown, went to the rally there and said that elect me 

and I'll get more money for you.  The member from Rosetown 

was holding his hand probably, helping him out that day, 

explaining to him about agriculture. 

 

You talked about the spending on swimming pools and saunas 

in homes.  Yes, there was some of that, Madam Minister.  

There was also a large number of people who fixed up their 

homes, put in new windows and all the other things that happen 

in a home; it wasn't just solely swimming pools.  The fact is, I 

would suggest, that on a $1,500 grant, you're not going to get a 

very big swimming pool.  You might be able to put in a 

decent-sized tub. 

 

Your program in 1986 election, 7-7-7 -- $7,000 grant, 7 per 

cent loans on a $70,000 mortgage, Madam Minister, and that 

wouldn't have cost the province any money?  No, Madam 

Minister, everyone in that time period was looking to spend 

money.  It wasn't just the government of the day and it wasn't 

just the opposition of the day calling for more; it was society as 

a whole, Madam Minister, that wanted more spent on them 

because they never believed that it would end. 

 

Madam Minister, yes, the gas tax did come off and it cost the 

province a large amount of money.  But it wasn't any different 

than the promise to remove the PST (provincial sales tax) in 

1991 which also cost the province a large amount of money.  

The projections on that one, Madam Minister, was that the 

province would collect something like 200 to $250 million.  

And that was gone. 

 

Yes, Madam Minister, political parties sometimes make stupid 

promises to get elected.  The gas tax cost us a lot of money and 

in retrospect, from what I can remember of the 1982 election, 

not having run in it, was that the elimination of the gas tax was 

probably not necessary as a political promise.  But it was made 

and it was kept, just as in 1991 the promise was made to 

eliminate the PST.  The PST, the provincial sales tax, is still 

there, but the harmonization of that tax is gone.  The benefits 

that harmonization would have provided to business and to 

farmers is gone.  But the provincial sales tax is now . . . The 

education and health tax is now 9 per cent. 

 

And there are a good number of people across this province, 

Madam Minister, when they look at the cut-backs that they're 

receiving in education, wonder why, wonder why their 

education and health taxes have gone up by, what is it, 20, 25 

per cent?  Gone up by 20 to 25 per cent since 1991 and yet the 

hospital has closed in their community, the school is closing in 



March 7, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

their community, programs are being cut, teachers are being 

eliminated, the property tax is up, just as their education tax is, 

and yet they are not receiving any benefit for it, or at least 

they're not receiving the benefit they believe they should be 

receiving for that increase in their E&H (education and health) 

tax -- the provincial sales tax  

_- Madam Minister. 

 

It's a problem in rural Saskatchewan and it's a problem in urban 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, when the school closes.  It 

doesn't matter if the school is in Dodsland, if it's in Glen Ewen, 

or if it's in downtown Regina, the people in that community are 

hurt by it.  Their children have to travel where they didn't 

before. 

 

A lady came up to me a couple of years ago very upset because 

her child now had to travel down the road to the next 

community, and this was a kindergarten child.  Parents have 

contacted me in Regina with the very same concerns, Madam 

Minister, because their child can no longer attend the school 

close to their home because that school has been closed by the 

funding cuts that your government has put in place:  2 per cent 

on K to 12 in 1992; 2 per cent in 1993; and 4 per cent in 1994.  

And that 4 per cent cut, Madam Minister, in the city of Regina 

meant, I believe it's $2.4 million; $2.4 million that you cut out 

of the funding for Regina schools for the public system. 

 

And there's a good number of other communities across this 

province that have taken a substantial cut, Madam Minister, 

while the taxes in their areas have gone up.  Property mill rates 

are projected to go up by 3 mills or better on average across 

this province.  For a good number of communities that's going 

to mean a lot more than that, Madam Minister, and it's your 

government and you who are responsible for that. 

 

I don't have the quote with me, Madam Minister, but I believe 

you asked the question during the previous administration to 

the minister of Education, why he couldn't go into cabinet and 

get more money for education.  You suggested in that, that 

somehow he was incompetent because he could not get more 

money for education from cabinet. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, I don't want to suggest that of you 

because I think you are trying, but for some reason the Minister 

of Finance will not provide that.  And it's not just the K to 12 

system.  You look at the university out here.  They're being cut.  

Their tuition fees were up 13 per cent last year.  How much 

more are they going to have to go up?  How many students are 

not going to be able to attend school because of those tuition 

fee increases?  In a time of recession when people cannot find 

jobs, one of the things that they look to is to further their 

education to give themselves a better opportunity in the future. 

 

And these kind of increases, Madam Minister, deny them that 

opportunity.  They can no longer afford to take advantage of 

what the university can provide them if they can get in.  

Because one of the things that's happened with these tuition fee 

cut-backs . . . not the tuition fee cut-backs, the cut-backs to 

operating grants 

to the universities, means that there is quotas in place in certain 

departments; that you have to have a certain grade level to be 

able to get into a certain faculty. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I don't believe that's what education in 

Saskatchewan is meant to do -- to deny people access.  We 

have a universal program of taxation for education, and we had 

a program that if you met the minimum requirements for 

university you were allowed to enter into your faculty.  And 

that's no longer the case, Madam Minister, because you have 

cut funding. 

 

Madam Minister, across the board these cuts are hurting.  We 

have the teachers that are losing their positions, Madam 

Minister.  And it's not just one or two or three teachers, but it's 

by the hundreds, Madam Minister. 

 

There are going to be again a significant number of teachers 

who will no longer be in the system.  And it's not necessarily, 

Madam Minister, those that some of the communities would 

like to see eliminated as teachers -- because there are a few 

teachers that seem to aggravate parents in the community -- but 

it's the teachers who are not in a position to protect themselves.  

They're the young teacher who's just come into the system; it's 

the teacher who knows the newest methods, who has just come 

through the education system, and understands the new 

curriculum, the new direction that education is taking -- but that 

is the teacher who is being removed from the system. 

 

Now some of the teachers who have been there for a good 

many years understand the system also very well.  But when 

you eliminate the new person in the system, you save a very 

small amount of money.  It's not in comparison . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Members will be able to continue 

after supper.  It now being 5 o'clock, the Committee of Finance 

stands recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


