




















































Hansard: March 14, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 869 

 March 14, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister might take a few minutes and describe what he sees as, 

very briefly, the energy options and the energy possibilities in 

uranium and the nuclear industry.  And then I could ask him a 

little bit more about oil and gas and coal and what not.  But 

maybe he could start with the uranium and nuclear industry and 

describe what he sees -- the major potential, the alternatives, 

perhaps a little bit about what's going on in terms of economic 

development, particularly on the nuclear side, and just bring us 

up to date in a brief fashion about the nuclear and the uranium 

industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I thank the hon. member for his 

question.  It can be a fairly broad ranging topic of what is 

asked.  I'd like to first off note that the energy options review is 

part of the comprehensive energy strategy, and that will be laid 

on my desk some time this summer of this year, summer of 

1994.  That work, at least the preliminary work, is being done 

by the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority, and it will be part of their input into the 

comprehensive energy strategy. 

 

Having said that, we feel that the prospects for uranium in 

Saskatchewan on the medium- and long-term are fairly 

optimistic.  As the member would know, a lot of the sales of 

uranium are in long-term contracts, and they're not affected a 

whole lot by the spot market.  The developments, in terms of 

mining in itself, the hon. member would be aware that the 

federal-provincial panel approved two out of three requests to 

proceed with new uranium developments in Saskatchewan. 

 

On the nuclear side, the memorandum of understanding is still 

in place with the Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., and their work 

in Saskatchewan is centred around doing research and design 

work for the CANDU 3 (Canadian deuterium uranium) reactor.  

Beyond that I'm not sure that there is much more I can offer to 

the member on that particular topic until the comprehensive 

energy strategy has been completed this summer. 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, may I have 

permission to introduce guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- The guests are seated in your gallery.  They 

are the 24th Girl Guide Company of Regina.  They are here 

chaperoned by Laura Pogue, P-o-g-u-e, and I'm not going to try 

and pronounce the other one either because it is Karen 

W-u-r-m.  But they're all a fine-looking group, and I hope to 

meet with them a little later and answer easy questions in Room 

218.  Welcome them to the House, please. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, you mentioned 

CANDU 3's .  I'm not sure that I got entirely what you said; 

you said that . . . I won't put words in your mouth, but along 

with AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), you are 

reviewing the options for CANDU 3's or the technology.  

Maybe you can elaborate a little bit on that so I know exactly 

what that is.  And secondly, are you exploring any other 

options on the nuclear side other than CANDU 3's? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I did not say we were reviewing the 

agreement between AECL and the province.  What I said is that 

there is an agreement in place.  I believe it's a four-year 

agreement, $20 million in total -- $20 million from each, the 

province and AECL.  So $40 million in total over the four years 

of the memorandum of understanding. 

 

Their work is to do research and design work into the CANDU 

3 reactor.  They're centred in Saskatoon, as the member would 

know.  At this point in time, until the comprehensive energy 

strategy is completed, the province is not presuming any work 

at this time on further nuclear developments in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You're saying that the MOU (memorandum of 

understanding) between Saskatchewan and AECL is to do 

research on the design of the CANDU 3.  And you are 

participating in that research now so that over the next four 

years you can presumably have in place the best technical 

information, engineering information on the design and 

presumably how to produce a CANDU 3.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The memorandum of understanding is 

quite clear.  Over the four years there will be design work and 

research done, and there will be more information there on the 

technology than currently exists today anywhere in the world 

because this is the place where the design work for the 

CANDU 3 is being completed.  Beyond that the province is not 

contemplating anything further than what stands there. 

 

We want to have the best information possible, looking at all 

possible means of generation in the long term for the province 

of Saskatchewan.  And we are not in a position yet to make that 

determination as to 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

what those options are in any sort of a priority order.  But with 

the comprehensive energy strategy and developments that come 

over the next few years beyond that, we'll be in a position to 

give, hopefully, a very definitive statement on what the most 

logical options are for medium- and long-term generation of 

electricity in the province. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Would you care to comment on how you might 

feel about the possibility of the province of Saskatchewan, 

having looked at the design of this . . . enter into a combination 

public-private sector agreement where CANDU 3's are 

manufactured in Canada, perhaps in Saskatchewan -- well let's 

say Saskatchewan -- manufactured here and exported abroad, 

or exported to other places in Canada, or anyplace else that 

might want to use them. 

 

Have you got a philosophical problem that would prevent you 

from entertaining that possibility where you would make them 

and market them, as opposed to perhaps making them and 

using them, but making them and marketing them to Ontario or 

to United States or to other places in the world?  Have you 

ruled that out, or would you have a philosophical problem with 

making those turbines and marketing them, either nationally or 

internationally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's not been a problem to that that 

I've been privy to any discussions.  The concern over the whole 

nuclear debate, of course, is one that the member opposite 

would be familiar with in Saskatchewan, and elsewhere around 

the world it's a very sensitive issue. 

 

I think what we're looking at in Saskatchewan though for right 

now is what those options are for us in the future for electrical 

generation.  If, on the other hand, out of the memorandum of 

understanding comes work that shows that there could be some 

marketing possibilities and some industrial development, I 

suppose you would call it, in Saskatchewan, we would be 

interested in looking at those opportunities. 

 

It would not be the province directly that would do the building 

and the marketing, and I'm sure the member understands that.  

AECL would have to make that choice.  They are the 

marketers, and they would likely be the builders or contract 

with someone to do the actual building of the components. 

 

In terms of the government having some particular problem 

because of the political situation or because of ideological bent 

or philosophical bent, that's not been something that's been 

debated to any great degree.  But on the other hand, there's not 

a problem that's been identified at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well that's fair enough.  Mr. Minister, what I'm 

getting at is, in terms of the long-run economic development in 

the province of Saskatchewan, if you can have manufacturing 

jobs here related to good quality information . . . particularly as 

you point out, if we can have the best information that money 

can buy or that is generated on CANDU 3's, if the best 

information in the world will end up being in Saskatchewan, on 

how to design and make and produce CANDU 3's. 

 

And there is a demand for CANDU reactors, because AECL 

sells them worldwide.  What I'm asking you is if you haven't 

ruled out the possibility that people could actually manufacture 

these well-designed CANDUs and market them 

internationally -- not using it here for whatever reason, if you 

don't want to, but just the making of it, the manufacture.  

Assume there's a demand for electricity worldwide, and 

environmental concerns associated with coal and other things 

that you're familiar with.  If countries like Korea or others that 

we presume to be safe to market these technologies to . . . You 

haven't ruled out the possibility that Saskatchewan could be a 

key player, either through the private sector, AECL, joint 

venture, combination, in the manufacturing and production of 

this very sophisticated technology worldwide. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, we've not ruled that out.  Of course 

AECL would be a major player in making that type of 

decisions, and I think that we always have to be aware in 

Saskatchewan, in the changing environment that we are in, that 

technology and information is just as marketable as tangible 

products that can be held onto and fabricated, put together, as 

well as the possible components.  I think there are some 

backward linkages in terms of producing equipment for such a 

project.  There could be forward linkages in terms of new 

industries.  And at the current time there are, I believe, 93 

people now in place to design the CANDU 3 reactors, and I 

believe that they are all located in Saskatoon at the present 

time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm really delighted that 

they are in Saskatoon, as you can imagine.  My question is in 

economic development terms.  In talking with your Minister of 

Economic Development and your cabinet colleagues, one of the 

things that obviously Saskatchewan will have that other 

jurisdictions don't have in the country, along with uranium, is 

the best research anywhere in Canada on designing this newest 

level of CANDU, with its incremental technology and its parts 

and its pieces and its components.  We will have, presumably, 

the very best in the nation. 

 

Given that is going to be here, and you've said you've 

committed to it; and AECL is here and they're doing it; I would 

just like if you could leave some doors open to industry who 

might be interested in manufacturing and the design and the 

building and co-venturing marketing, as well, CANDU 3's in 

the province of Saskatchewan for worldwide markets.  Because 

that could be -- and I'm sure that you are aware, based on the 

information that we have and based on the fact that we are a 

major producer of nuclear energy through uranium -- that could 

be a natural development which could be very powerful for the 

province of Saskatchewan, if we'd entertain just manufacturing 

them and/or the components, as you've suggested, in 

combinations to market worldwide in conjunction with AECL 

and any business partners, local, national, international, that 

may come along. 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

And as you know, we have German partners, Japanese partners, 

American partners, French partners, in the mining business.  

Conceivably we could have similar kinds of partners in joint 

ventures which would allow us to manufacture the latest and 

the very best technology in nuclear reactors any place in the 

world. 

 

(1915) 

 

It would be a fascinating economic development strategy.  And 

I guess I'm just asking, can you add a little bit more enthusiasm 

or a little bit more excitement than saying, well, we haven't 

ruled it out.  I mean could you give me any real major 

hesitation in why you might not even consider manufacturing 

or making the components?  Isn't that just like a slam dunk? 

 

Isn't it pretty easy if the technology's there and the market's 

there, wouldn't you rather have them dump . . . and AECL is 

here and the research is here, isn't it just very, very clear they 

should be built here as opposed to being built in Ontario or any 

place else? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I don't want to add too much 

enthusiasm because last time we were together in the House I 

added enthusiasm; we didn't get anywhere.  We talked about 

one topic, and it drew out for quite some time.  So I'm trying to 

be calm and provide you with answers to the very good 

questions that you're asking this evening. 

 

And I said to you very clearly, we have not ruled that out in 

terms of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that we have not ruled 

that out.  AECL of course want to do it here.  That's a 

consideration.  We would have to make sure that, through the 

work over the four years of the memorandum of understanding, 

that the CANDU is the best product in the world. 

 

The current CANDU system we have I think is recognized 

worldwide as a very good system.  The CANDU 3 is under 

design right now.  And nuclear equipment needs special 

qualifications; I understand the ISO (International Standards 

Organization) 9000 quality in manufacturing.  And we can 

encourage companies to obtain this certification.  And if they 

go after it and those companies happen to be in Saskatchewan, 

there is a future economic development opportunity there. 

 

And of course we are going to have the best information 

available anywhere in the world on the CANDU 3 because this 

is where the work is taking place: in Saskatchewan.  So those 

may indeed lead to future economic development opportunities 

for export of information, technology, and equipment to other 

parts of the world that are much more starved in energy than 

what we are in Saskatchewan -- in fact, in Canada. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I can pursue this with the Minister of 

Economic Development when the time comes, but you're the 

Minister of Energy and I just wanted your opinion. 

 

What you're saying is that you can see no . . . I guess one more 

simple question.  Are there any theoretical reasons, ideological 

reasons, or philosophical reasons, from your administration that 

you couldn't . . . if the design is there and the market is there 

and we've got all the information, that we couldn't make them 

here and market them.  Can you see any reason why we 

wouldn't want to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, I can't see any reason why we 

wouldn't want to do that.  As I said, there is a world out there 

that starves for energy and that particular option is an option for 

many countries in the world that don't have the abundance of 

resources that we have in Saskatchewan, and in fact throughout 

Canada. 

 

There are some of the other caveats I put on that, is that the 

qualifications have to be there, the safeguards have to be there, 

the companies have to want to do the business.  And I think 

with the confidence we have in the business community in 

Saskatchewan that they would be willing to do that and most of 

those caveats that I place I'm sure could be overcome.  But I 

don't want to project into the future for you or the people of 

Saskatchewan or for anyone, an absolute that may not come 

about.  But in terms of your question I see no reason why one 

couldn't flow into the other. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I'll assume that to be the case and I can 

ask other ministers whether they feel the same, or indeed the 

Premier when his estimates come up.  I don't obviously see a 

philosophical or environmental problem with manufacturing 

machinery here and marketing it, particularly when we're 

mining and selling uranium energy, I mean, making the turbine.  

It's just like the Japanese coming to Saskatoon and 

manufacturing turbines.  There's no philosophical problem with 

that and if we could make them here it seems to me that's one 

of the things that your administration could seriously look at 

and indeed promote, is the manufacturing of all these energy 

options.  One of them is the nuclear option.  Whether you use it 

here or not is one question, but making them and marketing 

them could be literally thousands of jobs.  And I wouldn't know 

why you wouldn't want to consider that and I'll assume that you 

would. 

 

Now you mentioned that if you have this information, you're 

doing the research here, that there's not market not only for the 

components, not only for the machine itself, but there's a 

market for that information, or similar kinds of information.  

Could you tell me whether you're doing research on nuclear 

waste management here in the province?  And with the 

research people that you have, and others, could you bring us 

up to date on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In terms of nuclear waste management, 

it depends on what kind of waste you're talking about.  Of 

course there is extensive work that goes on in Saskatchewan on 

tailings which is waste from the mines in the North, in terms of 

medium-level and high-level nuclear waste.  It's not been 

anything 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

that's been researched by the province, or as far as I know any 

entities of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There of course are some unique experiences going on in 

Saskatchewan, not in terms of waste but the actual ore bodies 

themselves, in that some of the ore bodies are such high 

intensity and a high grade of uranium that they're considering 

alternate methods of mining, such as using robotics, because 

they don't want workers to be exposed to the high levels of 

uranium or the high levels of radiation. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, now I'm going to bring you 

back to a focus there a little bit.  What I'm talking about . . . 

Assuming that we were marketing, manufacturing and 

marketing, CANDUs out of the province of Saskatchewan, 

some countries might say, well how do we handle the nuclear 

waste from these CANDUs?  How do we handle the spent fuel? 

 

Now are you going to be in a position, because of the research 

you've done, to say, we recommend this and this and this.  I 

suggest, Mr. Minister, that if in fact we, in this province, could 

be doing the research as we have in mining on the technology 

in terms of the CANDU machine itself, corresponding 

information on how to manage the fuel would be very valuable, 

or conceivably could be very valuable, and people would pay 

us handsomely for that technology.  In other words, we could 

be as good as you describe in terms of not only the CANDU 3, 

but indeed in terms of how to manage the waste cycle entirely. 

 

Are you saying that you're not doing any research on that or 

you haven't contemplated research on that, particularly when 

you're now saying that we will be the very best on the design 

and manufacture in the production of CANDU 3s?  Wouldn't 

you think it would be a reasonable idea to have corresponding 

research on the management of the waste product that is going 

to be the spent fuel from CANDUs no matter where they're 

used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The province of Saskatchewan is firmly 

on the record.  This government is not entertaining a high-level 

nuclear waste repository in the province.  We are not doing any 

research into that type of nuclear waste storage.  AECL does 

have a mandate to look at that within Canada.  And safe 

disposal is being designed at, I believe it's Pinawa-Whiteshell is 

what they refer to it as, in Manitoba.  And I think it's waiting 

federal approval or at some stage of trying to gain federal 

approval. 

 

So there are different places throughout the world and it's a 

world problem, not a unique problem to Saskatchewan or to 

Canada. It's a problem across the globe.  And I know the 

authorities in the United States are looking at the Yucca 

mountains in Arizona in terms of deep storage repository of 

high-level nuclear waste. 

 

In terms to your direct question, in Saskatchewan the 

government is on the record that we will not entertain 

high-level nuclear storage in this province, and therefore there 

is no research going on into high-level storage.  And as part of 

the AECL memorandum of understanding with the province, it 

specifically excludes high-level nuclear waste, and in any event 

they still signed and they still came here, and there's 93 

employees working on the research and design of the CANDU 

3. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you said that there wasn't a 

theoretical problem in . . . or a philosophical problem in . . . if 

you have the best research and design in CANDU 3's that you 

could perhaps make them and market them internationally. 

 

Now I didn't say whether you were going to store nuclear waste 

here; I said could you do research on it because the research 

could be very, very valuable. 

 

In the world of environmental problems, in the world of new 

technology, one of the next waves of jobs and economic 

activity is environment related, energy management related, 

and we're blessed; we have a huge opportunity here.  And it 

didn't say you had to use it. I'm just asking as I did in the 

CANDUs. You never committed to using the CANDU here. 

 

I'm not saying I'm asking you to philosophically change your 

mind and commit to waste management in Saskatchewan. I'm 

asking you, could you conceivably do the research?  Would 

you entertain -- with public sector, private sector, AECL, 

international joint venture partners, others -- research so you 

could be a centre of excellence on waste management in 

Saskatchewan to provide advice, because frankly you might be 

asked: if you're going to be marketing CANDUs, how do we 

manage them in the complete cycle?  And then you get into 

medical research that is in the cycle and the whole combination 

of how you can pull off the various parts, depending on the use 

and how hot it is and the combination thereof. 

 

Can you philosophically see a problem in us gathering good 

information, or even conceivably being a centre of excellence 

on waste management technology and information -- as you 

said earlier, because it might be marketed internationally? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The research is basically already done.  I 

mean AECL has done the research; various agencies across the 

world have done research; we have access to the research.  It 

doesn't seem that the research for disposal of high-level waste 

is the problem. 

 

The problem is finding someone who says yes, this research is 

valid and we'll let you set up a high-level nuclear waste 

repository in our area.  No one at this point has been willing to 

do that.  If the federal government approves the AECL facility 

at Whiteshell, then we not only have the research at our 

disposal to tell international markets, we would also have by 

our next-door neighbour a actual repository for the high-level 

nuclear waste as well. 

 

So we don't intend on duplicating very expensive work by very 

technical people that has already been completed by AECL and 

others at various places 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you just finished saying 

earlier that the world is changing and technology changes and 

we do research.  Now you can't assume that we've learned 

everything there is to know about waste management and 

nuclear energy.  I don't think you meant that.  Or that 

everything there is to know is next door in Manitoba.  Now if 

there is, if we have it all, could you report to the House or even 

get your officials to report to the House or table in the 

legislature all the latest . . . and all to your satisfaction -- a 

nuclear waste management, all the research and all the three?  

And I think it would be quite difficult to do that, but I could ask 

you to do it. 

 

What I'm talking about is, with the design of new technology 

must come -- I mean just logically -- the impact on how we 

might modify . . . how we manage the wastes because of 

incremental design, smaller designs, putting them together 

differently, a combination of how long you can use it, the time, 

the length, the design.  And to do it hand in hand in the fact that 

you are designing this new technology and designing the 

management system to go with it would seem to me to be a 

reasonable marketing package. 

 

I think you've travelled enough to know that if you can put this 

in one hand and this in the other and say yes, we have looked at 

both . . . in fact we have a centre of excellence here, or we have 

looked into the future and with the design going this direction, 

we can offer you a complete package.  Doesn't that seem to 

make . . . You've ruled that out. 

 

You said I will only depend on . . . I mean I guess what you 

said is all the research that's available and is up to date as some 

place else, we won't need it here.  And while we're doing this 

research on the latest technology, we won't bother on waste 

management.  Is that . . . that's it, is it?  I'm not putting words in 

your mouth.  And I'm just asking you in theory or in principle.  

Couldn't you see those parallel streams developing for a 

province like Saskatchewan that could mean really high-tech, 

long-run, environmentally connected, job-orientated activity 

that could be sustained for a long period of time?  Doesn't that 

make, I mean, just some logical sense in terms of development 

of economic opportunities here in Saskatchewan? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It makes very good sense.  What I'm 

saying to the member is what doesn't make good sense is for 

the Government of Saskatchewan or for some agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, to spend scarce resource dollars 

on research work that has already been done or is in progress 

by AECL and others throughout the world.  If AECL proceeds 

with the CANDU 3, they're going to be the marketers and 

they've been the developers and they've been the designers and 

they have that information at their disposal.  So yes, the 

package makes sense; you're correct in that. 

 

But where I disagree with you -- where we depart -- is whether 

or not the province of Saskatchewan, or one of its agencies, 

should reinvent the wheel.  That information is available 

through those that know the most about the technology, and we 

have confidence that they will use the economic strategies that 

they should be using to market their product in the future. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I guess you're saying you'd let her go.  

You will not even attempt to tie them in.  Given the fact you're 

spending four years designing this new technology, you assume 

that somebody next door is keeping up to you in terms of waste 

management and the latest twist on that associated with your 

technology.  You just won't do it. 

 

And I know you can see the philosophical problem.  I'm not 

asking you to spend extra revenues that wouldn't come from 

joint revenue partners and a combination of things that would 

be from private, public, AECL, neighbouring provinces.  Have 

you talked to Manitoba about a joint venture?  Have you talked 

to anybody else about those kinds of possibilities, 

encouragement from those that might be associated with 

environment? 

 

Have you ruled it out completely, even if it was financed in 

large part by somebody else?  In other words, if somebody 

came along and said, I know that you're designing these new 

CANDUs.  If somebody came along and said, I'd like 

corresponding parallel research to go on to at least make sure 

that we're right up to speed on waste management and the 

various kinds of modifications and twists you might have with 

that for three or four years down the road, would you rule that 

out, of taking place in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well as clear as I can be to the member, 

that research has taken place and is ongoing through AECL, the 

same people who are doing the design work for the CANDU 3.  

So in your hypothetical situation, someone has come along a 

few years down the road and asked for that package.  AECL 

would say yes, here it is, because they've been doing the work. 

 

And if you care to look at the work that's gone on at Whiteshell 

outside of Winnipeg at Pinawa, Manitoba, they're waiting for 

federal approval for the concept which they propose.  And their 

expertise tells them that this is the best method for them to deal 

with high-level nuclear waste. 

 

So I'm not saying no to the concept that you propose.  What I'm 

saying to you is, no we're not going to do something that's 

repetitive to work that's already been done. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So you suggest that AECL knows the answer 

and they've suggested the best is X.  Could you describe what 

that solution is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The solution is to encase the high-level 

nuclear material, take it down underground in the Canadian 

Shield and store it there 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

in repository for many, many years to come, in what has been 

viewed as a very stable geological formation for many 

thousands of years. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, are you satisfied that it's good 

research?  Are you satisfied that it is the best research?  Are 

you satisfied that the findings are credible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the environmental assessment 

panel will rule on that.  I mean I'm satisfied that the research 

scientists at AECL are professional people and I'm satisfied 

that they've put together the best package they can. 

 

It's now not for me to make the assessment as to whether or not 

this is the best that could possibly happen.  It's up to the federal 

review process, for them to make the determination: one, is this 

the best possible; and secondly if it's not the best 

possible -- they have some other idea -- how do we get to the 

point that it's the best that we could possibly have; and what is 

acceptable to the population as a whole, taking into 

consideration the economic circumstances, the emotional 

feeling that surrounds the debate.  But yes, I feel that the 

research scientists have paid due diligence to the job they're 

doing.  It's up to the review process to decide whether this is 

the best possible, not me, in this House, to you, sir. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'm just asking the Minister of Energy his view 

on the development of this economic opportunity.  And I just 

want to make sure the best I can that you're logical and 

consistent in your arguments. 

 

So you've said that the research is available and they've 

recommended a certain storage technology and as far as you 

know it's the best technology they can . . . they've designed and 

you're satisfied.  I'm not putting words in your mouth, but 

you're satisfied with that technology.  And particularly if the 

advisory and review panels, wherever and whoever they may 

be, say yes, that's the best we have, then you would say that 

that is the appropriate technology to use for the management of 

waste in the nuclear industry, not only in other parts of the 

world, but indeed in Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- In terms of high-level nuclear waste, it's 

the best that I know of.  We're satisfied with the process of 

research and development, and of the approval process which is 

under very close scrutiny.  Ideally, if we lived in an ideal world 

with ideal circumstances, the ideal situation would be for some 

research scientist to wake up some morning and come up with 

an idea of taking the radioactivity out of spent fuel so it would 

be no longer radioactive.  I mean that would be ideal.  But no 

one knows if we'll ever get to that point. 

 

So with what we know, and the stage and time that we're in as 

we travel through this journey of life, I believe that this is the 

best option available that's proposed to this point in time.  In 

the future if we can progress beyond that, research should 

progress beyond that to make this world, and the energy and 

the systems we use, the safest they can possibly be, and if some 

morning the research scientist wakes up and finds a way to take 

radioactivity out of spent fuel, then I'm sure they'll win the 

Nobel peace prize, and many other items, and be honoured and 

renowned throughout the world. 

 

So is it ideal?  I don't know.  Is this state of the art and do we 

have confidence in the research scientists that developed it?  

Yes, we do.  Do we have faith in the approval process?  Yes, 

we have faith in that because it comes under such close scrutiny 

and the public has input into it every step of the way. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's very good, Mr. Minister.  So you have 

faith in the scientists and you have faith in the review panel.  

Now let's assume that the scientists and the review panel agree.  

This is the best technology and they recommend that if you're 

going to store it, this is the best.  If that's the case, Mr. Minister, 

would you entertain or would you stand in the way of 

Saskatchewan people applying to be part of that management 

industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we've made a determination that 

this administration will not entertain deep repositories for 

high-level nuclear waste.  That statement is very clear on 

record as a government.  And I back that decision of the 

government here in the House today, and I back that decision 

also in public.  That is the position of the government of which 

I'm a member of the Executive Council, and that's the position. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you have confidence in the 

environmental people, you have confidence in the scientists, 

and you have confidence in the review panel, and you have 

confidence in the design of the CANDUs and the 

manufacturing and marketing of them.  And then you say, but 

no, not for Saskatchewan people.  Could you describe . . . if 

you have confidence in the environmentalists, and in the 

review, and in the technology, and in the scientists, and the 

manufacturing and the design, and the best options -- and we 

assume that we have the geological formations to do 

this -- could you describe why we should have confidence in 

your judgement, why industry should have confidence in your 

judgement, if you've said, I believe in these people and these 

and the scientists and the environmentalists and all of this 

review, but when it comes to talking with an NDP (New 

Democratic Party) administration, obviously there's something 

else there. 

 

Could you further describe why all of this confidence and this 

trust that you have just described falls short of allowing 

Saskatchewan people with the appropriate uranium, and the 

appropriate mines, and the appropriate technology, and the 

appropriate scientists, and all of that potential which, as you 

know, could be clearly thousands and thousands of jobs . . . 

You say, but no, not here. 

 

Could you walk me through that confidence, confidence, 

confidence?  All of a sudden it falls through because with an 

NDP administration it just 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

doesn't work.  And particularly for those that want to invest 

here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well to this point in time the people of 

Saskatchewan have said on a number of occasions that they 

don't wish to proceed any further in the nuclear cycle than what 

we're into already in Saskatchewan. 

 

There have been hearings in Saskatchewan many times in the 

past.  The most famous one was over the Warman refinery, 

where there was a large public outcry at that time.  And those 

conditions have not changed. 

 

I would repeat to the member that the position of this 

government is not to have high-level nuclear storage waste in 

this province.  And I put that back on the record here this 

evening.  If the member wishes to pursue that line of 

questioning he can certainly pursue it, but that is my answer to 

him on that topic. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you see that you're digging 

yourself into the same hole you did the other night.  What we're 

after is logic and some confidence.  We can take you along so 

far and then all of a sudden it just falls apart.  Because you've 

just said that you have full confidence in the environmental 

panel, the scientists, the researchers, the technology.  It's the 

best in the world; we don't have to redo it.  And if it's approved, 

it's fine for anybody else but not for people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you have no evidence to show me that Saskatchewan 

people wouldn't entertain the newest technology in having us 

do research on technology or even looking at the options of 

management of this complete cycle.  You have no evidence to 

show me that. 

 

You have made a decision, which is fair enough.  I'm asking 

you in public to justify your position.  Because you said you 

have all this confidence and I assume all the cabinet ministers 

have this scientific confidence. Then where does it fall apart?  

Why can't you allow Saskatchewan people on the 21st century 

wave of technology, environmental impact and the 

management? 

 

And your colleague, the Minister of the Environment, will tell 

you precisely that's where the jobs are.  Precisely.  In 

environment, and management, and energy, and putting them 

together.  And you've said, I have confidence in him and all my 

research and all of this, but when it gets to Saskatchewan, while 

we can mine it and sell it and market it -- nuclear activity -- we 

can't look at the cycle involved with waste management.  

Because of the research?  No.  Because of the scientists?  No. 

Because of the latest technology?  No.  Because we're 

manufacturing and designing it?  No, we are. 

 

You see industry will not have much confidence.  And that's 

the problem we face.  So I'm just asking, could you build a 

better case why you can just say: well logically, we just say no.  

Could you elaborate on the no.  From what source that comes; 

where it's from; why, if you've got all this confidence in all this 

research and technology. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Elaborating on no, I guess, means no.  

That's the position.  It's a policy of government.  You know as 

well as anyone and you should know -- as a former premier of 

the province -- you should know how government policy gets 

set.  And that's the government policy, and the no is a no, and I 

don't know whether elaboration just means no, no, no, no, no, 

no or just no.  It's still the same no. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when it comes to many 

decisions by the government, the opposition and the public will 

ask why.  And it's not good enough just to say, well it's just 

because I'm in cabinet I can say no and I don't have to explain it  

We went into that in co-generation and you didn't really have 

an answer.  And it's not very popular and it's not quite logical.  

This one you're caught.  I mean personally I don't think you 

probably have a problem with managing the waste cycle and all 

the things that are involved with it, particularly with respect to 

the health care technology, waste management technology. It's 

high industry, high tech, high jobs.  But you just say no, can't 

hear. 

 

(1945) 

 

My colleague just reminded me -- and he can speak for 

himself -- but what happens if just in theory, we have a new 

administration in Saskatchewan and it says we can review the 

waste management, we can have research, we can even 

participate, and then we go along for four years.  Then when, if 

you want again, you can come back and say no, we've got to 

shut it down.  Another administration, oh yes we're going to be 

. . . it's okay.  And then you come along, you say no, you're 

going to shut it down.  We're talking about long-run economic 

development. 

 

Now it seems to me you've come to the conclusion you can't do 

that in uranium mining.  It seems to me you've come to the 

conclusion you can't do that in the manufacture and design of a 

technology, particularly when it comes to CANDU 3.  What 

kind of a message and a signal are you sending out to national 

and particularly international investors on this high-tech 

information when you just say no without any logic.  But 

there's no basis for it.  Can't you help build the confidence, as 

you've been trying to tell me in the last go-around here, that it's 

important that industry invest here because of confidence. 

 

Your answer, with respect, just doesn't generate a lot of 

confidence that you really have made up your mind why you 

said no, and what might change your mind because it would be 

quite important to people looking at this massive 

industry -- and it is massive -- from the management, from an 

environmental point of view, of this energy source. 

 

So you're caught.  You don't look like you're well . . . one, 

perhaps, very confident of your answer; two, you don't want to 

elaborate on why; and three, it doesn't  



876 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

leave the impression that the industry would like to invest here 

because it could be on again, off again, on again, off again.  

And people will not invest under those circumstances.  So it 

really does beg for a better answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well a couple of points, on your last 

point, people won't invest here -- that's inaccurate.  There are 

no facts to bear out what you say.  If you want to take a 

particular industry, there's approval for two new mines in 

Saskatchewan.  People have invested in that.  There's an 

underground exploration project going at McArthur River, 

another one at Cigar Lake.  Those are all uranium mines.  

People have invested.  AECL invested here -- $20 million over 

four years; that's an investment.  So there are no facts to bear 

out what you say that people will not invest here. 

 

And secondly, the point I make, you're dealing about a 

hypothetical situation.  Why don't you just slow down for a 

moment and see how this goes through the federal review 

process.  See if Whiteshell at Pinawa in Manitoba, the concept 

gets approved first. 

 

One thing that I would pride myself in this government is that 

we plan things out; we don't react in a knee-jerk kind of 

situation, as you're proposing that we do here this evening.  

And just slow down a little bit, and let's have a look at what the 

facts are, rather then you inflaming the debate here again this 

evening.  I don't know what it is you're trying to accomplish, 

and I don't know why you're being as negative as you are about 

the prospects for this great province. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm very high on the 

province; I'm just not as high on you and your rationale for 

what you're doing.  I have a great deal of time for the resource 

development in the province and had something to do with 

encouraging people to invest here and encouraging AECL to 

come here and encourage people to invest in uranium mining, 

and in some ways perhaps brought you kicking and screaming 

into those decisions so that you . . . you know, which were not 

popular for your party.  And then you have political problems, I 

mean I can appreciate that. 

 

What I'm trying to do here is say if you pride yourself in 

planning, then you should look ahead and say:  if indeed the 

panels and the environmentalists recommend that we do this 

waste management technology, you should be fully prepared to 

respond to that and respond in a way that shows you've had 

considerable thought put into it.  Not just no, but yes we can 

design, we can manufacture, we can give you packages on 

waste management, here's how you do it, etc., which is a very 

comprehensive marketing package. 

 

Now you've not given us any indication that you can do that 

because you've just said no.  Now all I'm asking you, have you 

considered research, just considered research on waste 

management that would allow you to make those parallel 

decisions as we go through this environmental and 

technological change that we're all experiencing. 

 

Because if you haven't and you're just going to say no, then I'll 

. . . I mean we'll just shut it down here and you say no, the NDP 

government has ruled it out categorically. 

 

And it makes no sense given your confidence in all this other 

research, particularly when we're looking for jobs and you're 

looking for jobs linked to the Minister of the Environment . . . 

the ministry of Environment and Energy coming together.  The 

two of you must know that's huge potential, and you've said no. 

 

Now one more time: is that all you can add?  You will not 

elaborate for all those potential and future investors in this 

high-tech, knowledge-based industry that it could take place 

here in the province of Saskatchewan as we have the research 

on CANDU 3. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I'll repeat to the member, the 

review process that the federal government is undergoing right 

now, I believe, into the proposed method that AECL has come 

up with to store high-level nuclear waste -- that process will in 

fact take several years.  I'm saying to the member: give that a 

chance, that process, to work. 

 

You seem all bent for fire that you want to change something 

tonight here in the legislature that professional people are going 

to spend several years looking at to make sure it's the best 

possible and maybe adapt to it along the way. 

 

Why do you get caught up in this House on trying to make the 

politics or whatever it is you're trying to do out of a situation 

that's first off hypothetical; and secondly, there's a review 

process there that's going to take several years.  If you want to 

create this as a political issue, just wait until the next election 

and run on it as your major election issue.  Do it that way. 

 

I mean don't take up the time of this House and professionals 

when I've answered your question several times.  Either 

rephrase your question a little bit differently or go on to another 

topic that's appropriate to the estimates of this House. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it shows me if you're not 

prepared to entertain this in a long-run fashion, then it won't 

happen in Saskatchewan.  It may take up to 10 years for the 

design and the manufacture of different technologies on the 

CANDU side and on waste management.  And you've got to be 

part of that, even if you pride yourself in the vision of having 

intelligent capacity to say yes and no down the line. 

 

But what bothers me is that you've just ruled it out.  You say, I 

don't want to do the research and I don't want to look at it, and 

we'll wait 10 years.  You know what?  The rest of the world 

isn't going to wait.  It doesn't wait; it bypasses you.  And you'll 

be retired and gone and doing something else and you'll say, 

gee I wish we'd have been on top of this.  If we'd have 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

been there in the driver's seat when we had the opportunity in 

the early '90s, in the mid-'90s, to be there at the frontier and at 

the front of it. Then you can drive it.  But if you're going to 

wait, you're going to see other people driving it.  And it 

happens all over the world, all over, all the time. 

 

And any of the latest journals or any of the latest writings on 

the latest technology and the latest industries will tell you, get 

on the horse, do the research, get out front.  So I'm not playing 

politics.  This has nothing to do with politics.  This is to do 

with Saskatchewan having an opportunity that other 

jurisdictions don't have. 

 

We have the uranium.  We have AECL.  We have a joint 

venture.  We've got great technological capacity.  We've got the 

Japanese here manufacturing turbines.  We can do more of that.  

We've got international partners who are looking for 

confidence, and you're kind of slipping into politics that I 

shouldn't be talking about this.  This is a major discussion and a 

significant discussion about the future of your province and my 

province, and it deserves serious attention. 

 

And I'm just asking that -- I guess I'm confirming -- you've just 

ruled that part out. So you will not do the research on it and you 

will not entertain it and you said, wait for 10 years.  So I mean 

it's disappointing to hear that.  It's . . . well I would . . . If you 

have nothing else to address or to reduce the fears that I have, 

that you haven't thought about it, or if you have nothing else 

you can say in terms of adding confidence to international 

investors, then we can just go on to something else. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I've already explained to the hon. 

member the position on research.  The research is being done.  

And why would we do something that's repetitive to an 

organization that's set up to do that and have already done the 

research and have ongoing research? 

 

If you don't believe in the process you should say that.  It's not 

me that's saying it's going to take 10 years, that's the process 

that's been set up.  That's the review process, could take several 

years down the road because of the review of the proposal 

that's been submitted by Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.  And 

when you're . . . you're talking to your member . . . our 

process -- it's not our process, it's the public process.  It's the 

federal government process for reviewing high-level waste 

disposal as proposed to them by AECL. 

 

Now we do not have the means or the resources to duplicate 

work that's already been done and I would find it unwise to 

spend Saskatchewan taxpayers' dollars on something that's 

already been done.  That's the first point I want to make with 

you. 

 

The second point is you saying we want to get out front and 

drive it.  What if this isn't the right process used to dispose of 

high-level nuclear waste.  We saw, far too many times, other 

governments in Saskatchewan get out in front and drive a 

process that left us about $15 billion in debt in the province. 

 

We want to look very closely at what's happening with this 

industry.  The whole industry is major to the province of 

Saskatchewan; we're well aware of that.  But don't tell us to get 

out in front and drive something that is in the process and in the 

hands of the federal government at the present time.  We don't 

want to lose the shirts of the people of Saskatchewan by 

jumping into something that we don't have the possibility to run 

out in front and drive. 

 

What if we went ahead and said yes, let's have deep nuclear 

disposal in Saskatchewan and we built a shaft and we wanted to 

haul high-level nuclear waste into Saskatchewan.  Know what 

would happen?  The federal government would say: no you 

don't.  Because it hasn't gone through the review process.  So 

I'm saying to you, wait till the review process is over. 

 

Saskatchewan does not have the authority to get out and run in 

front of something like this, and I reinforce our position on this 

particular topic, is we are not going to have high-level nuclear 

waste disposal in this province.  That's what the record states; 

that's what I state here this evening. 

 

And if you want to pursue this line of questioning I suppose 

you can.  But I would think your time would be more 

productive, once I've given you that answer, to go on to the 

other important items concerning Energy and Mines and the 

Energy Authority for the work they do every day and the work 

they're doing for the future of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, you 

just raised a very important point when you're talking about 

review processes.  You recently had a joint federal-provincial 

panel bring down some decisions in regarding to uranium 

development in northern Saskatchewan.  You saw fit and 

appropriate that you not follow all of the recommendations of 

that panel.  And if I remember correctly, the reasons that were 

given were that there were certain historical realities associated 

with uranium mining.  There were certain economic realities.  

There were certain things to do with native employment and 

hiring.  There were a whole host of reasons why you could 

ignore all of the recommendations of that panel. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, it isn't quite fair of you to come and hide 

now behind the federal environmental review of waste 

management in regards to the nuclear business.  That's simply 

not fair.  Where you saw opportunity, where you saw a real 

political bind, you had no problem disregarding a panel 

decision -- a joint federal-provincial panel.  Now the fact is, 

Mr. Minister, you know full well that there are people in this 

province that are quite prepared to drive this issue a little 

harder.  And I've heard the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, I've 

heard other entities, say that they have money that they aren't 

expecting the taxpayer to put up one thin dime for.  And they 

would like to enter the review process in an advocacy way. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, how can you say to them now, no 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

this is in the hands of the feds, and we aren't interested, when 

just a few short months ago you didn't mind not accepting those 

recommendations at all because it fit nicely with what you 

wanted to do.  Don't you find that a little bit hypocritical, Mr. 

Minister, that you can sidestep when you want to?  But on this 

issue, which is on the minds of a lot of people, you simply say 

no.  How do you rationalize being able to ignore one panel and 

yet lay all of your arguments on the findings of another one?  

How can you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the member is bringing up a point 

that he's either not clear on or is straying from realities.  What 

the federal-provincial panel did was make a recommendation.  

We responded to the recommendation.  The federal government 

also responded in a similar manner to what we responded as a 

province, and the federal-provincial panel said that they felt 

that we responded in the spirit of the recommendations they 

made. 

 

So let's not play with the reality of the situation.  There is very 

little comparisons you can draw between what you're asserting 

and what happened in reality.  In fact you're drawing a very, 

very long bow to even make the connection. 

 

In the case of the initial panel that you talk about -- the 

federal-provincial panel on the new developments for uranium 

mining -- they had reported.  They made their report.  The 

federal government and the provincial government had to 

respond.  We responded and the federal-provincial panel said 

the response is good.  It's within the spirit of the 

recommendations we make. 

 

In the other case, the review process hasn't even been 

completed and you're asking us, in terms of your rationale, to 

violate the review of the panels ongoing on the other topic.  So 

let's use rationale that's in line for comparisons, not something 

that's playing with the realities of the situation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, the point I'm trying to make is 

that you should be inviting people to participate in that review 

process.  It doesn't cost the government of Saskatchewan 

anything to invite interested parties to be part of that federal 

process. 

 

Yes, at the end of the day you and the federal government 

agreed on things and the people on the panel had to say that it 

was within the spirit of the review. You know full well that the 

government had some vested interest, as did the federal 

government, in seeing some of those projects proceed.  And I 

heartily concur with the decision that you made, Mr. Minister, 

heartily concur.  In fact you probably could have gone a little 

bit further, in my view, and still been within the spirit of the 

recommendations, and things would have proceeded as they 

should in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But the fact is, Mr. Minister, that what you are telling us 

tonight in committee, where we're discussing something that 

you and I both know has the potential to create a tremendous 

amount of employment and activity in our province, that you 

simply don't want to talk about the subject. 

 

Mr. Minister, would it be within your purview as Energy and 

Mines minister to be an interventionary or invite Saskatchewan 

proponents of waste management in the nuclear industry to be 

part . . . Have you, have you asked the federal government if 

you can be part of that process, so that you clearly understand 

the environmental review process, because obviously in the 

nuclear business we've done joint federal panels here as a 

matter of course.  Would you see that as your role, to be part 

and parcel of that process and be in a position to invite 

Saskatchewan people, if they wish, to be part of that 

discussion?  Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well that is part of the process.  And 

during the review of the federal government, part of that review 

is public participation.  And anyone in the public, including 

yourself, is welcome to make a presentation to the public 

review process, that part of the process which will be 

undertaken by the federal government for the disposal of 

high-level nuclear waste.  It's under federal jurisdiction.  It's not 

our jurisdiction in that area. 

 

So when you're talking about federal-provincial panel, we don't 

have any jurisdiction in that area whereas where there's some 

mining in Saskatchewan, we have some jurisdiction.  There's 

overlap of jurisdiction.  That's why there was a 

federal-provincial panel. 

 

So in answer to your question, yes, there should be public 

discussion about it.  The process is there for that public 

discussion to take place.  And what I don't understand is why 

you and the former premier don't just allow the public process 

to take place.  It's been set up, it's there, it's there for the public 

to deal with.  It'll come under the scrutiny of the broader public 

beyond those interested in the issue.  So I say yes, it makes 

sense.  And not only does it make sense, the process is there to 

enable that to happen. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Specifically, Mr. Minister, is the province of 

Saskatchewan, either through your auspices, or the Minister of 

the Environment or some other ministry, directly participating 

in that federal review process?  You say it is entirely out of our 

hands as a provincial jurisdiction.  I'll have to take your word 

for that, Mr. Minister.  I don't quite understand why you would 

want it to be that way. 

 

But can you tell me, is the Government of Saskatchewan not 

involved at all in that process or don't plan on being involved in 

that process in any way?  Are you saying that you're staying out 

of it entirely?  You've washed your hands of being any part of 

that.  Or are you going to officially enter into that 

environmental review process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- As far as I'm concerned it would be 

inappropriate for me to become involved in it.  And 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

I'm not going to be involved in a process that's already 

established, to interfere with the due diligence of the federal 

panel that is reviewing that issue. 

 

Nuclear waste, in terms of this proposal, is not an issue in 

Saskatchewan.  It's an issue -- as I understand it -- for the 

process which AECL is proposing to be used at Whiteshell at 

Pinawa in Manitoba.  That is what's being studied.  Am I going 

to interfere in that?  No, I'm not going to interfere in that. 

 

Unlike the man who's sitting beside you advising you, we're 

going to do due diligence and not jump into something which 

could cost us dearly economically in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We're willing to follow the process to make 

sure what we do in Saskatchewan is the right thing. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman.  That's what I 

want you to do, is some due diligence here, sir.  You're saying, 

I'm washing my hands of it.  I'm not going to interfere in it. 

 

The federal panel, for whatever reason, if the minister is totally 

removed from it and doesn't understand what's going on there, 

may within a couple of years come in with a decision.  And 

they may say, in our esteemed position, this is all right.  This is 

the way that you handle nuclear waste. 

 

My colleague was asking you to at least be out in front.  I'm 

saying to you, what if that decision is made and you don't have 

any inclination about what's going on there.  And then 

somebody comes along and says, well I want to do that.  

Federal government says it's okay to do that; passed all the 

environmental hoops and bells and whistles.  And you're telling 

me that you and your department don't have a clue what's going 

on there, and you don't care to be part of that? 

 

Mr. Minister, I find that strange.  I find it really strange that 

you wouldn't want to be part of that process given that your 

province and the ministry that you're responsible for handles 

about 20 per cent of the free world's uranium. 

 

I find that bizarre, Mr. Minister, that you wouldn't want to be 

part of that process and know that if that panel comes down 

with a decision that you are informed about what is going to 

happen.  Are you telling me that you have no interest 

whatsoever in being part of that process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We're not going to be part of that 

particular process.  We have full access to information on what 

occurs there.  We have information on things that happened, 

processes that happened, various places in the world -- such as 

the Yucca mountains in Arizona, such as the research facility at 

Whiteshell in Manitoba.  We have access to the information. 

 

You're asking us to jump into something in the middle of a 

process and interfere in the process.  That's not the method of 

our government to do that. We are not getting involved in the 

interference of a process that's currently established to make 

whatever point it is that you're trying to make here. 

 

Do we have the research at our fingertips?  Yes, we have that 

information at our fingertips.  Are we willing to share that 

information with other people?  Yes, we're willing to share that 

information with other people.  Is there a process in place for 

high-level nuclear storage?  Yes.  Are we going to interfere in 

that process?  No.  I don't know what it is that you're trying to 

glean out of me as a member of this government, but I think 

I've been very straightforward with you here this evening.  I've 

answered as directly as I can the questions that you have put, 

and if you need different answers, maybe ask the question 

differently.  But if you keep asking the same question, I'm 

going to be giving you the same answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

there's a serious flaw in your whole argument here tonight, and 

it applies as well to the previous discussions we've had.  Let me 

give you an illustration. 

 

You are the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Research 

Council, and you've gone through some of those estimates.  

Now you didn't say to the Saskatchewan Research Council, I 

know that there's research going on in Ottawa and there's 

research going on in Mexico and there's research going on in 

California.  We don't need to do any.  We'll just glean it from 

the rest of the world.  Particularly we can get it from the federal 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You didn't say that. 

 

In fact you were prouder saying what we do in the 

Saskatchewan Research Council is we invite people to 

participate in joint venture research.  In fact if I recall it right, 

you said the private sector is funding more and more research 

as they're invited to come into the province of Saskatchewan.  

Why do you do that, Mr. Minister?  So that you can be on the 

leading end of the technology, so that you can be there in terms 

of various kinds of  . . . I can go back through Hansard; I can 

read it to you today. 

 

You said we should be there.  Not in putting words in your 

mouth, but the SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) can lead 

in providing this solution to this new technology.  You don't 

wait . . . is what you said with the SRC, and you're the minister. 

 

Now you come in here in this House in Energy estimates, and 

we asked you, well why can't you do research and be up there, 

at least in the parallel partner in the knowledge-based industry 

on waste management.  You say, we don't do that.  It doesn't 

make any sense.  It's not logical.  And that is 15 times if not 

1,500 times the significance of the SRC. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I'm after the logic of your decision not to 

be able to say I want to be there in a parallel fashion. 

 

Let me give you another illustration.  Do we do research in 

agriculture?  Of course we do.  Do we do it  



880 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

in horizontal drilling?  Of course we do.  Do we do it in 

upgraders?  Of course we do.  Do we do it in technology?  Yes 

we do.  And agriculture is a typical one, and forestry is another 

one, and paper.  And the technology to use various kinds of 

renewable resources and planting, we don't just depend on the 

rest of the world. 

 

Where it's important to us, we're in there like a dirty shirt.  We 

do the research in agriculture, and we do it in forestry, and we 

do it in energy until we got to the position where you said, I 

will not look -- I will not look.  And it looks odd, Mr. Minister, 

it looks like you've got a serious philosophical problem that is 

going to get in the way of major economic and 

knowledge-based development in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And your argument that the system is going on 

and you don't need to be there doesn't wash, makes no sense.  

It's very similar to what you did in co-generation, makes no 

sense. 

 

Just all of a sudden, no.  Yet you brag about the research where 

you think it does and as my colleague . . . even when you get 

research and you don't like it, you can get around it.  So what it 

tells people is that maybe you just do whatever you like and it's 

not based on logic, or science, or research, or environment, or 

any other system.  And that gets at the heart of probably one of 

the major questions about your administration, is the 

confidence in the uranium industry, in the nuclear industry, in 

the energy business, and all of those options. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if I can just draw you back.  If in fact you 

are proud of what the SRC does in its joint ventures, couldn't 

your department invite people to participate in this high-level 

research, costing you very little money, but for you to stay 

abreast and for you to contribute to the solution.  Because 

probably, just like in SRC and in other research institutions, 

you don't know all the answers and maybe you'd like to be 

there.  Isn't there some compelling argument that you would 

like to be at least as knowledgeable as you said you would be in 

the SRC when it comes to waste management? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We are knowledgeable at waste 

management.  It's not our mandate and it's the view of our 

government that we won't repeat work that's already been done 

at very high cost to the taxpayers in the province.  AECL has 

that mandate.  They've done research, they are doing research, 

and we would rely on the research that they do.  Don't ask us to 

make duplicate payments for repetitive work that won't make 

any greater advantage or disadvantage to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Just understand that for a moment.  Just stop 

and understand that. 

 

Different issue with the SRC that you're chirping about from 

your seat.  The issue with the SRC is that they have the 

mandate and that's work that they need to seek out and people 

seek them out to do that work.  No one's seeking out anyone in 

Saskatchewan to do research work in the field which you talk 

about because it seems everybody in North America, maybe 

throughout the world, knows that it's AECL's responsibility.  

You might be the only exception in the whole world that 

doesn't know that. 

 

So the research is being done.  The research has been done.  

It'll continue to be done.  And we have access to that research.  

The public will have access to the research through the review 

process.  So stop for a minute and think about what you're 

asking us to do. 

 

Are you asking us: one, to do work that's repetitive, that's 

already been done; secondly, at a high cost to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers that you would have a blatant disregard for, is that 

what you're asking us to do?  Or thirdly, are you asking us to 

go into a project that could have literally hundreds of million of 

dollars into development of it and then the federal government 

could just say no, and we've wasted all that money?  Is that the 

due diligence that you would spend?  That's likely why you're 

ex-premier here today. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, could you just then 

elaborate . . . if you can't provide any consistent arguments on 

research, could you elaborate why you just say no?  Could you 

just come up with the justification for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- It's the policy of our government.  There 

have been discussions about it, and the policy is that we do not 

see the need or have the desire as a government or for the 

people of Saskatchewan to have high-level nuclear waste 

storage within the province.  There are other areas in western 

Canada, in the Canadian Shield that are far more advanced.  So 

let's leave it at that.  Let the process do its work. 

 

But the answer to you, to your specific question, if I understand 

your specific question, the answer to that is no. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You said there are better areas.  Do you have 

. . . could you present research to the House . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Other areas, better areas and other areas.  

Could you present anything to the House that shows that there's 

a geological disadvantage to any of the particular formations in 

Saskatchewan compared to other jurisdictions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- If I said better, I meant to say other; 

there are other locations.  And there are some that are 

developed as research facilities already in western Canada.  As 

to the most stable formations, I don't have that information 

readily available, but some of that information does exist.  Why 

I don't have it? -- because I don't have it here this evening.  I 

didn't expect in Energy and Mines estimates to be into an 

hour-and-15-minute discussion with you on high-level nuclear 

waste, especially when I stated the position of the government 

very clearly when you first asked the question.  An hour and 

almost 20 minutes later I guess you still haven't heard the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm just trying to  



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

find out why you said no.  Are you saying that . . . do you have 

evidence to show that Saskatchewan does not have stable 

geological formations?  Have you anything to justify your 

decision?  Could you compare or show or table any research 

that shows that the geological formations here in Saskatchewan 

would not be as stable as other jurisdictions, particularly in the 

Canadian Shield? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Let's take this in steps, if the member 

wants to deal with it.  It's not the geology that's the issue right 

now; it's the process.  So it's going to happen in stages. 

 

What's before the federal review process right now is the 

process which AECL proposes to deal with high-level nuclear 

waste, just the process -- how to get it there, how to get it into 

the ground, what form it should take.  That's what's being 

reviewed.  If the federal government, after their due diligence, 

says this is the right process or this is the process with 

modifications, then there would be a search for the most stable 

geological formation in Canada in which to use the process 

that's being proposed by AECL. 

 

So you're moving from one point to another, and it's very hard, 

I'm sure, if not for me, also for the viewers to get a coherent 

logic as to your line of questioning here this evening. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm just asking you if you done, 

or your officials done due diligence on the stability of the 

geological formations in Saskatchewan compared to others.  

Has that been part of your cabinet decision?  Have you used 

that as part of your cabinet decision -- you say no, we won't 

consider it? 

 

Wouldn't you like to have that information at least available to 

you?  And it's just a discussion on what the geology is in 

Saskatchewan.  In the event the panel says, well that's the best 

and now we're going to look for the best, wouldn't you like to 

be prepared for that?  And it's just a study of the geological 

formations. 

 

Can you inform the House of your latest research or the latest 

information on the geological formations and their stability? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We just don't proceed like that.  We 

don't even know the criteria set down by the federal 

government.  They haven't set the criteria.  But I'm sure if your 

government's indication was anything, you would be out there 

running around punching holes all over, blowing air out of 

them, telling people this is good economic development and 

then losing millions of dollars to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We're not about to do that. 

 

When the federal government has done their review process for 

the process and they set the criteria, then people can start 

looking for the most stable formations.  But we're not running 

10 miles ahead, spending tens or maybe hundreds of millions of 

dollars of Saskatchewan taxpayers' money without even 

knowing what the rules are. 

 

And it's not our fault we don't know what the rules are because 

the federal government will at some point set those rules.  Don't 

try and push us into wasting taxpayers' money before the 

federal government has even set down the rules to the game. 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I was just asking, and I'm sure 

that you have . . . and what you've advised me now is that you 

didn't even consider that in your decisions.  You obviously 

don't know personally how our geological formations and the 

stability of them rank compared to others in the Canadian 

Shield.  You don't know. 

 

I'm asking you: would you get that information from your 

officials because I'm sure there's existing research.  After all the 

mining and all the drilling that we do across the Canadian 

Shield you'd know what we have compared to others.  And if 

they've got that, couldn't they present it to the House so that we 

know, despite the stability in Saskatchewan's geology, you still 

said no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's nothing particularly unique 

about any area of the Canadian Shield that makes one more 

stable than the other . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 

member would well know that it'll come down to a political 

contest at some point.  Suppose every province within Canada 

wanted to compete for the site that you say so many people will 

want.  Then it would likely, knowing the way that the federal 

government operates, come down to a straight political 

decision. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're saying -- just so we 

have it on the record, just so that you know we all know -- we 

have the most of the uranium in Canada in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We have geological formations . . . are as stable 

as any in the Canadian Shield.  According to you and your 

officials, there is not a statistically significant difference.  We 

are doing research on the CANDUs.  We mine the uranium.  

We are opening new mines.  We have all of the technology 

available.  And you are saying no, not in Saskatchewan because 

we're going to leave that up to somebody else. 

 

I just want to put that on the record because the logic obviously 

fails to ring here in the Legislative Assembly here tonight 

because people have looked at all those possibilities and to 

have an NDP cabinet minister and an NDP administration say 

no without any logic behind it . . . and you still haven't come 

out with why you said no. 

 

If it isn't geology and it isn't research and it isn't the scientists 

and it isn't the process, then I'll give you one more crack.  Why 

are you saying no, categorically, if the geology and the 

technology and the scientists and the environmentalists and the 

CANDU and the research and the AECL and all of that 

industry is poised for full development here in Saskatchewan, 

including your blessing of uranium mines?  Why have you said 

no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well thank you for giving me  



882 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

one last chance to explain this to you.  The policy of the 

province of Saskatchewan is that we will not have high-level 

nuclear waste disposal in the province.  I can't be any more 

clear than that.  We've been through all the other reasons.  All 

the other reasons we've been through.  You've been through the 

research aspect; we've dealt with that.  You've been through the 

process, and I think we've dealt with that.  We've been through 

the federal review, and I think we've dealt with that. 

 

And you're premature in your debate on this issue.  It's a debate 

that needs to go on and it's a debate that will in fact go on.  It'll 

go on with the Canadian public; it'll go on with the 

Saskatchewan public.  And I'm saying, just slow down for 

awhile.  Just hold on and let the process and the reviews do 

their work.  Don't try and push Saskatchewan people out 

somewhere where we're not certain that's where we want to be. 

 

This government wants to be sure as to where we're going with 

the development and the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that's particularly so in the whole field of 

energy which has massive potential for the province when 

we're talking about energy.  It's one of the stars in our future 

that will guide us to future prosperity.  So I'm saying to you, 

just hold on.  The process is there; the research is there; the 

review is there; and I can't answer any more clearly than I have 

over the past hour and 25 minutes, the questions that you've put 

to me. 

 

Now you can spin that out in whatever way you want to and 

how I know you're quite capable of doing.  So spin it out as you 

want, but let's go on to the other topics that I'm sure you must 

view as very important within the people and the 

responsibilities that sit before you here tonight ready to answer 

those questions. 

 

I would not want to say what you've said so far is not pertinent 

to the Saskatchewan debate -- because it is.  But once I've 

answered those questions I think that it's proper that we go on 

to other topics that I'm sure must be of concern to you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think you've summarized 

it but you just can't seem to answer.  We found, Mr. Minister, 

that you said no, despite all the evidence that says yes.  You 

said the research is good; and the geology is good; and the 

scientists are good; and the location is good; the panels are 

good; and the manufacturing is good; the mining is good; the 

nuclear activity is good.  You said yes to all of those, and then 

we asked you but why not here in terms of waste management, 

and you said no but you never answered why. 

 

So obviously you must think there's some hidden agenda and 

the hidden agenda is getting into the minds of an NDP cabinet 

minister in confidence.  The public won't have confidence.  

You've got to explain why you said no because we can't find a 

reason.  It's not for environmental, geological, panel, research.  

You just said no. 

 

So if there's no other answer other then it's just no from you, 

then we've got to assume that you've got some hidden agenda, 

or some other reason, or the industry is going to say, well what 

are they all about.  What is the logic?  And if there isn't any 

logic, that's fine, we'll just leave it at that and it'll be one more 

chapter -- as I saw it, Mr. Minister, and I'm sure you're aware in 

1982 and I certainly saw prior to that -- where it didn't make 

sense and people threw up their hands.  And you're digging 

yourself into that same hole. 

 

There's no logic.  It doesn't follow.  So you summarized . . . we 

can't find a single reason for you to say no but you've said no.  

And if that's all you can give us, then fair enough.  I mean 

you've said no to this industry -- you'll say yes to gambling, 

you'll say yes to casinos -- you won't do due diligence worth a 

diddle.  None.  Unbelievable.  Getting into all kinds of things 

but all of a sudden you say no to this. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I'm prepared to move on but I'm just for the 

record going to state: we can't in this House find one reason 

why you have said no to waste management, research, 

direction, in the province of Saskatchewan.  None. 

 

So fair enough, but I guess I go back to our initial contact here 

when we were going at your estimates before.  If you said the 

development is going to be based on confidence, show me why 

your decision to say no should generate any confidence in 

investors in the nuclear industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the facts don't bear out your 

assertion.  And while I'm dealing with facts, the investor 

confidence in Saskatchewan is very high at the present time, 

both in mining and the oil and gas sector. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, there is confidence in investing 

based on policies that have stayed open -- open to business, 

open to the outside world.  People can invest in oil and gas.  In 

fact, it's publicly traded.  People can invest in the potash 

industry because it's publicly traded.  People can invest in the 

paper industry because it's privatized.  People can invest in 

fertilizer; in fact you're in business with a very large 

multinational in fertilizer.  Huge investments in pulp and paper, 

oil, gas, processing, manufacturing -- because you're open. 

 

All you've done in this situation is you've closed the door.  And 

we want to know why, in this huge potential, did you say no.  

And it's massive.  Maybe you don't understand how big it is.  

The environmental question on managing energy and waste is 

huge, from carbon based, coal based, nuclear based -- and 

you've said no.  That's a big decision to make and you have no 

justification. 

 

(2030) 

 

You said investment's good in Saskatchewan.  It's good where 

you've left the door open.  You haven't nationalized companies. 

You've let people trade, they 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

can invest, and that's what we would entirely recommend.  And 

the same in the uranium mining industry.  You've stayed open; 

you didn't slam the door shut.  And you're to be commended for 

that.  All we're asking is why won't you even entertain an 

invitation for people to come in and study -- on their money, 

their nickel -- the geology, and the formation, and the potential 

in case we have the chance here? 

 

Why wouldn't you just do that -- say, we won't participate but 

come on into the province of Saskatchewan.  At least facilitate 

that as you did with the Research Council or others.  Couldn't 

you at least keep those doors open in terms of knowledge, by 

inviting people in to do the research, or to look at the geology, 

or to combine it with AECL and CANDUs and potential 

countries that are going to buy them?  You could do that. 

 

You could go to various countries and say, we'll likely be 

manufacturing; at the same time we want to do top-notch 

research.  We'll sell to you if you agree to participate in 

research.  A natural joint venture -- really interesting, high 

level, high technology, lots of jobs, and other people's money.  

And you said no, can't do that; we'll wait for somebody else to 

do it. 

 

It makes no sense in an industry this big. This is not just bingo.  

This is very, very, very large for the future of Saskatchewan.  

So I'm glad you agree the discussion is relevant.  It's very 

relevant.  Again, Mr. Minister, even if you invited people in . . . 

what if we just make this proposition to you.  Would you 

entertain, or could you take back to your cabinet colleagues . . . 

We would invite people here to explore the possibilities -- on 

their money.  Could you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I can offer to the hon. member, is 

that companies that are interested in the project that you 

propose, I'd certainly invite you to have them come and see me, 

and I'll tell them the rationale for our answer no. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Could you tell me the rationale for the answer 

no, if it's on their money, doing the research that is parallel with 

the CANDUs that you were doing the research on?  Could you 

describe to me, and to them now, why you say no to that 

research funded by the private sector or another country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I have told you.  I just think they'd 

understand it better. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well you haven't come up with one answer.  It 

isn't for geological reasons, economic reasons, environmental 

reasons.  What's the reason that you say no to this huge 

technology?  Just the research here, inviting them to come in 

here and do research, what's the reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Come on, I thought a deal's a deal.  I 

told you I'd invite them here, and I'll tell them why the answer's 

no, and they'll understand better than you have this evening. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, a smart-alec answer isn't going to 

get you any place.  The members opposite can think that the . . . 

I mean this minister's got himself in trouble before, and if that's 

all you've got left - 

_ if that's all you've got left is to provide kind of a smart-alec 

answer to the industry and say, I'll tell them no and they'll 

figure it out -- I mean that is not going to generate confidence. 

 

And that's all I wanted out of you.  Because eventually that's 

what it gets down to.  Just a knee-jerk reaction, no it doesn't 

count, you're not relevant.  You can't even come in on an 

invitational basis. 

 

I'll leave it at that, Mr. Minister.  I think you've just said 

everything there is to say about your attitude in the industry and 

what you think of them.  And what you think, frankly, of just 

legitimate questions about a very important industry.  That you 

will not come up with one single answer in justification for 

your no.  Even when it makes it as simple as say, come in on 

your money, Mr. Man from Germany, or Mr. Company from 

Japan, or some place else. 

 

So fair enough, Mr. Minister.  I think I've got enough from 

your answers to provide anybody who has any interest in 

coming in here to participate in that industry to know exactly 

why the NDP historically has the record it does in economic 

development and in energy, and we all know what it is.  And 

you haven't done precious little to change that; in fact you've 

made it worse. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it true that SaskPower has made the decision to 

expand internationally in the provision of energy and/or 

technology? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I want to first deal with the earlier 

part of your statement.  I'm not providing you with any 

smart-alec answer.  If you know people who are interested in 

that topic that we were exploring earlier, tell them to come and 

see me in Saskatchewan, and I will explain to them why the 

answer is no.  I've explained it to you tonight, and I think you 

refuse to listen and to understand it. 

 

I think you don't know anybody who's interested to come into 

Saskatchewan and make that kind of investment in any event.  

If you do, my challenge to you is: you invite them to come and 

see me, and we'll have a discussion in my office with them, and 

they will understand why the answer is no from Saskatchewan.  

There's nothing smart alec about that. 

 

And in terms of me being in trouble before, I wouldn't view it 

as being in trouble.  I can understand people who sometimes 

get irritated with me, but I guess that's why they pay you the 

big bucks to be in cabinet, is come sometimes you've got to 

make decisions that don't make everybody happy, especially 

during times after you've been in government in Saskatchewan 

and left the mess that if I was you I'd be ashamed to even show 

my face in this legislature -- the mess that you left that other 

people have to come along and clean up. 

 

That's why there's tough decisions.  That's why you 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

interpret me as being in trouble sometimes, but I don't view it 

as being in trouble.  That's why I'm part of the cabinet: to make 

tough decisions, decisions that are even tougher because of the 

mess you left us in because your cabinet wouldn't make the 

tough decisions that were necessary.  So I want to just have that 

clear on the record.  I'm not being smart alec with you.  I have 

never been more serious in my life with you. 

 

In terms of SaskPower expanding internationally, no that 

decision has not been made.  What's happening at SaskPower is 

that they view there is being some international opportunities, 

some opportunities in other provinces in Canada to sell our 

technology and our expertise, our technological expertise at 

SaskPower.  And what's going to happen is that for a very short 

period of time there will be a business plan put together.  The 

business plan will identify what the expertise is that we have to 

sell, what the countries or other provinces are that require the 

expertise, and further, which countries or other provinces can 

afford the expertise that we have. 

 

If that business plan makes sense, then we will have some 

commercial interests in SaskPower that go beyond the 

boundaries of Saskatchewan.  If the business plan does not 

make sense, we will not expand beyond the boundaries of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you're saying that . . . well, 

I'm quoting from the newspaper, but it's an interview with the 

head of SaskPower, and it's saying that: 

 

. . . SaskPower must start acting more like a private 

business in a variety of ways . . . On the one hand . . . 

establishing a new subsidiary to sell technology and 

expertise to other countries . . . the company must gear up 

to look for niche export markets. 

 

Now you're saying, Mr. Minister, on one hand, your Crown 

corporation and Energy is going to look internationally and be 

in the export business as a Crown corporation based on the 

reputation of an NDP administration, and out there competing 

internationally, at the same time when you said no, we won't 

allow certain kinds of companies and certain kinds of research 

to take place in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And no justification.  None.  You just slammed close the door 

and say no.  And no justification even here in the legislature.  

And you expect other provinces and other jurisdictions and 

other places around the world . . . This . . . (inaudible) . . . goes 

back to why Allan Blakeney got in trouble, exactly.  Because 

you would nationalize a company internally, and then you turn 

around and then you'd expect to compete internationally. 

 

It's like SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) -- what 

you're doing now.  You have monopoly rates and a monopoly 

here, and you go try to compete in other jurisdictions.  With 

monopoly power, monopoly profits, and then you try to 

compete in other jurisdictions.  And people obviously think that 

it's a little odd, that you're going to use the monopolies to gain 

money here, rip off people -- I mean utility rates, people think 

it's a rip-off these days, SaskPower, SaskTel, SGI -- and then 

you're going to go in other jurisdictions and say, but let us 

compete.  We're allowed to go over here and go over there, and 

so forth. 

Is that a fair description of the philosophy that you have that 

you think that your monopoly, SaskPower, can compete 

internationally without subsidy, and you're not going to be 

called on it for cross-subsidization or deep pocket financing of 

various kinds of projects. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- As I said to the hon. member, the initial 

stage is to draw up a business plan.  If it makes some sense, if 

they can convince the board and the board convinced the 

cabinet, then there will be some interest pursued outside of our 

own boundaries.  I would want to point out we are well aware 

there are some very, very big players as electrical utilities in the 

international market-place.  We have no intention of going 

head-on, trying to get into their business out there. 

 

There are also some niche markets that we think we can take 

advantage of.  There are some places in the world which are 

starved for the technological expertise that we have within 

SaskPower.  They may or may not be able to pay for that 

expertise.  This is very short term. 

 

Look at the business opportunities. If they make sense, then 

they should get out there and pursue those opportunities -- not, 

as you assert, to draw from Saskatchewan taxpayers and 

ratepayers, to squander in the international community; just the 

reverse of that.  Because of the rates and the taxes that 

Saskatchewan people have paid, we have some very good 

expertise within our utilities in Saskatchewan.  It's time now, if 

the opportunities exist, for the people of Saskatchewan to get 

some return on their investment from the technological 

expertise that has been built up. 

 

You have many inaccuracies in your arguments, hon. member.  

One is when you talk about the monopoly of SGI in 

Saskatchewan.  I would beg to differ with you and so would, I 

think, Saskatchewan Mutual; Mennonite Mutual; Royal 

Insurance; all the other companies that do business in a 

competitive market with Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

in Saskatchewan.  I think you should correct your facts on what 

you place before this legislature and not use inaccuracies to try 

and bolster your own faulty arguments. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You may not want to answer this, Mr. Minister, 

but can anybody else provide auto insurance in Saskatchewan 

except SGI? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No.  Can anyone else provide 

commercial insurance?  Yes.  Can anyone else provide 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

liability insurance?  Yes.  Can anybody else provide property 

insurance, residential, farms, auto liability?  The answer is yes.  

So let's just look at the facts.  SGI, for the largest part of their 

book of business, deal in the competitive market in 

Saskatchewan, and deal very well in the competitive market.  

They have a monopoly on that one sector and you know very 

well why they have a monopoly in that one particular sector. 

 

I just wanted to point out that you should use some accuracy in 

your arguments and not slant the case to present an argument 

which otherwise would be faulty.  When you talk about the 

inaccuracies you place forward about SaskPower Commercial 

that is being proposed to be on an international market, we 

don't know that yet. 

 

If you ask me that question six months from now, I'll either tell 

you that SaskPower is operating in the international or at least 

the markets beyond our borders, or they're not operating in the 

markets beyond our borders because it doesn't make sense to 

operate in the markets beyond our borders.  At the present time, 

I don't know that, but I've seen the business plan put together 

with the items of particular concern which I mentioned to you 

earlier in addressing your question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you have no philosophical 

problem with a monopoly from another province, say Manitoba 

Hydro or a telephone company run by a province, coming in 

and taking business here in Saskatchewan when it is operating 

in another jurisdiction with a monopoly, and SaskTel has a 

monopoly on telephones here.  Correct?   SGI has a monopoly 

on automobile insurance here.  SaskPower has a monopoly on 

power.  So if another power company comes in here to 

compete, like Manitoba Hydro, and you don't know in how 

deep their pockets are -- you know that they may have 

monopoly profit -- that's okay with you.  So philosophically 

you're fine when government monopolies from another 

jurisdiction come in here and try to take business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well the member would well know that 

all of our Crowns, I think, would be wise to get prepared for a 

market-driven economy in which has traditionally been a 

monopoly.  If we look at the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television 

and Telecommunications Commission) decision over 

competition within Saskatchewan where other companies come 

in and use our hardware at what we would view as preferential 

rates, don't think that can't happen with our pipelines and with 

our transmission lines in terms of electricity.  That, depending 

on what the federal government does, will in fact be happening 

in the future under the markets that are currently being set 

because of a number of things which we have no control over 

at this point in time.  You know yourself we're moving into a 

global economy, and I could not object if the situation you said 

was to happen. 

 

As long as we have a franchise, I will fight my best.  I'm bound 

by my obligations to the Crown to protect the franchise of the 

corporations that I represent.  If in fact there is regulation or 

deregulation, depending which side of it you're on, that allows 

that to happen, I have a responsibility, as a minister of the 

Crown, to make sure that those corporate utilities that we have 

now that have monopolies in Saskatchewan are able to compete 

in the market-place.  I think they're very welcome, capable of 

competing in the market-place.  They're getting prepared to 

compete in the market-place, and they will compete in the 

market-place. 

 

(2045) 

 

Part of that is them showing us that they can go into the 

international markets or markets beyond the Saskatchewan 

boundary and do very well, as SaskTel has in getting prepared 

for the market-driven economy that they're going to have to go 

into because of NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement), because of the Free Trade Agreement, because of 

many things that are already there with us, facing us in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We're prepared, as a government, to deal with that.  You look 

at the contract that SaskTel did in the Philippines, successful 

contract brought back a return to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You look at the Chunnel project that SaskTel's 

involved in.  That will bring a return back to us.  International 

competition for Saskatchewan technology is the best it can be 

anywhere in the world. 

 

If we can prove that same thing at SaskPower, I think it's to the 

good of the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And it's 

good for SaskPower because of the competition that they'll 

have to face in future years down the road because of many of 

the deals that you participated in such as NAFTA and the Free 

Trade Agreement that have put us into a position where we 

have to compete. 

 

Again I repeat, we're capable of competing.  We're competent.  

We're professional.  And we have in terms of our utilities, all of 

them, state-of-the-art technology and state-of-the-art employees 

with the best minds you can find anywhere on the continent or 

possibly throughout the world and we can compete given the 

opportunity. 

 

The business plan will be put together.  We'll either show we 

can do that at SaskPower or we can't do that, and that's a 

decision that'll be made in the near future. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it says here in the paper that 

we may have to be able to take on the competition that could 

come in here with . . . and I quote: 

 

The possibility also exists that other power companies 

might soon be able to gain access to the Saskatchewan 

market, using SaskPower's transmission lines . . . 

 

This practice has become common in the U.S.  



886 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

through de-regulation, and there's nothing to stop a 

competitor from launching a . . . challenge to gain access 

(to this market) . . . 

 

Now you've talked about the global economy and competition 

and we got to meet it.  Are you saying that you understand that 

there is global competition and regional competition and this is 

going to take place between utilities -- private and public -- and 

that you're going to have to meet that competition? 

 

Secondly, are you saying that if people could provide lower 

priced services here in Saskatchewan from other jurisdictions 

that you would let that happen?  That SaskPower or SaskTel or 

SGI would have to compete with those other people who are 

coming in here to provide that service at a lower cost to the 

public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well you warped my words a little.  

What we're saying is that there's federal regulatory agencies in 

Canada:  CRTC has jurisdiction over communications; the 

NEB, National Energy Board, has authority over electricity and 

natural gas, the energy components.  And if the National 

Energy Board says that there's going to be open competition in 

Saskatchewan as they've said with SaskTel, a couple of years 

down the road that's going to be the case, then we have to 

accept that.  Otherwise we don't accept the laws of Canada. 

 

In the meantime, if somebody from somewhere wants to wheel 

some cheap electricity in here that's temporary, and we don't 

know how secure it is to them, I'm going to fight that.  I'm 

going to fight that because I have a mandate by the province of 

Saskatchewan to enforce the legislative authority of the utilities 

and I will fight to maintain that legislative authority that's put 

into place by statute of this House.  If you don't like it, change 

the statute in the House.  Don't ask me to arbitrarily change the 

laws of the province of Saskatchewan, because I won't do that.  

I respect the law. 

 

If the federal government, through their regulatory agencies, 

move into the National Energy Board and say that there is 

going to be other competitors in the market-place of energy in 

Saskatchewan, I have to accept that because that's the federal 

law and I respect the law. 

 

What I do have to do in the meantime is anticipate that some 

day that may happen.  Anticipating that some day that may 

happen, I have to work with the officials at SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy to ensure that they're able to survive in a 

market-driven economy which they're not totally exposed to 

right now. 

 

And part of this exercise, in terms of the business plan for 

SaskPower to go beyond our borders, is part of the preparatory 

work of getting ready for a market-driven economy.  Whether 

that comes two years down the road or 20 years down the road, 

I believe, as the president of SaskPower does, we have to at 

least prepare for that.  But it will be rational, it will be planned, 

and it will make common sense.  Otherwise we won't do it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's kind of interesting, Mr. Minister.  You're 

going to be prepared and do the due diligence and all those 

things to survive in a market-driven economy down the road in 

case it comes along and you're quite prepared to do that in 

SaskPower, but you're not prepared to do that in the nuclear 

industry.  I mean just the due diligence, just be prepared, just be 

there.  I mean the inconsistency in your arguments tonight are 

. . . well, not surprising, but you haven't changed. 

 

So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that you are going to be 

prepared to meet a market-driven economy, and if that's the 

case, other people down the road could come in and can 

compete in providing electricity or other sources of utilities 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, and that may be the 

long-run way things work, that you'll have to compete in 

telephones and compete in power and compete in utilities, 

compete in services, maybe even compete in automobile 

insurance if people can come in and provide that insurance 

cheaper than you can provide it now. 

 

So you're saying in the energy business you're fully prepared to 

meet that competition, and in fact it looks like that you may 

have to be able to survive in a market-driven economy here in 

North America on an energy basis.  And you're getting 

prepared for that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, we're preparing for that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, if you're prepared being . . . 

getting prepared for that, what do you think will happen to and 

what's the role of monopolies in a jurisdiction like this under 

those conditions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The role of the monopoly is usually 

defined by the federal regulatory authority.  In this case it 

would be the National Energy Board.  And I think they've quite 

clearly defined the role of SaskTel from CRTC, and I would 

have to assume that the National Energy Board would do the 

same thing.  And the role of the monopoly is to view that they 

no longer have a monopoly, and therefore you deal with 

market-driven economy. 

 

And I'm confident that our utilities -- SaskTel, SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy; and SaskPower and SaskEnergy being the two I'm 

responsible for -- I believe that they have the expertise, they 

have the knowledge, they have the staff, they have the 

know-how to compete in a market-driven economy.  We just 

have to fine tune that a bit to make sure that they're prepared 

for whenever that comes.  Part of that preparation is going 

beyond our borders, and I've already told you about the 

business plan and the components that have to be in there. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, what I'm asking you to consider 

is, in the event that Mr. Messer is right and you are right, that 

you're going to compete internationally -- and indeed people 

will come in here as we get ready to survive in a market-driven  



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

economy, and provide services here in the areas where we have 

monopolies, and we're going to have to compete with 

that -- then if there are alternate sources of those services, by 

definition we don't have a monopoly.  Is that true? 

 

If the consumer can get alternate sources of auto insurance or 

power or electricity or telephone service under the national 

scheme of things, whether it's the National Energy Board or the 

CRTC, then if there's alternatives -- which means there's more 

than one -- there's no monopoly.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Not necessarily.  I think the hon. 

member makes the assumption that in a deregulated state of 

affairs that there is no role whatsoever for monopolies.  Well 

that's not the case.  There are roles where it doesn't make sense, 

for example our pipeline system deregulated.  There's a 

monopoly on our pipeline system, and not ours I'm saying as a 

provincial government, but there is a monopoly designed into 

the pipeline system in Canada.  So you're making a purist sort 

of argument from the most extreme view from where monopoly 

would be, saying that . . . At least that you seem to be making 

the assertion that monopoly never has any role ever in 

deregulated economy. 

 

Well there are instances where a monopoly does have a role in 

a deregulated economy.  What that role is remains to be defined 

in some cases.  For example, right now . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well just hold on to your enthusiasm for a 

moment.  For example, right now there's deregulated gas in 

Saskatchewan.  The industrial consumers today do not have to 

buy their gas from SaskEnergy.  They can buy it from gas 

brokers.  They can buy it on the open market.  Where the role 

of the monopoly is involved in these cases is that we have the 

pipeline system to get the gas to the burner tip where they want 

to use it.  And the monopoly makes some sense in cases where 

you have services you want to provide, but it doesn't provide an 

immediate profit to provide those services. 

 

If you went and looked at the original electrification of the 

province of Saskatchewan, if that was left to the private sector 

there'd still be farms in Saskatchewan that wouldn't have 

electricity today.  They do because the utility that had the 

monopoly had a mandate to provide that electricity to them.  

And so that came about. 

 

So yes, there is a role for monopolies even in a deregulated 

economy.  It can happen in SaskTel, SaskPower, SaskEnergy.  

It can happen in communications or the energy sector. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure you know what 

a monopoly is by your answer.  You're just all over the place.  

What I'm after is . . . if you're the Minister of Energy, people 

are complaining by the monopoly rates -- they are high energy 

rates -- and you're saying you're getting ready to survive in a 

market-driven economy, will you allow alternatives to come 

into the market and provide energy at lower rates particularly, 

let's say, in electricity?  Will you allow that to happen? 

 

Because people might see that as interesting news, if they could 

get lower rates as it says in the paper.  You're going to have to 

compete.  Are you going to match those rates, as those 

electrical sources come in here because you're about to go to 

other jurisdictions, according to you, and compete on 

technology and all kinds of provisions.  So if Manitoba Hydro 

or some other utility decides in a market-driven economy 

which you've just spent a half an hour talking about . . . allows 

people to come in here and provide lower energy rates, you'll 

say that's okay.  We're in a market-driven economy; we'll have 

to compete with that which means one of two things. 

 

Either you can change customers which means you don't have a 

monopoly, or the monopoly rate has to come down to meet the 

competition.  Now both of those would be really interesting to 

the consumer in Saskatchewan that has certainly been gouged 

in the last couple of years.  And you're saying you're going to 

be open to market-driven realities.  Now that'll only mean one 

thing: lower rates.  That's what it means. 

 

And if it doesn't mean lower rates, then how are you going to 

go compete in other jurisdictions unless you're going to provide 

lower competition in other jurisdictions?  Why should they buy 

SaskPower's anything?  And if you're just going to throw them 

technology . . . that isn't what he's talking about here in the 

paper.  What the president is talking about, and I'm asking you 

about, is the international and interprovincial and interregional 

competition in energy sources.  What's the role of the 

monopoly, and will you allow the Saskatchewan consumer to 

pick up the benefits of those lower costs and those lower 

prices?  That's the question. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Both in gas and electricity, people in 

Saskatchewan have options now.  Any company that wants to 

in Saskatchewan can self-generate.  Some companies do.  Any 

customer wants to buy gas from someone other than 

SaskEnergy can do it.  Some do; some don't.  We compete. 

 

The initial stages of SaskPower moving beyond our borders is 

not to sell the electrons going through a line.  It's to sell the 

expertise within SaskPower.  And incidentally, that's happened 

from time to time now, where Alberta or British Columbia will 

phone and ask for our help at SaskPower for some specific 

problem, and we help them with it.  What we're talking about is 

the technical expertise that can be marketed beyond our 

borders.  When the business plan is done, we'll make a 

determination how great that is.  And if it doesn't return a 

benefit to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, we're 

not doing it. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's fair enough, Mr. Minister.  I'm just 

exploring what it says here, that I'm sure you agree, because 

you've talked about being competitive in a market-driven 

economy. 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

It says here: SaskPower for example traded electricity or 

provided electricity of British Columbia.  Alternatively the 

possibility exists that electricity could come in here, and we 

might have to compete with it. 

 

This practice has become common in the U.S. through 

deregulation, and there's nothing to stop a competitor from 

launching a court challenge to gain access here . . . 

 

Which means they can use our power lines.  That's what he's 

talking about. 

 

Now if that's the case, Mr. Minister, it means that there is the 

potential that alternative sources of power could use our lines 

and come in and compete here.  If that's true, I just want you to 

acknowledge that that's what that means or explain to me what 

it means or doesn't mean, and that could lead to lower priced 

electricity for the people of Saskatchewan -- farms, homes, and 

industry -- because of the global market which you say you're 

getting ready to compete in. 

 

So that's an interesting development given the fact you have a 

monopoly and you're prepared to let other companies compete 

against that monopoly and either let alternative sources come in 

or drop the monopoly price so the consumer gets the benefit. 

 

Now that's a big decision for you to make and I'd just like to 

know that you understand what that means in terms of the 

monopoly power, because you no longer will set the rate.  

That's what that says.  You won't set the rate, the competition 

will set the rate, and they can launch a court challenge to come 

in and use these lines and provide alternative sources of 

electricity at lower rates because you can't compete or else 

you'll have to match that.  Then if you enter international 

competition they'll question whether you're subsidizing that.  

And monopolies get into all kinds of problems if you enter 

international competition, particularly in a free trade zone. 

 

So do you really know what this means, or does the president 

of Power, or do you understand what the consequences are of 

opening up yourself or of a monopoly to international 

competition?  It's fine to go peddle a little bit of technology but 

do you understand what it means if you open your doors to 

their high-tech electrical production and marketing that could 

lower the prices here?  And I'm sure that the consumers and 

businesses would be quite interested. 

 

Do you agree with this?  Do you understand this?  And what 

implications does it have for prices in Saskatchewan in the 

event that you're under, as you say, market-driven economy 

that you have to compete with as described here by Messer and 

yourself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we'll see what happens in a 

market-driven economy when it happens.  I understand the 

implications of what's being proposed in the article that you 

keep quoting from.  And what I'm saying to you is that the first 

thing that has to happen is that there has to be a business plan 

put in place, and if that makes sense, we're going to do it.  And 

if it doesn't make sense, we're not going to do it.  We can't 

make that determination, how far we're going to go at this point 

in time, because we have to have a plan under which we're 

going to do it. 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you obviously didn't understand 

the point here.  What if other companies try to come into the 

province of Saskatchewan and are successful and provide 

electricity over our lines at lower rates?  What's the implication 

of that to SaskPower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well if we go by the example of 

deregulation of gas that happened back in what, 1988 . . . '86.  

World well prices dropped, now prices have shot back up.  So 

the market predicts what's going to happen under that situation 

and you don't know, I don't know, nobody knows.  That's the 

law of supply and demand in the market-driven economy. 

 

And to speculate on that, you'd be as well to speculate like they 

did in the '70s on the price of oil, when they were speculating 

oil would hit $90 a barrel.  Where is it today?  It never hit 

anywhere close to $90 a barrel.  Now we're down to, some 

days, around $14 a barrel, $15 a barrel.  So don't ask me to 

speculate on the exact cost implications, because it's not 

possible to do that, and the member knows very well that to be 

the case. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I guess what we want to know is, 

are you prepared to meet a market-driven economy, as a 

cabinet minister?  Is the NDP government prepared to say to 

the consumers of Saskatchewan, we will compete on power 

rates with anybody else that can get power here?  Yes or no. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We are preparing for a market-driven 

economy that may happen some time down the road, it may not 

happen down the road.  I believe it will happen down the road.  

We are preparing for a market-driven economy and I firmly 

believe, when the market economy does arrive -- if it 

arrives -- we'll be able to compete. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I agree with you.  I 

think that it is here and it will happen.  So what that says is, if 

this is going to happen, is that Saskatchewan's monopolies lose 

their monopoly power because you're going to have to adjust 

your rates to meet the competition.  So if that's the case, the 

consumer can look forward to interprovincial or interregional 

competition on energy, which could lower rates.  So what it 

means, if the cabinet says the rate is X on SaskPower, it could 

in fact be something else.  So would you acknowledge that 

could lead to . . . Well if the other member wants to respond, he 

can.  I just want the minister to address the question. 

 

Does that mean that the consumers . . . would you acknowledge 

the consumers could look at lower rates if SaskPower has to 

meet the competition that comes in, and in fact the monopoly 

rate, the rate increase set by cabinet as it is today, would not 

mean very much if you have to compete on a day-to-day basis 

with  



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

interprovincial or interregional competition?  And would that 

mean that the power to have a monopoly in SaskPower is 

virtually eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I believe that we can compete.  

We're getting prepared to compete.  And I think the 

Saskatchewan people get quite a good deal for the rates that 

they pay.  The last increase for SaskEnergy was the second 

lowest anywhere in Canada, maybe in North America.  We 

have the second-lowest gas rates, and we're also very 

favourable to other jurisdictions in our incremental rates for 

generation at SaskPower, very favourable.  There are some 

advantages in neighbouring provinces because of the situation 

in Manitoba where their hydrology-supported generating 

stations run at a very low cost.  But over the whole stream of 

things, we're very favourable.  And as we look towards the 

market-driven economy, if in fact it does happen, we will be 

able to compete.  I'm confident of that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I suspect you will.  I'm just 

asking, is it true that if somebody comes in and provides lower 

priced power that you'll have to drop your rate or else lose the 

market to somebody else?  And if that's the case, isn't it also 

true that you've lost your monopoly power over price setting?  

And if it's true, then it'd be interesting for the public to know 

that the utilities are going to go to a market-driven economy 

and you've lost your power in cabinet to keep raising rates.  

Isn't that a fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No that's not a fact.  One of the reasons 

that people like to deal with SaskPower is reliability of the 

product.  And I would suspect that if they -- in your 

hypothetical situation that you're trying to dream up down the 

road somewhere -- that if a competitor came in, was generating 

somewhere else, was selling electricity to a customer in 

Saskatchewan and for some reason their generating source 

went down, those people would look quite favourably to 

coming back on SaskPower because of our extensive network. 

 

And there's not just the isolation of rates alone.  There's the 

reliability of the product, and SaskPower has been very 

reliable.  Your hypothetical situation does not mean because of 

competition coming in from elsewhere that the rates would be 

lower.  You're making a very dangerous assumption on that.  

That may be the case, but it quite well may not be the case 

either. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I didn't write the story, and I 

didn't do the interview.  It was SaskPower that did.  Mr. Messer 

did, and he's talked with cabinet.  Cabinet's considering it.  The 

cabinet should agree with this etc., etc.  Then this is the place. 

 

Well all I'm asking is your view and the cabinet's view, if 

there's alternate sources of energy as he described that could 

apply to use SaskPower's line to bring it to my house or to my 

farm or to your place.  Then they're going to be probably 

allowed to do that in a market-driven economy which means 

SaskPower ought to drop its rates, or somebody else gets in 

here with lower rates which means the public could look at a 

competitive market-place for electricity.  Well that would be 

very interesting. 

 

Now it's your article.  It's SaskPower's article.  You're the 

Minister of Energy.  That means that you will provide the 

consumer with an opportunity to in fact even invite others to 

provide electricity through the lines here which is pretty 

interesting, particularly when you get the big energy users in 

manufacturing and processing and industry.  They are going 

to -- I'll bet IPSCO or somebody else -- solicit people and look 

for people to provide competitive electrical rates because the 

monopoly is gone. 

 

Now that's an interesting phenomena because it's been raised 

here, so I've just again . . . Is it true that under these 

market-driven economies that you're talking about and these 

circumstances that the monopoly power would not be there, 

and in fact rates could fall to meet the competition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We're not in a market-driven economy.  

It may happen.  It may not happen.  We're preparing for it to 

happen.  I don't necessarily accept your assumption that rates 

will fall under a market-driven economy. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well you've professed to know something about 

a market-driven economy.  Who gets the business, the higher 

priced or the lower priced if you look at a demand curve?  See 

you don't have a monopoly any more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The most reliable company gets the 

business. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you don't have to get short.  You 

don't have to get . . . Mr. Minister, we are asking you to explain 

the policy.  You didn't do it under the nuclear.  You haven't 

done the co-generation, and you're a long ways from it here in 

electricity. 

 

You're into a market-driven economy, and you don't know what 

it means.  You think prices are going to go up in a 

market-driven economy.  What this means is . . . and you said 

you probably can't compete which means you're going to have 

to provide the service and the continuity, but probably at a 

lower price.  That means the monopoly has lost its monopoly 

power which could be really interesting.  So I'll leave it at that.  

You don't seem to understand it.  I guess it's Mr. Messer's 

concept that he'll run by the rest of the cabinet. 

 

Market-driven economy means that you'll have to compete on 

this which means that you'll have lower prices.  And I think the 

public would be delighted knowing that you wouldn't have the 

ability to set the rate, that you had other alternatives for utility 

rates. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority got about a million and a half dollars 

last year, and I think it's about to get a million and half dollars 

this year.  About $3 million it's 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

going to spend.  Can you tell me what we sort of got ready to 

go here with that authority for $3 million and in terms of . . . 

You can add any light to the options here in the province of 

Saskatchewan for $3 million.  I mean we can go over the 

objectives of it and the raison d'tre, but just give me a 

thumbnail sketch of what . . . what's the public got so far for $3 

million that we didn't have before? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- First, to address the first part of your 

remarks on the assumption that in a market-driven economy 

that the electrical rates would go down, there are many 

examples that prove this not to be the case.  In Great Britain, 

for example, where the utility was privatized, became a 

market-driven circumstance, the rates actually went up.  So it's 

a very dangerous assumption you make, first off, to say I don't 

know what I'm talking about; and secondly, to show people that 

you don't know what you're talking about.  Because in the 

situation in Britain when the privatization and the 

market-driven economy came along, the rates did actually 

increase, not decrease. 

 

The Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority have a number of things that are under way at the 

present time.  The greatest emphasis of their work currently has 

been on the energy options review for Saskatchewan, and it's 

not a high-profile public process, but what it is is it's setting the 

stage for the public process in creating the comprehensive 

energy strategy.  The comprehensive energy strategy has a 

component called electrical options review and that is being 

done by the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development 

Authority.  That report will come onto my desk in the summer 

of this year, the summer of 1994, and then the focus of the 

work of the Authority will switch.  But that's been the major 

focus of their work until this point in time, amongst other 

activities. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you're saying that, to date, with 

this $3 million, they are going to put on your desk a 

comprehensive electrical strategy.  Did I get that right?  For 

this summer -- and a review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- What will arrive on my desk in the 

summer of this year -- the summer of 1994 -- is a paper, a 

document, that is called the comprehensive energy strategy.  

Part of the comprehensive energy strategy will deal with 

electrical options for Saskatchewan in the future.  The electrical 

options review is being done by the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation and Development Authority.  It's part of that 

report.  It's been very time consuming for them to this point in 

time, but once that's done, the focus of their work will change 

into other areas. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All right, so this comprehensive energy 

strategy, the first part of it, will focus on electrical options.  

And that's what'll go on your desk? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No, just very clearly, what's going to 

arrive on my desk is called the comprehensive energy strategy.  

It deals with energy.  I mean traditionally throughout North 

America we've viewed commodities as different types of 

energy, electricity, oil, gas.  We want to start looking at energy.  

So the report that I receive is called the comprehensive energy 

strategy.  One component of many components within the 

comprehensive energy strategy is an electrical options 

review -- as to how we generate electricity into the future and 

what those options are.  That will be one section of the 

comprehensive energy strategy. 

 

The electrical options review is being done by Saskatchewan 

Energy and Conservation Development Authority.  That is 

taking up the major portion of their time currently.  Once 

they've completed that then they will be doing other things that 

fit within their mandate. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- It is a little confusing, Mr. Minister.  Are you 

telling me that the other components are not done?  You say 

that there's several components of the comprehensive energy 

strategy.  The first is the electrical options review.  Right?  

Now, there are other components.  Are there half a dozen other 

components?  Are they going to be ready in July?  Or is the 

Authority just looking at the electrical options review?  Have 

they hired out and tendered out other components that you're 

going to hear about?  Or do we just have the one 

component -- the electrical option review? 

 

I'm just asking because they spent quite a bit of money here.  

We'd like to know what we're going to get in July.  The whole 

load?  Are we going to get the first component?  Are we going 

to get six of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- The comprehensive energy strategy 

deals with all aspects of energy -- how we generate it, how we 

use it, how we conserve it.  So the comprehensive energy 

strategy will be encompassing the energy issue.  Again, how 

we generate it, how we use it, how we conserve it, and the 

economic development opportunities that go along with it.  

That's all part of the comprehensive energy strategy. 

 

There'll be a report on my desk on the comprehensive energy 

strategy, not just electrical options, but an encompassing report 

on energy and how it pertains in the Saskatchewan context.  

From there, over a period of months, we will develop programs 

and policy of government that look at the energy requirements 

for Saskatchewan; that look at how we generate our electricity; 

that look at how we use our electricity and energy; and how we 

conserve or how we do demand-side management within the 

province; look at what the economic development opportunities 

are in the field of energy.  There'll be public input into that.  

And so we want to set a direction that's long term, planned, and 

to the economic and security benefit of people within the 

province. 

 

The electrical options review is just one small part of that, but 

nevertheless a major part of that.  It's the Energy Authority that 

will be doing that component of the comprehensive energy 

strategy.  There are other  



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

government departments and other government agencies and 

crowns that are involved in certain aspects of the 

comprehensive energy strategy.  They will be involved in 

drafting the document that's to arrive on my desk in the 

summer of '94.  The lead department for making that happen is 

the Department of Energy and Mines or Sask Energy and 

Mines. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay.  So maybe I could ask you to just very 

briefly list the companion departments or Crown corporations 

or others that are doing the research on this comprehensive 

energy strategy and sort of who's doing what.  And secondly 

are there major private sector participants that you've tendered 

out some of the research for because if the electrical options 

review is done by the Authority then they're pretty well tied up, 

I would gather. 

 

So who's doing the rest of it, what departments, and just give 

me, in a general sense, who is responsible for what in terms of 

generation of . . . how we generate electricity, the use of 

conservation, the economies, and so forth.  That's . . . you 

farmed . . . you must have farmed some of it out, as you 

suggest.  Who's got it?  And who's responsible for the major 

components? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- There's a cabinet committee on energy 

composed of the ministers of Energy and Mines, that's me, 

Economic Development, and Environment and Resource 

Management to oversee the strategy, development, and 

implementation.  The cabinet committee is supported by a 

steering committee of senior officials from Energy and Mines, 

SaskEnergy, SaskPower, Executive Council, Environment and 

Resource Management, Saskatchewan Energy Conservation 

and Development Authority, Economic Development, and 

Crown Investments Corporation.  In terms of their 

responsibilities, the framework document is the responsibility 

of Energy and Mines.  And when I mention the lead agency, it 

doesn't mean that they do all of the work. It means that they're 

responsible and that's who ultimately has the responsibility of 

getting the job done in that particular sector . . . or 

section -- sorry. 

 

And resource development, the oil side for royalty and taxation 

and regulatory review, it's jointly done by industry and the Sask 

Energy and Mines task force.  The heavy oil strategy is being 

done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines; the oil markets are 

being done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines; and the light 

oil strategy is done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. 

 

Under the resource development oil section, there is a part on 

technology.  The research and development section is done by 

Energy and Mines and Economic Development.  The section 

on horizontal wells is done by Energy and Mines.  The section 

on carbon dioxide recovery and utilization is done by Energy 

and Mines and SaskPower.  Under natural gas, the royalty and 

taxation and regulatory review is being done by a joint 

industry-Sask Energy and Mines task force.  In the area of coal, 

the resource evaluation, the markets, and the lignite strategy are 

all done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines.  Renewable and 

alternate energy, the resource evaluation, the technology is 

done by Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority.  The renewable and alternative energy strategy is 

being done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. 

Under energy utilization, the forecasting is done . . . when I say 

done by, I'm talking about the lead agency in each of these 

cases.  Forecasting lead agency is Energy and Mines.  Under 

electricity the demand/supply plan for SaskPower is being led 

by SaskPower.  The review of long-term generating options is 

done by the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority.  And the long-term fuel supply 

strategy for electrical generation is done by the Department of 

Energy and Mines. 

 

The interfuel substitution section is done . . . lead agency, 

Energy and Mines.  The conservation efficiency energy 

potential is done by Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority, and the program initiative is done by 

the interdepartmental energy management task force, which 

involves several government departments.  The technology 

section is done by Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority, and energy conservation strategy is 

done by Saskatchewan Energy and Mines. 

 

The environment -- firstly, the clean-air strategy -- is done by 

the Department of Energy and Mines jointly with the 

Department of Energy . . . or Environment and Resource 

Management, excuse me. 

 

Sustaining our infrastructure in institutions is done jointly by 

Saskatchewan Energy and Mines jointly with Crown 

Investments Corporation.  And the comprehensive energy 

strategy summary report is done by Energy and Mines. 

 

In with those lead agencies, we have various entities 

participating.  I'm happy to say that the steering committee of 

the overall group is involved.  The PACE committee, 

Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, is involved.  

Planning and priorities of cabinet will have some input into the 

framework document, as they should have. 

 

Industry has involvement.  The Saskatchewan Research 

Council has involvement.  The Alberta Oil Sands Technology 

and Research agency will be involved, as well as the National 

Energy Board will have some involvement in it. 

 

The Crown entities of SaskPower, SaskEnergy will be involved 

in it.  The Geological Survey of Canada will be involved.  The 

Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority of course will be involved, as I mentioned earlier. 

 

The Department of Finance will be involved.  The Department 

of Environment and Resource Management will be involved.  

Consumers will be involved and Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation will be involved and the stakeholder 

task force will be involved. 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

And there are likely a few that I've missed, but I hope that's a 

comprehensive-enough list tonight for the member to 

understand what's going on with the comprehensive energy 

strategy.  A very important part of that work is the work being 

done by the Energy Authority, and they're paying particular 

interest to the electrical options review, which is only one 

component, nevertheless a very important component of the 

comprehensive energy strategy which will be laid on my desk 

in the summer of 1994. 

 

And I'm assured that those targets are going to be met by the 

officials that we have here tonight, even though they're very 

pressed with the other duties that are placed upon them to do 

the due diligence within their departments and other authorities.  

But they will in fact deliver a comprehensive energy strategy 

that will guide us in the planning for energy developments and 

the economic developments that can go along with that into the 

future of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you've just given us a litany of a number of studies that are 

taking place.  I guess the question that still arises is, you've 

delegated $3 million to be utilized by a department to do a 

number of studies.  Well the department officials are already 

there.  Why do you need an extra $3 million to enter into 

studies that are basically comprised of the Department of 

Energy and Mines? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well you make a very wrong 

assumption.  The other thing that you do is that you don't 

assume that anybody else plans just because you didn't when 

you were in government.  You spent $5 million on GigaText 

and didn't get nothing out of it.  We spent less than $3 million 

in this plan and we'll have a comprehensive energy strategy that 

will guide us long into the future.  We're not here to squander 

money; we're here to spend.  So get into the mind-set of the 

1990s.  Don't be stuck in the past litany of your government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for verifying the 

fact that you're here to spend -- just exactly what you said.  And 

if you want to talk about GigaText, let's go back to Nabu.  Let's 

do some of the research if you want to start talking about 

computer companies, if you want to get back to the litany of the 

spending and the fact of where the deficit is, and the fact that 

your government has hung its hat on a deficit.  And you've got 

people around the province in fact looking at your present piece 

of legislation today regarding The Labour Standards Act.  Mr. 

Minister, I find it interesting, you talk about the fact of saving 

money and now all of a sudden you've got a number of 

comprehensive studies that are taking place within the 

department. 

 

And I would presume that . . . or assume from the list you gave 

us a few minutes ago that all of the personnel are there.  Why 

do you need the extra money?  They probably have all that 

information together . . . I mean there already.  All the 

information they're drawing from is probably on their desks, or 

in the library behind them, from the work they've done over the 

past maybe 5, 10, 15 years. 

 

Because SaskPower isn't . . . when you look at SaskPower, it 

was just, I believe in 1991 where SaskPower was already 

projecting to the year 1994-95 and the fact of looking ahead to 

further needs for power, our power needs that they would have 

to come up with. 

 

So why, all of a sudden, do we need an extra $3 million to do 

studies when your department probably has that all there, and 

the personnel are there no doubt working and have the ability, 

even right now, just to pull some of the information and place it 

on your desk as you've indicated by July of this year.  Why do 

you need an extra $3 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well because we want experts to do 

expertise work. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Who are the experts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Why would you yell from your seat to 

criticize the professionals that do work for the province of 

Saskatchewan?  I can understand you criticizing me, as a 

politician, as a fellow politician in this legislature, but why 

would you have the gall in this legislature to chirp from your 

seat, to criticize professionals that work for the government 

department.  I think that it's unfair of you.  It's unfair of you to 

do what you're doing, and I think that you should come clean 

with people, and just because you're grouchy late at night in the 

legislature, don't try and inflict that upon other people in here. 

 

The money that was used in the first year of operation, in the 

fiscal year '92-'93, the contracts that were let out from 

Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority totalled $35,209.  It involved six contracts.  The rest 

of the $300,000 that was used -- not 1.5 million in the first 

year -- the rest of the $300,000 that was used was used to 

provide staff and to set up in the setting up of the operation of 

the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development 

Authority.  In the year '93-94 which is just concluding at the 

end of this month, $630,600 was provided to contract services.  

That's out of a total budget of $1.5 million. 

 

These are highly skilled professionals that are contracted to do 

work that will withstand scrutiny by the public, by this 

Legislative Assembly, and we need the best experts we can 

have so that we know how to plan the future of this province, 

based on the best information available. 

 

Why do you criticize that?  I don't understand that for the life 

of me.  So when you talk about this money that you seem to be 

insinuating that it's being wasted, wait until you see the 

product.  You can ask more detailed questions now.  I'd be 

happy to provide you with the answers to them.  But you sit in 

this House and chirp from your seat about the appropriateness 

of the 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

people who do professional contracts for the government and 

people that are professional employees of the government.  

Shame on you for taking that approach. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, if there's an individual who has a 

very childish mode -- I don't know if there's a minister or an 

individual in this House who has any more significant childish 

mode.  I didn't say anything against the officials.  I was asking 

you who the professionals were and when you talked about . . . 

you said there are professionals and I agree there's 

professionals.  There's a lot of professionals in the Department 

of Energy and Mines that have been doing a fair bit of work 

over the last few years, that have a lot of information available 

to them, and I would guess that they're involved in this present 

study that you've laid out for us here. 

 

Talking about in fact . . . in the votes it talks about promoting: 

 

. . . development, application and business opportunities 

related to new energy conservation, renewable energy 

technologies, and expanded production and value-added 

processing of conventional energy resources through 

research and development.  It also evaluates the 

socio-economic and environmental impacts of long-term 

electrical generation options. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said that you would give us a breakdown of 

where the 1.5 or the $3 million has gone through the last three 

years.  I'm asking you if you would -- now you may not do 

that -- if you want to send it across to us, a breakdown of where 

that money is being spent and who it's going to.  And whether 

you want to stand here and go through the process and lay it all 

out tonight, that's fine.  If you want to send it to us that's fair as 

well. 

 

But we're here to ask some questions on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and I don't think it's appropriate that 

we should have to just sit here and take some of the verbal 

abuse that as a minister you tend to enjoy always handing out 

every once in a while. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well I assure the member I only hand 

out verbal abuse when it's warranted.  I find myself to be quite 

efficient at it because I've had to practise it a number of times 

especially on the members of your political party. 

 

Just to set the record straight, there is no $3 million.  I tried to 

explain that to you, if you'd listen to the answers when I 

provide from your questions.  There was $300,000 in the first 

year.  There was 1.5 million in the second year.  That to me 

adds up to $1.8 million.  That is a long shot from 3 million.  So 

let's just get that on the record first off, that there is no $3 

million that we're talking about. 

 

In the first year of operation, the year that $300,000 was 

provided, supplies and services in regard to the office, there 

was $122,997.  Staff costs $87,049; board of directors costs, 

$32,146; contract services $35,209; and SRC, Saskatchewan 

Research Council, administration fee, $22,599.  That makes a 

total of $300,000. 

 

In the year 1993-94, that was a $1.5 million a year.  Supplies 

and services to the office $155,500; staff costs $590,400; board 

of directors $18,500; contracts $630,600; Saskatchewan 

Research Council administration fee $105,000. 

 

In some of these companies that you're making disparaging 

remarks about, I'd like to put their names on the record.  One of 

them contracted was Peat Marwick Stevenson and Kellogg.  

Cochrane Lavalin was another one.  Anderson/Fast; the 

Saskatchewan Research Council; Simon Fraser University; 

Cochrane SNC Lavalin; Klohn-Crippen; Zephyr North; 

University of Regina; Research Council; K. Birch Consulting; 

the University of Saskatchewan; Calibre Consulting; Energy 

Research; I. Itani Consulting; Cambrian Monenco; Yoneda & 

Associates; Cochrane Lavalin; Klohn Leonoff Ltd.; V.H. 

Nelson & Associates; and K. Birch Consulting. 

 

Those are the companies that have obtained contracts from the 

Saskatchewan Energy Conservation Development Authority.  I 

think they're credible.  I think the employees are credible.  And 

this is where the money has been well spent. 

 

I think that if you had looked towards some anticipation and 

enthusiasm for when the comprehensive energy strategy is 

tabled in this legislature, and I'd welcome your input into the 

public process because I know that you do pay due diligence to 

the process of this place and the process of government.  And I 

certainly look forward to your input into the comprehensive 

energy strategy. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, when I 

am talking of 1.5 million and 1.5 million, I'm talking '93-94.  

Now you're correct in saying in '92-93, I believe it was $300 

million or $300,000, pardon me; '93-94 there was another 1.5.  

Now in this present budget, you're asking for a further 

allocation, I believe, of 1.5 million.  I take it that that is to go 

towards this further funding towards this study that you're 

involved in that you plan to have presented to you in July.  Is 

that what the extra funding, the 1.5 in this calendar year is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- No that's incorrect.  A very small 

portion of it would be used for the comprehensive energy 

strategy but the majority of that would be used for work that 

stands alone under the mandate of the Saskatchewan Energy 

Conservation Development Authority -- a major portion of 

that -- if we look at the economic opportunities associated with 

the energy strategy in Saskatchewan and how we develop our 

energy, and how companies will be able to capitalize, so to 

speak, on the development opportunities that are there. 

 

Another component will be for the Saskatchewan  



894 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority to look very 

strongly at the side of the energy equation which is 

demand-side management, which can well create more jobs and 

economic development opportunities than the generating side 

of it.  So the first is to look at the energy options for generation 

of electricity; then to look at the economic development 

opportunities that go along with that; and to look at the 

demand-side management and the opportunities that go along 

with that.  And that will be the major focus once the report is 

tabled on my desk. 

 

The direct relationship of the Authority will be somewhat less, 

and we certainly look towards their expertise as time goes on.  

But certainly a major portion of their budget will not be spent 

on the comprehensive energy strategy past this point. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, when you're looking at energy 

options, is co-generation one of the energy options that you're 

continually doing some studying in?  And you're quite well 

aware of the fact, I'm sure, that a number of the submissions 

that were submitted to your office regarding co-generation 

were looking at ways of using excessive energy that was just 

being lost.  Like the one from Moosomin, for example, was 

TCPL (TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.) looking at waste heat from 

their pumping station.  And there were a number of other 

options.  Is that part of some of this development that Sask 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority is looking 

into? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- When they look at the electrical options 

review that will be part of the comprehensive energy strategy 

document, they are looking at all options of generating of 

electricity, and then looking how they fit into the Saskatchewan 

context.  So yes, they are looking at all options to generate 

electricity in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So when we talk about all the options thus far, so 

what you're saying then basically, co-generation is something 

that is still out there for review.  And do you as a minister or 

does the department or even SaskPower have an idea of when 

they might take a serious look at getting into some co-gen 

projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes, they do. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you also talk about new energy 

conservation.  I think one of the things over the past number of 

years that's been discussed in the province of Saskatchewan is 

how we can conserve energy.  What has the department done to 

this date over the last year, year and a half, at different options 

that are available and working with consumer groups or major 

companies at finding ways in which we can conserve and how 

is the department focused on that in getting consumers to join 

with the department, and with government, in looking at the 

ways in which we conserve our energy? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well there are many individual pilot 

projects that have taken place throughout the province, in fact 

over a number of years.  Sometimes non-profit organizations 

will get involved as the lead agency to do a demand-side 

management project.  Other times it will be the initiative of a 

Crown corporation or the department. 

 

What we want to do in terms of putting together the 

comprehensive energy strategy lasting beyond that is to have 

one lead department.  I think the logical department for that is 

the Department of Energy and Mines, but it may not be.  As we 

go through the process it may be the Energy Conservation and 

Development Authority or it may be one of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

But currently we're in the process of coordinating the work 

that's going on with different energy players in the province, 

both in the private sector and the public sector, to get together 

with what we are capable of doing and where we're going to 

take this into the future.  But my objective is to have one lead 

agency on the demand-side management aspect. 

 

There is no overall program in the province.  That's the second 

thing that we need once we establish the lead agency, because 

there should be a program that applies not just in pilot projects 

but wherever in the province there's a requirement and it fits 

into the program, we should be able to proceed with some 

demand-side management work -- whether it's energy audits, or 

whether it's retrofitting, or whatever the project might be.  And 

so the second part is to develop that plan.  And thirdly, is to 

make sure that we meet the targets that we want to meet in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to have some 90 megawatts of demand-side 

management by the end of the decade and that's well within 

achievability.  In fact my personal goal is somewhat more than 

that, and if we can get everyone working together, and get your 

support and others within the province, then we'll provide lots 

of jobs in Saskatchewan through demand-side management and 

conservation; which actually creates more jobs than the other 

side of the equation which is the generation of electricity. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what has the department done 

to date to encourage new energy conservation based on some of 

the findings they already have before them as to some of the 

options that are sitting out there?  What has the department 

entered into and what has it done to encourage energy 

conservation? 

 

I know it's an ongoing dialogue and there's further study that 

will continue to take place but it would seem to me there must 

be some options that are already available.  And your 

department must have or must be in the process of looking at 

some of the options and working with consumer groups, or 

businesses, or large consumers of energy in defining new ways 

of saving energy in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Well we've negotiated an efficiency and 

conservation agreement with the  



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

federal government, in fact with your cousins before they were 

so soundly trounced at the polls.  It's now taken a little bit of 

time to get that back on track but it is on track with the new 

federal government.  And it's to provide for more efficient 

program implementation and some cost sharing.  One of the 

major components under the letter is to the creation of an 

agricultural energy-use database, which we hope to have 

attracted to the province of Saskatchewan, and we'll invite you 

all to come to the grand opening of that.  I'm sure you'll be 

interested in attending. 

 

The Department of Energy and Mines and a number of Crown 

corporations -- probably SaskPower, the Property Management 

Corporation, and SaskEnergy -- have implemented their own 

conservation programs, and this is what I referred to earlier, 

that we'd like to have a lead agency on all of the demand-side 

management programs that are contained within the 

government. 

 

Other conservation efficiency issues will be identified in the 

comprehensive energy strategy, a document that I've also 

mentioned here this evening.  The conservation programs of 

Saskatchewan Energy and Mines include an assessment of 

different methods of building energy audits designed to 

encourage the retrofit of energy-efficient equipment and 

buildings; support for a program to reduce the fuel utilization 

of large trucks and buses; the development and distribution of 

information to the public and to schools; and also maintaining a 

toll-free line to provide information to the public on energy 

conservation. 

 

Most other agencies focus on specific aspects of energy saving 

or demand-side management.  Energy and Mines hopes to 

develop a more comprehensive, strategic approach and to 

coordinate activities to avoid overlap; again something I 

mentioned a bit earlier to you.  To date most emphasis has been 

placed on the electrical energy but this is only one component 

of energy.  The average Saskatchewan household actually 

spends two-thirds of its energy dollars on transportation. 

 

To address the transportation issue, SaskEnergy's 1993 goal is 

to convert to natural gas, 100 fleet vehicles in municipalities 

and/or school divisions.  SaskEnergy has converted 40 of their 

200 fleet vehicles to natural gas and has targeted another 20 

vehicles to be converted in 1993.  The environment and 

resource network sponsored by Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management is a network of over 250 public 

information centres.  These centres contain booklets, brochures, 

contact names that address conservation issues from energy, to 

wildlife, to water. 

 

In January of 1993, SaskEnergy announced pilot projects in the 

towns of Watson and Canora to save energy by using a 

community-based approach.  The two communities will work 

with SaskPower to become more energy efficient and provide a 

framework for the rest of Saskatchewan based on that 

community's particular energy needs. 

 

I'd also like to say that the Crown corporation of SaskPower 

has entered into an energy program at the Regina international 

airport which has been very successful.  That's supported by the 

federal government and also very interested . . . the 

Saskatchewan Energy and Mines Department, in following the 

issues there. 

 

And our objective, in conclusion, is to have a coordinated 

approach with one lead department -- Crown, agency, or 

department -- and to have an encompassing lead agency to take 

care of all demand-side management programs that are 

currently under way.  I know the members opposite are very 

excited by these initiatives, and they will serve us well in the 

future, not only in terms of conserving energy, but also 

providing jobs and business opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if the 

minister would table the document that he read from for the last 

10 minutes. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Minister, you took, it seems to me, considerable 

pleasure in describing all the departments and Crown 

corporations that were doing the research for the Saskatchewan 

Energy Conservation and Development Authority.  And you 

went on and on and said well, the SRC is doing something.  

Saskatchewan Energy and Mines does a lot.  Economic 

Development does quite a bit . . . Environment . . . on the 

COD22 stuff, SaskPower, natural gas, obviously SaskEnergy, 

on the royalty stuff, SaskEnergy and departments, and on and 

on and on. 

 

So you have got $3.3 million Authority that in good measure 

. . . And we look at the size of the contracts you have in the 

private sector and then the work done in-house.  You've got a 

$3.3 million Authority so far that is -- and we'll add it 

up -- one-half to two-thirds in-house.  And you've taken the 

time to describe that. 

 

Now it's very interesting to the public that . . . I mean we might 

know why you set it up or why the cabinet set it up, but it's a 

lot of money to have all of this done.  And you're sitting here 

bragging about it for a half an hour that the department does 

this and the other department does that and the other 

department . . . 

 

And you've got it coordinated.  Not a word of disparagement 

I'm making towards the people that you've put on this 

Authority, but why was it there?  If all of this work is being 

coordinated and all the work is being done -- I mean pages of it 

and volumes of it that you so eloquently spoke of here 

tonight -- in-house . . . $3.3 million.  And you said well that's 

$300,000 year before last, 1.5 million last, and now another 1.5 

million.  The public has to begin to wonder.  Do you have to 

have a $3 million organization? We've had requests here to 

have legislative committees even review the rates that don't 

cost anything.  And you're spending $3.3 million and 

two-thirds of the activity is already in-house. 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1994 

On top of the fact, you didn't do all that well when you did 

recommend that you tender for co-generation.  You don't seem 

to make any sense when it comes to nuclear economic activity, 

and I'm sure that you haven't done that in-house.  And you 

expect us to buy a $3.3 million budget and you spent a good 

part of the evening describing how it's done inside the 

bureaucracy. 

 

Shame on you . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . And they laugh.  

Mr. Chairman, they laugh at a $3.3 million expenditure when 

they're supposed to be doing this to help balance the books.  

In-house. And we know why.  You're using this Energy 

Authority for whatever purpose that you might have.  It's sort 

of like your co-generation strategy.  Nobody for sure knows 

what it is. 

 

It's just like your electricity strategy.  Nobody knows for sure.  

You talk about confidence.  You think the public is going to 

have confidence and you spend $3.3 million and most of the 

work is done in-house by bureaucrats.  And for heaven's sakes, 

we know there's a little bit of patronage in some of the 

bureaucratic organization here. 

 

Isn't that interesting that we've got this kind of money and the 

minister takes . . . he must have taken half an hour to go 

through all the departments that are already there that you're 

going to spend this money.  What, are you going to double up?  

What's the money for? 

 

Now I want to know specifically, did you tender, did you 

tender the business that went out to Evergreen, Cochrane 

Lavalin, universities, others, on the studies that were being 

done here? How did you pick those studies?  How did you pick, 

pardon me, the people who did the studies?  Did you tender?  

What percentage of this $3 million to date has been spent 

in-house versus outside?  How much of the administration . . . 

You see, you're spending quite a bit on administration through 

the SRC.  The SRC has an administration.  You're the minister 

responsible, but you had to give them some more money. 

 

I have a lot of questions here, Mr. Minister.  We might not be 

able to get through tonight, or even this week.. But we want to 

know, what was the real reason for setting up this Authority 

and why so much of the work can be done internally and why 

you've spent all this time telling us that what you've really done 

is coordinate the government?  As if you couldn't have a deputy 

minister or a cabinet committee or a bureaucratic committee of 

good officials that you have sitting around you coordinate this 

and pay them extra. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, would you tell us if you tender these 

research contracts out that the Authority has put out, that you 

talked about here tonight. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Some we did, some we didn't. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to 

table what you tendered and what you didn't? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes we would. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Could you provide that this evening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- Yes I could. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I don't think he's 

on record because I'm still on my feet, but I will ask the 

minister and then he can stand up. 

 

Will you tender this evening the contracts that you put out, the 

projects that you tendered, who got them, who applied for 

them, what per cent of your budget went to the private sector, 

and what per cent of the work was done in-house by all the 

departments you told us about tonight that are doing all this 

work for the Authority -- could you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- I've changed my mind.  Maybe the 

microphone didn't pay up -- I said I would table tonight when 

you said would we table who got the contracts that were 

tendered and who got the ones that weren't contracted.  I'd be 

happy to provide that but the stuff that you're asking would be 

of no valuable purpose to you, and I don't see any reason why 

I'd want to provide you with the information because it just 

creates extensive work in terms of what you're asking. 

 

If you could maybe provide us in writing the detail that you'd 

require rather than asking some general question that would 

take a lot of time from the very busy employees, then we might 

consider providing it to you; but what you just asked is totally 

different than what you asked earlier. 

 

And I suspect there's a little game you're playing.  When you 

ask for something I say we'll give it, then you want something 

more because all you want to do is waste the time of the 

employees of the government.  So you can have this if you 

want, but don't count on the rest of it coming to you very 

rapidly. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, obviously the public wants 

to know what you're doing with the $3.3 million.  If you have 

spent a good amount and allocated money that you could have 

used in-house anyway because the employees are already 

there -- and we can go back and dig it up of Hansard 

tomorrow -- because you spent a considerable amount of time 

saying most of the research was done in-house, then what in the 

world did you spend . . . need all this money for? 

 

(2200) 

 

Number two is: did you tender the projects that you did to the 

private sector?  And I believe you said, some you did and some 

you didn't.  Would you give us the projects that you tendered 

and then give us the justification for not tendering the others. 

 

And what per cent of this budget went to the private sector and 

what per cent is . . . just goes to managing 



March 14, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

the bureaucracy because you spend so much time in telling us 

that it really . . . most of it was done in-house. 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: -- We're interested in cooperating. If you're 

serious about wanting answers to your questions, here they are.  

And I've asked the . . . Pardon?  I'm trying to be as calm as I 

can about this and it's been a frustrating experience this 

evening, but I appreciate the encouragement of my House 

Leader to keep me calm.  I've asked the page to take this and 

maybe you can make a photocopy so I have my copy, and you 

can give the hon. member from Estevan a copy of that.  I think 

it will be quite revealing to him and go a long way to answering 

his questions. 

 

If you have further questions once you've received that 

information, we'd be happy to answer them.  We have more 

time this evening and I'm sure, with the tone of the questions 

you've asked tonight, we'll be back here, maybe on several 

more occasions to answer your questions.  So we're here to 

serve, and you just keep asking the questions. 

 

The committee reported progress on division. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 

 

 


