




















































Hansard: May 10, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2205 

 May 10, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting Victims of Domestic 

Violence 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed to clause-by-clause study, I 

would invite the minister to introduce the officials who have 

joined us here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Seated beside 

me is Susan Amrud, Crown solicitor with legislative services in 

the Department of Justice.  Behind Susan is Darcy McGovern, 

who is also a Crown solicitor with legislative services.  And 

behind me is Penny Kelly, the director of victim services, also 

in the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials, to the deliberations this evening.  

Mr. Minister, we had I think a pretty good opportunity to raise 

some concerns and to speak to this piece of legislation in 

second reading.  And who do we blame?  What I'm saying, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we acknowledged at that time that in principle 

we were quite more than agreeable with the Bill before this 

Assembly. 

 

However, as you may have received, Mr. Minister . . . I'm not 

exactly sure if you have but certainly it came to my office -- a 

couple of individuals who wrote letters indicating that they felt 

that the member from Greystone and myself, on that particular 

day, forgot about one group of individuals.  And I'm not 

exactly sure, I think the minister as well was . . . a question was 

raised.  What about the male gender?  We spent a lot of time 

talking about the violence and the reality is, the numbers show 

that it's much larger as far as women and children.  And that's 

one of the major reasons, I believe, the Bill is before the 

Assembly tonight, trying to bring some responsibility back into 

the relationships. 

 

And in most cases, I would anticipate that domestic violence 

basically takes place in the home or happens amongst couples 

and amongst families, that at times apparently there were some 

individuals who felt that we should also be aware of the fact 

that at times the man or the male person in an assembly could 

face an abusive situation. 

 

And abuse can have many forms.  It can have a physical form.  

It can have just a psychological form.  It can be silence.  It can 

be verbal abuse.  And so many forms of abuse. 

 

And I'd just like to quote from one individual, a Mr. 

Montgomery, who says: 

 

 What concerns me most is that the Bill may refer only to 

women as the victims and men as the abusers.  This would be 

a grave error.  I'm 

also concerned that even with gender neutral wording, the 

implementation of the Act will see police removing husbands 

from the scene of family violence when the wives are clearly 

the abusers. 

 

This gentleman goes on to explain his particular circumstance, 

which is extremely unpleasant and unfortunate. And I am 

pleased that this gentleman and his wife are still married and 

attempting to resolve all of their problems. 

 

However, again I quote: 

 

 Our marriage survives but no thanks to any community 

service, no thanks to the police and no thanks to the law or 

the legal system in general.  I would like to believe that if she 

ever regresses back to her old behaviour, that the legal system 

has advanced enough to remove her from the home and not 

me.  In general I hope that Bill 30 allows husbands who are 

victims of violence to remain with their children and the 

abusive woman removed.  This would take a tremendous 

pressure off of abused men and remind them that they are not 

forgotten by their own community. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems to me that there are individuals out there 

who feel at times that the abuse, even though the numbers 

certainly indicate it's the spouse or the female person that 

receives . . . the majority of the abuse is experienced by the 

female partner or children, that there are some men out there 

who may feel at times that they are receiving and on the 

receiving end of abuse.  And I'm wondering if you could 

respond and give the assurances that the Bill before us is 

directing all forms of abuse as I understand the Bill to be 

addressing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, I thank 

you for that very important question.  The Bill is drafted in 

such a way as to be gender neutral and so if it should happen 

that a husband is being abused physically by his wife, the 

provisions of the Act are available to the husband in the same 

way as they're available to battered wives.  So it is neutral from 

a gender point of view. 

 

It also applies of course to parent-child relationships.  The 

definitions clearly cover that.  It covers abuse although I think 

it important to point out that it doesn't cover psychological 

abuse.  It covers the more physical and provable kinds of abuse. 

 

But I want to assure you, as I believe I've responded to the 

letter from the gentleman you refer to, that this Act protects 

battered spouses not just battered wives. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, a concern 

was brought to our attention by Mr. Doug Schmeiser, 

University of Saskatchewan law professor, and he stated that 

this law could violate several areas of Canada's Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms and these include the right to life and 

liberty, right to 



2206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

presumption of innocence until a fair hearing is held, and the 

right to a lawyer without delay.  Mr. Schmeiser argued that 

provincially appointed justices of the peace may be infringing 

on an area of law that only federally appointed judges such as 

Court of Queen's Bench justices can deal with. 

 

We're wondering, Mr. Minister, has the department looked into 

the concerns that have been raised by Mr. Schmeiser and are 

you fully aware and fully confident that this legislation is not 

open to contestation under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We have looked carefully into all 

aspects of the matters raised by Professor Schmeiser. 

 

I would point out that the Act does not create any new offence 

so that we don't get into the charter related issues.  And so far 

as what we refer to as a section 96 issues, the fact that there is 

not a Queen's Bench judge involved but it is a justice of the 

peace, our law officers have researched that question as well 

and we feel we're on solid ground here. 

 

I think that we've had this exchange in question period and my 

assurances at that time still hold.  We are confident that we are 

on solid ground. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you're saying is your 

department and certainly officials in your department have 

indicated they've reviewed the legislation, drafted the 

legislation.  We're quite well aware of the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and they're quite certain that even though we're 

giving justices of the peace an added power, that within the 

guidelines of this legislation, that they won't be challenged, or 

that the legislation itself won't be challenged on that basis, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We wouldn't be surprised if it was 

challenged.  You can't prevent that, you know.  The citizen has 

the right to raise these issues in the court if they feel wronged.  

I can assure the member that the provisions were drafted with 

the issues in the mind that he has mentioned tonight, and 

drafted with some care. 

 

I would also point out that the justices of the peace will, as the 

member has no doubt noticed, operate under very close 

supervision of the Court of Queen's Bench.  The orders given 

by the justice of the peace are reviewed by a superior court 

judge within three working days of the date which the order is 

given. 

 

And there is a right in the proceedings for an appeal.  If the 

superior court judge, on reviewing the order, is not satisfied 

that there was evidence supporting the granting of the order, the 

judge shall direct a rehearing of the matter.  And then the 

matter comes before the judge of the superior court for a 

rehearing.  So it is the fact that the justice of the peace will be 

acting under close supervision. 

 

I've also made the point that we plan to provide fairly intensive 

training for a group of justices of the peace in 

the administration of this Act, so that when the Act goes into 

effect there will be a coterie of pretty well-trained JPs (justice 

of the peace) who will be able to deal with the kinds of issues 

that can be raised before them under this Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, maybe you could just fill us in as to 

the type of thing that may take place -- and when we're talking 

of justices of the peace, are we . . . I would think if you're going 

to have someone available at any location, you'd be basically 

including all justices of the peace in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- the format that would be used.  And maybe 

you could just give us a bit of an understanding of the process 

that would be followed. 

 

Should a complaint be registered with the local police force -- 

be it city or an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

detachment or whatever -- regarding a domestic situation and 

the police determine that maybe they need to enter the house 

and they go to a justice of the peace . . . Let's say they're out in 

the community of Moosomin or down in Stoughton, some of 

these other communities, the process that would be followed. 

 

Are we talking of all justices of the peace?  Because at 2 

o'clock in the morning you certainly don't want to be running 

30 miles to talk to or get approval from a justice of the peace to 

walk into a situation and assess what's taking place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the member asked a number 

of questions.  I'll try to deal with them and I hope I get them all. 

 

We are looking forward to a proclamation date on this Act of 

about December.  In the meantime, as I have mentioned, we 

will be providing training to a cadre of justices of the peace.  

That will not be all justices of the peace by any means but a 

relatively small number who will be designated as the JPs who 

will make orders under this Act.  They will receive training, as 

I've said. 

 

The member asked what kind of training and I want to try to 

answer that in the following terms.  They will be trained with 

respect to the provisions of the Act and the powers that they 

have under the Act.  They will be trained as to the kind of 

orders that they can make and the forms of those orders in the 

event that they make them. 

 

(1915) 

 

They will be trained in the process of dealing with an 

application, keeping in mind that these applications can take 

different forms.  They can arise with someone appearing before 

the JP and making the application in person, but as I have 

mentioned before, they can also be made by telephone.  And in 

either event the JP will receive training in the process that 

should be gone through, the kind of evidence that the JP should 

have before making the particular order, the questions that the 

JP should ask of the person who is making the application -- 

and in that connection, training with 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2207 

respect to the rules surrounding the kind of evidence that can be 

listened to, the kind of evidence that can be accepted and acted 

upon.  There will be a manual which will be provided to the JPs 

for their reference and for their own personal browsing and 

brushing up, as it were. 

 

An important element of this is that the JPs only act in the 

event of the kind of emergency that is contemplated by the Act, 

and that they have powers which are limited by the Act and 

exercisable only in those emergency circumstances. 

 

Now if the JP needs advice on any of the matters that I've just 

mentioned, the kinds of orders they can make, the forms of the 

orders, the rules of evidence, or any related matter, the JPs will 

be instructed to contact the administrative court judge who is 

the Chief Judge of the Provincial Court, and that will be their . . 

. I hesitate to use the word supervisor, but that is in effect what 

the administrative judge is.  It's Chief Judge Carey, and he will 

be available to them in the event that they need any quick 

advice. 

 

The police are not necessarily involved, although as a practical 

matter one would suspect they would be, but it can work either 

way.  Other people may be involved in the event.  Let's say that 

the victim has called a relative or called some support agency 

and someone has come over to the house to provide support to 

the victim.  But the police, I would guess, would be involved in 

the majority of circumstances.  They also will be training 

themselves up to provide the kind of services that they might be 

called upon to provide or assist in under this Act. 

 

And that, I think, Mr. Chair, takes care of all the questions that 

the member raised in that intervention of his. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair.  Mr. 

Minister, you indicated that it would be a certain number of 

justices of the peace.  In a situation that you've got a certain 

number . . . you're in a rural community, possibly even 20 or 30 

miles away from the nearest police detachment.  You 

mentioned you could call if it's a call to a family member about 

a problem they're facing.  It would seem to me a lot of times a 

family member would probably go over and in most cases can 

generally talk to other family members to arrive at some 

consensus and maybe settle down a situation; but if indeed it's a 

situation that goes beyond just a family member or neighbour 

trying to settle down an individual who's become abusive and 

they find they would feel that they might need some outside 

help -- say from the police or from someone else to assist and 

help -- who do they contact if they don't have a justice of the 

peace close enough?  Who would they deal or work through at 

the time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We plan to start with 8 to 10 justices of 

the peace located around the province.  We will know in short 

order whether that's enough, whether we need more, and if we 

need more we'll train more.  Their names and telephone 

numbers and addresses will be available broadly to the whole 

system. 

 

And in addition to that, we will have 1-800 numbers that will 

also be publicized so that people can reach the JPs over the 

telephone.  We want to avoid a situation if we can where the JP 

would know the people involved and therefore might have a 

view one way or the other, so that in a town such as the 

member's home town it would likely be that that JP would not 

be one of those who are specially trained and that the calls that 

might arise in your neighbourhood, although I can't imagine 

such a thing, might go to Regina or to some other centre and be 

dealt with over the telephone. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying then, Mr. Minister, it 

would be a call through the phone and a verbal approval that 

would be given should a request come in. 

 

Mr. Minister, what types of action would constitute a request to 

have an eviction notice handed to one of the parties?  And I'm 

going to use the term "one of the parties" so we don't leave the 

impression that it's only, say, one group, like say the female or 

the male gender would be requested to be removed from the 

home.  What types of circumstances would constitute that type 

of eviction notice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The relevant sections are section 3(1) 

and (2), and with that must be read the definition of domestic 

violence.  As the member will notice, an order may be granted 

by the JP where the JP determines that domestic violence has 

occurred, and that is a defined term. 

 

And the justice of the peace must also determine that: 

 

 by reason of seriousness or urgency, the order should be 

made without waiting for the next available sitting of a judge 

of the court in order to ensure the immediate protection of the 

victim. 

 

So the evidence has to be such that the JP is satisfied that those 

conditions exist, that there is domestic violence, and that they 

just can't wait.  Then if you move on to subsection (2) there are 

a number of factors set out for consideration by the JP, and it is 

mandatory   The justice of the peace shall consider the 

following factors: 

 

 (a) the nature of the domestic violence; 

 

 (b) the history of domestic violence . . .; 

 

 (c) the existence of immediate danger to persons or 

property; 

 

And this is important: 

 

 (d) the best interests of the victim and any child of the 

victim or any child who is in the care and custody of 

the victim. 

 

So those are the things that the JP should have to take 



2208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

into account.  And finally let me point out that while the Act is 

mandatory, that the JP shall consider those factors, the JP is not 

limited to those factors.  It may consider other factors as well 

and that is spelled out in the subsection (2). 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what takes place or what transpires 

after an individual is removed if the abusive situation appears 

to be abusive and warrants the removal of an individual?  What 

takes place?  Because, Mr. Minister, it could so happen that a 

person is asked to leave the home, may be escorted out of the 

home, and where do they go? 

 

And if they're not observed, or if they're not taken . . . they're 

removed far enough away and at least observation overnight, 

there's nothing to say if they're just asked to leave the home and 

then the parties that took an interest and were involved go 

home and basically back to their own roles, and say to bed, and 

this individual is kind of left on the street.  There's nothing to 

say that that individual wouldn't go back into the home. 

 

What process is followed to guarantee or to ensure that at least 

until the following day when there's some opportunity to really 

take a serious look at the matter, that that individual or 

individuals will indeed not be allowed to enter that home in the 

immediate future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is a very delicate area of course and 

potentially quite dangerous. 

 

The first thing that will happen of course is that the police will, 

in our hypothetical situation where the order has been obtained 

over the telephone, is that the police will -- or whoever's there 

-- will write out the order and hand it to the abuser.  Let's say 

for our example that it is the police.  They then escort this 

person out of the house.  The police will have to make an 

independent decision about whether or not they're going to lay 

any charges in respect of the conduct.  That depends on a 

number of factors and they will be making that judgement 

themselves.  This Act doesn't address that question. 

 

Then the next question is the really interesting one: what 

happens after that?  How is the person kept away?  And this 

will be of great concern to the police.  The first thing I would 

say is that the order that is made over the telephone and handed 

to the abuser is an order in every sense of the term and it is 

enforceable as an order.  And if the abuser were to breach that 

order and go back into the house later that night, that is a 

criminal offence and the police would be entitled to treat it as 

such. 

 

The police are, as we understand it, making arrangements to 

enter these orders on their systems, their CPIC (Canadian 

Police Information Centre) system, so that it will be a matter of 

record immediately. And of course in a city that can be 

extremely important with a number of police on duty in an 

evening and a number of cars out on the street.  So that that 

information, that there is such an order, and the substance of it, 

is a matter of record 

immediately accessible to the police in the event that they have 

some cause to follow it up.  And at the end of the day, it will be 

a matter for the police to try to determine what level of 

protection they're going to have to provide in that situation. 

 

I think I put it fairly.  It's going to be up to the police to decide 

what follow-up action is necessary: what kind of a person are 

they dealing with here, and what is the history of this?  Will it 

require close supervision through the night and into the next 

day?  That is to say, will they have to check the house out 

often?  Or is it a situation where the abuser has been removed, 

and there probably is no cause for concern, in which event their 

level of follow-up activity would be much lighter.  That will be 

up to them to determine, and they're the people with the 

experience and the expertise in those matters, and I think we 

can be content to leave it to their discretion what kind of 

follow-up action they provide. 

 

(1930) 

 

So far as where the abuser goes, they have a lot of experience 

in that too because people have been leaving these kinds of 

homes on an emergency basis often in the middle of the night 

for a long time.  The police will assist in finding a place if 

necessary.  They know where such places are, and they will 

provide advice and assistance to the person as to where that 

person may spend the night. 

 

In the final analysis, the social services are available to assist in 

such circumstances, so who knows how that will work in any 

particular case.  It will depend upon the circumstances, where 

the offence is . . . or where the situation arises, and will depend 

upon a lot of personal factors too, such as does the person have 

friends or family that they can go to in those circumstances. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I can understand the 

delicacy of trying to bring out the format that may be followed. 

 

But as I indicated earlier, when you're talking about a situation 

like this, and I think when you face a situation where you may 

be asking an individual to leave the home or -- not just asking 

-- ordering an individual to leave the home, there must be 

something that basically indicates that you have an idea where 

the person that you're going to assist . . . and make sure the 

person not only leaves the home but is put in an environment 

where they're at least able to sit back for a while and assess 

what has transpired. 

 

Because I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that I think if we took a 

look at a number of the situations that come up and possibly a 

large number of the abusive situations, especially of physical 

violence, seems to be some of the temperament that arises.  It 

may arise.  It rises in the middle of the night, possibly after 

there's been some alcohol involved.  People become irrational.  

They become angry. 

 

And even if they've received an order not to go back in 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2209 

the home, if a person isn't really in total control of their senses 

and has become very irrational, and then they've been asked by 

another individual or another person, be they the police or 

Social Services or someone of that nature, to leave the home, I 

think we can imagine what kind of abusive situation the police 

or the individuals trying to enforce that order are going to find 

themselves in. 

 

They may even find themselves in some matter where people 

are going to be coming after them physically for having 

infringed and come into their own personal place of residence.  

And I think the home is considered by most, even if people are 

irrational, it's considered their own little kingdom and they 

really don't like to have a lot people interfere in it. 

 

So I guess what we're looking for, Mr. Minister, is a way that 

guarantees that the police do not go beyond the powers that are 

allowed to them or whoever the agent may be, be it Social 

Services or whoever that's called in, but at least have some 

resources to work with so that at the end of the day they are not 

accused of having stepped into a situation and maybe, let's say 

two or three days down the road when the parties get together 

and they try to determine whether there was a real matter of 

physical urgency or urgency to order a person out of the home . 

. . 

 

And I think it's happened on many occasions before, where 

police have gone into a domestic situation and all of a sudden 

the couple have decided no, these individuals are infringing on 

our rights, and they turn against the person that's stepping in to 

try and help them out through the problem they're facing. 

 

So what I'm just wondering, Mr. Minister, is you're saying the 

Act really doesn't lay it out because it's almost, I guess, quite 

difficult to perceive all the different situations and formats you 

might be involved in.  But we want to know that people will 

indeed be put in an environment, or at least offered a place to 

be in an environment that would help them through the evening 

or through the next day to come to a rational census of what has 

transpired, and at least get some help so that the police as well, 

or whoever's involved, is not going to find themselves accused 

by the abusive person that they've already just ordered to leave 

the home. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I would imagine that in many 

of these cases there will be criminal charges involved because 

the domestic violence will, in many cases, take the form of 

some kind of assault.  And so the abuser probably doesn't have 

to worry about a place to stay that night.  That decision will 

probably be made for the abuser. 

 

About half of these cases are alcohol-related but the other half 

aren't.  The other half are just the lack of life skills, or the lack 

of self-control, or whatever it is that drives people to beat the 

ones that they love most of all.  And the police have great 

experience dealing with these people and are able to make 

judgements about who is dangerous and who is not. 

So far as the actions of the police are concerned, I must say I'm 

not especially worried.  I think that there are safeguards in the 

system.  Some would argue more than adequate safeguards to 

protect a people from the actions of the police.  They're 

responsible in the criminal courts for their actions should they 

transgress the criminal law.  They are responsible in the civil 

courts should they cause damage to somebody.  So I'm not so 

worried about that. 

 

Now I take the member's point that a raging person who is 

escorted out of the family home will behave differently 

depending upon what happens to the person after that. 

 

But I don't have any answer.  There are no homes in existence 

now especially dedicated to the care of abusers.  There is all 

kinds of supports in the community to help the abuser cure the 

problem that led to the violence in the first place, by way of 

self-help groups and support groups and that sort of thing.  But 

there is just simply no board and lodging available for people 

with that particular problem.  As I said earlier, the police will 

assist, and have some experience in assisting people to find a 

place to stay.  They know where you can go, and where you 

can get a night's . . . get a room for the night.  And that's about 

the best, I think, that the system will be able to furnish. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, as I was 

raising the last question I'm mindful of the fact that I think even 

our police forces are becoming a little bit disillusioned with our 

whole judicial system and the process that is involved. 

 

And I'm not just talking of the abusive situation we're dealing 

with here in the victims of violence legislation, but so many 

other circumstances where they take time and effort, and they 

get to court and find out that through a technicality someone 

gets off. And I think some individuals who have committed 

themselves to peace-keeping or law-keeping duties must 

become very frustrated at times. 

 

So I was just wondering if there was something that would be 

laid out.  And I take it from an earlier answer that the police 

departments throughout the province will get an update on the 

legislation so they have good knowledge of what the legislation 

intends and the area that they can work in. 

 

Mr. Minister, when an emergency or intervention order is 

reviewed, is a lawyer necessary for that review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll take those two points in order.  We 

consulted extensively with the police in the preparation of this 

legislation, and the police forces in this province strongly 

support this legislation.  That's the first thing. 

 

The second thing that the member asked was the question of 

whether a lawyer had to be present on the review, and the 

answer is no.  The judge will review the file within three 

working days, and how that will work in the court setting is 

that the registrar of the 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

court, the local registrar, will bring the file to the judge as a 

matter of course for review.  There will be no lawyers present 

at all. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What kind of cost do you anticipate will be 

associated with the review of individuals evicted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, we don't attach any costs at 

all to the process.  The judge is there anyway earning a judge's 

salary and the court officials are there working a full day 

anyway.  And this is extra work, but it's not work that will 

require the expenditure of public funds. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Another major concern 

that has been raised with us -- a number of my colleagues . . . 

we've discussed as well -- is what happens in a situation where 

an individual is evicted from the home and it just so happens 

their home is, let's say, a business?  Where their place of 

business happens to be their home?  Or the situation of a farm 

and let's say the person evicted is the husband, the farmer?  

And they've got to get back.  They're in a livestock operation 

and they've got chores to do the next day. 

 

What kinds of . . . or what has the department looked at as to 

ways in which they can deal with these types of situations so 

that a person's livelihood isn't disrupted while we go through 

the process of the eviction notice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the Act will actually give the 

system more flexibility to deal with the kinds of situations that 

the member has raised than is presently the case.  Now with the 

kinds of orders that you get -- the peace bonds, the restraining 

orders that you get -- it just keeps the person right away.  

Whereas under this process, the orders can be made subject to 

any terms that the JP considers appropriate. 

 

And so in the two situations where the residence is a place of 

business or where the residence is on a farm, the order can 

make allowances for that and allow the abuser to return to the 

property for certain specified purposes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as you've indicated, this Bill gives 

Saskatchewan courts new powers to order abusers to 

compensate their victims for expenses like legal costs and 

temporary accommodation.  It grants victims temporary 

possession of property such as a car or children's clothing and 

restrains the abuser from contacting the victim, their family 

members, or associates. 

 

And you indicated that you've talked to the police.  I believe 

when the legislation was introduced in the House, Regina 

Police Chief Ernie Reimer endorsed the proposed legislation, 

saying it's a major step in law enforcement because it focuses 

on assisting victims instead of punishing offenders. 

 

Now when you talk about ordering abusers to compensate their 

victims for expenses like legal costs, exactly what would that 

involve, Mr. Minister? 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, this is not a totally new 

concept in the sense that those matters could still be sued for in 

the civil courts by a separate action with a statement of the 

claim, and if necessary a trial in the civil courts for most of 

those same expenses or damages.  This simplifies the whole 

process and gives to the victim an opportunity to have the 

courts deal with this matter within the context of the domestic 

violence and the processes set out in the Act. 

 

These powers are in section 7 as you will have seen.  And as I 

say, there's nothing radically new there but it is a quicker and 

more efficient and probably much more effective way for 

victims to be compensated for their loss. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think that I've 

raised the questions that basically were being related to us.  

Certainly we trust that at the end of the day this piece of 

legislation will not just be a means of protecting individuals but 

will be able to work out programs and come up with ideas that 

can become solutions to a problem that may arise.  And I know 

we've got the mediation services now available for individuals 

who are seeking separation through the courts, were in a 

divorce settlement. 

 

Mr. Minister, I guess maybe what I would like to know is, after 

a person has been given an eviction notice and been removed 

from a home, you indicated that there are a number of 

programs right now that people can seek some help in to get 

some help in finding ways to overcome their abusive ways.  

Should a situation arise where . . . let's say it's in a situation of a 

couple where they decide that basically they've come to the 

point of they've had enough.  Will the mediation services also 

be available to them and maybe kind of mediate some kind of a 

mutual agreement and understanding, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The mediation services won't be 

attached directly to this Act, but under the family law division 

provisions that we'll be considering a little later tonight, there is 

a mediation process.  And the member will recall that the first 

step of that process will be an orientation and an assessment as 

to whether or not mediation is appropriate in the circumstances.  

If it is, then we have high hope that it will do a lot of good in 

these family situations. 

 

I know the member is intensely interested in saving as many of 

those situations as possible, in having the system set up in such 

a way that those problems can be worked out in the maximum 

number of cases, and the partners to the marriage are reunited 

to live happily ever after.  That's my view too. 

 

And I think some of the reforms that we're making will 

contribute to that.  I guess at the end of the day if people don't 

want to live together, they won't.  And if they're not prepared to 

try and if they both can't make the adjustments necessary to 

make it work, then it's not going to work.  But I think that the 

system ought to 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

be set up in such a way that we try as hard as we can to 

maintain relationships between married people. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before they leave, and on behalf of my 

colleagues, I'd like to thank my officials for coming to assist 

the committee in its work tonight. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I too would join with 

the minister in thanking the officials for giving us their time 

this evening.  Thank you. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

create a Family Law Division and to enact Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

The Chair: -- Before we proceed to clause-by-clause, I would 

invite the minister to introduce the officials who have joined us 

for the consideration of this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Beside me is 

Brent Cotter, the deputy minister of the Department of Justice; 

behind Brent is Susan Amrud, who I introduced to the 

legislature a few moments ago; behind me is Ron Hewitt, the 

assistant deputy minister of registry services; and to my right is 

Doug Moen, the executive director of public law and policy. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and welcome to the 

officials that have just joined him.  Mr. Minister, I understand 

that this Bill enhances the Unified Family Court, which has 

actually operated as a pilot project in Saskatoon since 1978.  A 

couple of questions, Mr. Minister.  What was the cost to 

operate the pilot project last year, and what is the estimated 

cost to operate the enhanced Unified Family Court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the cost of operating the 

Unified Family Court, we will have in a few minutes.  We 

prepared that material for estimates and the people with that 

information are outside the Chamber right now, but we'll bring 

that in in a few moments. 

 

The estimated increased costs for expanding the court, from the 

province's point of view, will be $191,000. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it then that this 

expansion is something that's already been allocated in the 

budget and provisions have been made for that. 

 

I understand, Mr. Minister, that we will have specialized judges 

working within this court.  And, Mr. Minister, I just received a 

copy of an amendment.  I take it that . . . Will these be existing 

judges or will the government be hiring new judges to 

accommodate 

the court?  And from the amendment, is it this proposal, this 

amendment you've brought forward that really is going to put 

in place the judges for this process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This question of the number of judges in 

the family law division and how it would work were the subject 

of a great deal of negotiation with the court and with the federal 

government. 

 

These are all federal judges that are involved here.  And the 

figure of six dedicated judges was eventually settled upon, with 

some flexibility for the Chief Justice to put additional people in 

there as he may consider necessary for short periods of time, 

and to assign these judges out in certain circumstances for short 

periods of time.  So the Chief Justice has a bit of flexibility. 

 

There are two judges in the Unified Family Court now and they 

will move over to the family law division, and there will be 

four new judges appointed.  It is my understanding, the 

arrangement that has been agreed to by Mr. Rock, that there 

will be four new appointments to flesh out the family law 

division to its complement of six judges.  They will not be 

judges who are now sitting in the court but will be new 

appointments. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So I take it from that, 

Mr. Minister, that these judges then are actually Federal Court 

judges or Queen's Bench judges. 

 

Mr. Minister, you indicated through your second reading 

speech that you have high hopes in terms of goals for the 

unified family law.  I wonder if you could outline for us and for 

this Assembly how you hope to see the court operating in the 

near future.  Referring to the enhanced services -- for example, 

mediation, custody and access investigation services, 

supervised access service, counselling in the case of family 

breakdown, and self-help kits.  How many of these services are 

currently available and how many are left to be initiated? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- At present, the only one of these 

services that the minister mentioned that is being offered are 

the custody and access investigations by the Unified Family 

Court.  There is a certain amount of mediation that can take 

place in those cases that are provided, as I understand it, by 

outside agencies now. 

 

The other services -- the supervised access, the counselling, the 

various educational services -- will be new services that will be 

provided within the framework of the family law division on a 

province-wide basis.  These . . . I call them new services.  They 

were services at one time offered in the Unified Family Court 

but over the years successive budget cuts have reduced them to 

their present state, and we think it important to offer them again 

because we think they perform a valuable service. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, earlier on 

you indicated that there's an additional 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

$191,000 for this court.  Does that include the bringing into 

effect and upgrading the services, the extra, the additional 

services that will now be brought into force, Mr. Minister?  

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, when do you anticipate that 

all of the services will be available?  Are we going to be 

looking at a drawn-out process in implementing the different 

services that were going to be included in this Act?  Could you 

give us a timetable for that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The figure of 191,000 that I gave to the 

member earlier, Mr. Chair, covers all of the services that we've 

been talking about except for mediation.  Mediation is provided 

for in the other Bill that we'll be considering later tonight. 

 

These other services are available in Regina, Saskatoon.  They 

will be available in Prince Albert and they will be made 

available across the entire province.  Some of them will be 

available only in -- at least initially -- only in Regina and 

Saskatoon, such as group education sessions.  Self-help kits 

and other printed material will be available throughout the 

province, and so on, but the $191,000 figure covers all of those 

services. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just from the work that 

has taken place over the last few years in this project -- the pilot 

project instituted in Saskatoon -- once this Unified Court is 

enhanced, Unified Family Court is up and running, Mr. 

Minister, how many families do you anticipate will be assisted 

through this process?  And as well, Mr. Minister, what other 

areas does this piece of legislation cover other than the Unified 

Family Court?  Are there any other areas that it covers besides 

Unified Family Court or is it strictly related to that form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We don't know how many families will 

be assisted by this legislation or affected by it. 

 

The Unified Family Court in Saskatoon is in my experience a 

busy court.  It handles cases that arise in Saskatoon and area, 

and some litigants come from quite a ways out of Saskatoon in 

order to take advantage of the existence of the court. 

 

The member will know that the family law division is taking 

over a number of pieces of legislation formerly administered by 

the Provincial Court so that it probably wouldn't be accurate 

just to count the number of divorce actions commenced.  You 

would also have to take into account the maintenance processes 

and adoptions, and applications under The Child and Family 

Services Act, and those sorts of things.  I don't think we could 

come with a reasonable guess as to how many families might 

be affected. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair.  I move that we: 

 Strike out section 5 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

 "5The following subsections are added after subsection 7(4): 

 

  '(5)  The Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench shall assign 

six judges of the court to act as judges of the Family 

Law Division. 

 

  '(6)  The Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench may assign a 

judge mentioned in subsection (5) to hear causes or 

matters outside the Family Law Division, but only if 

the assignment does not prevent that judge from 

spending the substantial majority of that judge's 

time hearing causes or matters in the Family Law 

Division. 

 

  '(7)  In addition to the six judges of the Family Law 

Division, the Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench 

may assign, from time to time, any judge of the 

court to act as a judge of the Family Law Division. 

 

  '(8)  Every judge of the court, including the Chief Justice 

of the Queen's Bench and every judge of the Family 

Law Division, has jurisdiction to hear and 

determine any cause or matter in the court, 

including causes or matters in the Family Law 

Division'". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the minister 

and his officials, the ones that have joined him for this Bill and 

the discussion.  I thank them for coming in. 

 

I was just sitting here thinking for a minute as I was watching 

you conversing with your officials, Mr. Minister. I was 

wondering if maybe we shouldn't institute some of the program 

that we've put forward in Crown Corporations where we allow 

the officials to speak out a little more open and save the process 

of trying to relay all that information, especially when it can get 

to be fairly extensive. 

 

Anyway, I want to thank you and your officials for your time 

and efforts.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, that's not a bad idea.  These 

intensive education processes that the officials go through to 

equip a minister to stand up and answer some of the questions 

is interesting and stress-filled. 

 

I'd like to thank the officials for coming today, Mr. Chair, or 

tonight, to assist the committee in its 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

consideration of this legislation. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting Representation in the 

Legislative Assembly 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Justice to introduce 

the officials who have joined us for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I have previously introduced 

to the Assembly Darcy McGovern of legislative services in the 

Department of Justice. Behind Darcy is Tom Irvine of the 

constitutional branch in the department.  And behind me is Jan 

Baker who is the assistant chief electoral officer of the 

province. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'd 

like to ask a number of questions.  I guess the first one I'd like 

to ask is: can you give me the rationale for the changes that 

you've made in the decision on boundary changes and then why 

it was changed to population?  Would you give me the rationale 

for the decision to change it to a population base? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- With leave, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- While we're waiting, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you, to the other members of the 

Assembly present, two inspectors from the Saskatoon Fire 

Department, Mr. Brian Bentley and Mr. Dave Bykowy, and 

they are in Regina to attend a fire investigation course put on 

by the Saskatchewan Fire Commissioner's office. 

 

As we all know, fire fighting is becoming much more 

specialized in terms of protecting all of us in the inspection and 

investigation fields, and I know all members want to wish them 

well in their course and welcome them here to the legislature 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 58 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I thank the member for the 

question.  I think I've answered this question before about a 

year ago now during the debate and committee consideration of 

the Bill that led to the redistribution that has finally found its 

way into The Representation Act that we're now considering. 

 

My memory is that . . . well I know it to be the fact that the 

principle is that members of this legislature 

represent all people, not just people who are on the voters' list 

or people who are eligible to vote, but they represent all people 

including children and including non-citizens.  This is of course 

a familiar concept in democratic systems. 

 

I think if I'm not mistaken that all of the elections in the United 

States for example are conducted on the basis of . . . at least all 

of the House elections in the United States are conducted on the 

basis of population, and the constituencies in Congress -- at 

least in the House of Representatives -- are divided on the basis 

of population.  So it's hardly a new idea. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in the United States they 

also have two Houses in most of the states.  One is 

representation by population, and the other one is 

representation by area.  And the two are there because of a 

decision made a long time ago by two people who didn't agree.  

And they . . . one said it had to be representation by state, and 

the other one said it had to be representation by one person, one 

vote -- representation by population. 

 

And they couldn't agree, so the United States set up a two-tier 

governing system.  And that is there as a counterbalance. And I 

would say that I'm not a great proponent of the U.S. (United 

States) system; however, there is a democracy that has existed 

for over 200 years because of a balance and counterbalance on 

those two conflicting points of view. 

 

The decision by individuals to appeal to the Court of Appeal in 

1991 on the decision by this Assembly to bring forward a Bill 

that had a distinction between urban and rural constituencies 

was challenged by the Court of Appeal, and the Court of 

Appeal said it's wrong to do it that way.  On appeal to the 

Supreme Court, things began to change.  And one of the things 

that they suggested as a thing that has to be decided on is that, 

not only do you have to have equal representation, you have to 

have effective representation. 

 

And I'll just use as an example -- the constituency that I will be 

living in is going to be Thunder Creek.  And I live on the very 

west boundary; it's a quarter mile from the western boundary.  

The eastern boundary is just outside of Regina here.  Very 

significant distance, and very significant time is going to be 

taken for individuals to provide effective representation.  Now 

you can say the telephone is there, and fax machines, and all of 

that. 

 

The question I have is, you took into consideration effective 

representation when you deal with one part of the province, and 

that is the North, where you don't have equal representation. 

And in the South you say no, it doesn't matter there; we're 

going to have equal representation, not effective representation. 

 

I think the people of the province need to probably have you 

tell us why in one part of the province, and how you can justify 

having on one side of the boundary from the northern part of 

this province to the 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

southern part of the province, you can have one area that says 

we're going to have effective representation along with 

equality, and a qualification to the equality part; and on the 

southern half of the province you're going to say I'm only going 

to do it on the basis of equal representation -- one person, one 

vote. 

 

Now I think you need to justify to the people of this province 

who have criticized you for that in a substantive way.  I think 

you need to address that and the people of the province need to 

have you tell them why you have that distinction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It occurred to me as I was listening to 

the member's question that I think the federal government is 

also organizing it's constituency boundaries on the basis of 

population and not on the basis of registered voters.  They work 

off the last census figures.  So we don't feel out of step at all on 

that one.  Probably doesn't make a lot of difference at the end 

of the day, but in theory it is I think correct that we all represent 

in this Assembly, everybody who lives within our constituency 

regardless of their age, and regardless of their citizenship. 

 

The seat that the member mentions, Thunder Creek, is certainly 

a long, narrow seat if you look at the map, and you're tempted 

to ask, isn't it possible that that could have been compacted in 

such a way that it didn't cover such a long, long distance.  We 

left those questions to the commission, this Assembly did, and 

it immediately passed out of our hands, and all we could do 

after that was make representations after the interim report was 

down and I believe that the member did that. 

 

We encouraged the commission in the legislation passed by this 

House to consider special communities of interests or diversity 

of interests, of persons, when drawing these constituency lines 

and beyond that there wasn't much you could do.  You just had 

to leave it up to these people who had a good deal of 

knowledge about Saskatchewan and particularly the chair who 

was a former Leader of the Opposition in this Assembly who 

knows every part of Saskatchewan and understands it as well as 

any of us.  And we left it to him to draw the lines, and he drew 

the lines, and we have to live with that result. 

 

The member has already mentioned that with modern 

communications part of the problem goes away or at least it's 

not as severe.  We have telephones.  We not only have them in 

our homes and offices, but we have them in our cars and we 

carry them around on the streets with us, and we can get in 

touch with a lot of our constituents by telephone quite easily.  

That wasn't the case 40 years ago or 30 years ago. 

 

I like to tell the story of my wife at Christmas time, just six or 

seven years ago, going out shopping for me for a portable 

telephone for Christmas.  That's what I wanted.  That's what I 

asked her for -- a portable telephone.  She came back about two 

weeks later to tell me that she couldn't find one that worked. 

Her and a friend of hers who knows a lot about these things had 

gone out to buy me a portable telephone and there wasn't one.  

Well now the situation is that portable telephones are 

everywhere.  Little kids are taking them to school and on to the 

playgrounds of this city and communications have improved 

radically as a result.  In addition we have fax machines and 

now we're getting e-mail and a whole lot of other things that 

are happening in the communication field that is going to make 

it easier and easier for us to get in touch with our constituents. 

 

Now before I sit down I have to address the member's concerns 

about northern Saskatchewan.  You just have to look at a map 

to see the plight of the two members of this legislature who are 

representing the constituencies of Cumberland and Athabasca.  

They represent huge areas.  Together they represent, I think, 

more than half of Saskatchewan geographically in number of 

acres and their populations in both cases are far-flung.  You 

can't drive from Buffalo Narrows to Stony Rapids.  You can't 

drive from Buffalo Narrows to Uranium City except in the 

wintertime.  And you can't drive from La Ronge to Wollaston 

post.  And the distances involved are huge and we just couldn't 

imagine creating a piece of legislation that would result in 

those constituencies getting even bigger. 

 

They're probably too big geographically the way they are right 

now.  But rather we could hardly make them smaller.  We just 

froze them and said this is enough; this is the maximum size for 

those constituencies.  So we took those out of the mix and left 

them the way they were.  That was our thinking, and I think it 

was valid. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well in a matter of course, you make my 

argument on the basis that in one area you deal with effective 

representation, and the other areas of Saskatchewan you deal 

with equal representation.  And I think the two need to be 

addressed equally across this province, not only in the northern 

part. 

 

I just want to point out in 1982, Senator Gerald Beaudoin 

considered the possible impact of the democratic rights 

enshrined in section 3 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms and he made some observations concerning the way 

Canada and its provinces were divided into constituencies for 

the purposes of conducting elections. 

 

I believe that Saskatchewan was given special status, received 

14 seats.  The province of Prince Edward Island was given 

special status as a part of the Constitution of Canada because it 

had its own uniqueness.  It has a reasonable access for all the 

same reasons that you just talked about to the rest of Canada, 

but a decision was made on the part of the constitution and the 

people working in the constitution that they would have four 

seats, just like Saskatchewan has 14. 

 

The whole of the Northwest Territories, if you went by your 

reasoning for having equal representation, probably would only 

have one seat.  And that is both irresponsible on the part of 

legislators to consider that. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

It is also in my view, something that needs to be considered. 

 

Now Senator Beaudoin also indicated that what we are going to 

probably have is people moving more to the American system, 

in one person, one vote.  And we have that counteracted, in my 

view, from the aspect of the way the representation takes place.  

For example, we have the senators who represent . . . two 

senators from every state and we have the House of 

Representatives, representation by population. 

 

And he said about that, it was unfortunate, he said, that section 

3 of the charter does not refer to equal suffrage.  That's what he 

said -- equal suffrage.  And that means effective, equal 

opportunities in dealing with this matter in a way that's going to 

assist people in performing their duties as elected individuals.  

At the time in the United States, the courts had mandated equal 

representation for equal numbers of people -- one person, one 

vote.  And it was expected that our courts will eventually get 

that way too. 

 

He went on to predict that one vote, one person principle in 

Canada will be Canadianized to a certain extent under section 1 

as a result of our particular situation.  And that deals with the 

distances that we have in the country of Canada.  That 

particular situation was characterized by sparse population and 

great distances, two factors which make it extremely difficult if 

not impossible to attain equality between ridings -- very 

difficult to assess. 

 

In dealing with the issue, the Supreme Court of Canada had 

that very same view of what it is as it relates to a 

Canadianization, doing it the Canadian way rather than the 

American way -- which is what we have here, the American 

way being one person, one vote -- and doing it the Canadian 

way which says, we will have effective representation and 

equal suffrage, which means that there is a Canadianization of 

the principle of one person, one vote. 

 

(2030) 

 

Now I still don't understand why you would consider the cities 

the same as the rural.  I don't understand that.  I probably never 

will.  In fact, when I made representation to the former Justice 

Culliton in this area, he told me that, he said, you know, people 

in the urban centres don't understand this.  They will never 

understand it.  He said, I represented a rural seat and when I 

came to sit in this Assembly they didn't understand that we had 

distances to travel.  And urban people do not understand it.  

Urban people who represent urban people don't understand the 

rural context of what you're talking about.  So you got to have 

this great distances that drives these people into less effective 

representation than you have in an urban centre. 

 

And I haven't gotten from you one reason yet that you would 

indicate to make me believe otherwise.  You just state that one 

person, one vote.  But you haven't laid out the arguments, I 

believe, in confirming that to the people of Saskatchewan, 

saying that effective 

representation is going to take a back seat, it's going to move to 

the back of the train in this whole business, even though 

Canadianization of the principle of effective representation says 

that Saskatchewan gets a special status in the Constitution of 

Canada. 

 

And that gets 14 seats in Canada.  It's the way it's going to be.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is where effective representation 

overlays equal representation, and it becomes a part of equal 

suffrage for individuals within the framework of Canada. 

 

I'd like to have you tell the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan what your view of effective representation is in 

light of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Chair, and to the member, we 

debated these questions at great length a year ago when we 

adopted the legislation that we adopted.  I don't mind at all 

debating them over again except that we could probably just 

both stand here and adopt the positions that we took 12 months 

ago and save ourself time tonight. 

 

The member must concede that representation by population is 

a principle consistent with all of the notions of democracy.  The 

member I think must also concede that representation by 

population includes representation according to the numbers of 

people who live in the constituencies that are drawn on an 

electoral map. 

 

I will concede on my part that representation by population is 

also consistent with a map drawn on the basis of numbers of 

voters.  You could go either way, one way or the other.  Some 

jurisdictions go one way, some the other. 

 

As the member pointed out, in the United States they 

compromised such an argument in the way that they did to 

result in a different way of electing members to the House of 

Representatives as compared to the Senate.  In Saskatchewan 

we have done it both ways, and across Canada it is done both 

ways.  And we can argue for a long time, I suppose, about 

which is the most democratic of the approaches to take.  We 

elected to go on the basis of total population according to the 

last census figures. 

 

Effective representation is a very interesting question.  It is 

obviously easier for me to represent the people who live in my 

constituency, on the west end of Saskatoon where the 

population is condensed into a relatively small area, than it is 

for the member to represent his constituency as it now exists, 

the constituency of Morse, because of the miles involved.  So if 

you're going to see all the people, it is going to take a lot more 

driving. 

 

Now apart from driving around to see people, I think our 

problems are about the same.  We both make long-distance 

telephone calls to our constituency; we make most of our 

contacts, I think, by telephone.  We mail out to addresses that 

we have available to us in our offices, and generally we use the 

same techniques in representing our people, except in your case 

you 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

have to drive more than I. 

 

And I concede that that is a problem for you.  To see the people 

in the flesh, you're going to have to drive more.  And it's one of 

the things that you encounter when you have a big province 

like we have, with a sparse population as we have, scattered 

over a very broad area, as is the case here. 

 

And I know the member recognizes that our population is 

scattered.  You compare what we have here to the population in 

Manitoba, the distribution in Manitoba, or even the distribution 

in Ontario, you get a much different picture.  One of the results 

is that we in Saskatchewan have far more miles of road than 

you have in Ontario -- in very large Ontario, serving a 

population of 10 million.  We've got more roads in little 

Saskatchewan because of the distribution of our population.  So 

it raises problems and I recognize that. 

 

But at the end of the day you ask yourself: how best can this 

place work?  And we spend a lot of time and a lot of worry 

about how to do that in a way that would reflect the things that 

we believe in.  We believe in representation by population.  We 

believe in one member, one vote.  We also believe in effective 

representation.  And we try to balance those things out. 

 

You may not agree with the way in which we've balanced it, 

but we've balanced it in a way which I think was defensible.  I 

and other members defended it in this House and elsewhere.  

And it will be for people to judge whether we've done it right 

or not.  But we certainly did it in accordance with established 

democratic principle. 

 

The member from Cumberland represents a huge area, as I 

mentioned a few minutes ago.  His voting population was, he 

tells me, larger than at least four of the rural constituencies in 

southern Saskatchewan, which would include the member's 

own constituency of Morse, which I think had the smallest 

voting population in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we could have made it bigger.  We could have made it 

smaller, you know.  But he does represent an enormous area for 

8,000 voters.  An enormous area.  And we just simply couldn't 

see expanding that seat any bigger than it once was. 

 

Now the member detects an inconsistency in that explanation 

and I acknowledge it.  But my point is simply this.  You can 

represent the constituency of Morse, large though it is, much 

easier than can the member from Cumberland represent his 

constituency.  Because while I can look at the member and say, 

you have to drive farther than I do to represent your 

constituents, imagine what the member from Cumberland has 

to do to go out and press the flesh in his constituency.  I mean 

it's an enormous job and we didn't want to make that any 

harder. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I think the minister has to come to the 

point where he has to acknowledge that there is 

a difference between effective and equal representation.  And I 

think that the combination has to be delivered as an option to 

an independent agency to make that decision.  And I don't 

believe that you've provided that option to the commission. 

 

I believe, for example, when they were doing their work, they 

had an interesting situation around the city of Swift Current 

where they didn't even consider any of the way the people work 

out the system there.  At the beginning they said, okay, we'll 

have this unit of the StatsCanada.  We'll put that into the centre 

around Swift Current.  We'll decide that that is what that 

population base is. 

 

And people who lived right adjacent to the town of Gull Lake, 

which is situated inside now the Cypress constituency, those 

people would have to go to Swift Current when their whole 

service centre was connected to movement west.  And that 

same thing applied to the area north of the city which was 

supposed to go into an area that was represented by individuals 

from way down south at Consul.  A huge, huge distance 

separated these two people. 

 

And I'm not saying to you that there shouldn't be larger 

constituencies or reduced members in this Assembly.  I didn't 

say that at all.  In fact we've brought forward those kinds of 

references and would have been prepared to make some 

substantive contribution to the discussion if we were allowed to 

become involved. 

 

But effective representation is in my view exemplified by what 

you did in the North.  I think that that is effective 

representation.  And effective representation means that you've 

got to take the time that is given to you in an annual basis and 

provide that representation for those individuals in those 

communities. 

 

And I believe that you did that, and I'm saying that you didn't 

do it in other parts of the province.  That's what I'm saying to 

you.  And I don't think that you have indicated to us that I 

should change my mind on that or given me arguments that 

would say that the Supreme Court had . . . decision that they 

made on that basis, that individual constituencies should be 

represented also by an effective representation.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is what this argument is all about. 

 

In fact when the people were making representation to the 

Supreme Court, there were . . . I believe the Government of 

Canada was making representation to defend the position of 

Saskatchewan people, to defend the position of the people in 

Prince Edward Island, to defend the position of effective 

representation for the people of the Northwest Territories, for 

the people in the Yukon.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're 

talking about. 

 

In dealing with effective representation for Canada, it's good 

for us that they don't do it the way you did it just in this Bill 

that we have before the Assembly.  For effective representation 

I am pleased that the Canadian people said no, we will continue 

to have 14 people represent the people of the province of 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

Saskatchewan.  Why?  Because of distance to be travelled.  

And effective representation means just that, and I believe that 

that's fair. 

 

One of the major discussions that took place in the 

constitutional debate as it related to the Charlottetown accord 

was that different provinces with different volumes of senators 

would have to have those adjusted.  And it became extremely 

difficult for the province of Ontario to give up any senators, so 

that other provinces . . . or we could have more equal 

representation in the Senate, in the upper House.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, was based on discussions on how this thing would 

evolve. 

 

They were given more seats in the House of representatives, 

which is the House of Commons, and in the Senate side they 

were given fewer.  Why?  To have effective balance in 

representation and how that representation is made.  If you 

would put another House into the province of Saskatchewan, 

and I don't agree with that, but if you would put another House 

in, you would have to put it in on the basis that it represented, 

not by population but by area, to give a balance to it. 

 

So you put those two things together, representation by 

population -- one person, one vote -- and you overlay that with 

a effective representation, and what have you got, Mr. 

Minister?  You've got a Canadianization of an opportunity.  

Parliament is a whole lot different than the Americans do their 

business.  Canadian parliament is based on a completely 

different dynamic and it's a parliamentary system versus a 

congressional system.  And the two are completely different. 

 

And what we're having placed on the people of Saskatchewan, 

in the southern part, is an Americanization of the parliamentary 

system; and in the northern part, we're having a 

Canadianization of a parliamentary system.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is the focus of where we're at.  And we in this side of 

the House said no, you can't do it that way.  You shouldn't do it 

that way. 

 

(2045) 

 

One of the Supreme Court judges, Justice McLachlin, reiterated 

the position she had taken, that the strict principle of one 

person, one vote was neither appropriate for Canada nor part of 

its experience, and there was no evidence that the framers of 

the charter had contemplated the reading of such a principle 

into the provisions of that document.  That was what Justice 

McLachlin said about the principle of one person, one vote.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is the rationalization behind this. 

 

They see Canada as being unique.  They see Canada as having 

an opportunity to represent itself in a unique fashion.  They 

don't have an upper House, so then they have to say, we have to 

deal with it in a different fashion than the United States does.  

And that's very significant, and I don't think you have taken 

that into consideration in this province. 

Now you go one step further in assessing this, and you say, I 

am going to allow one person, one vote in the Assembly, but 

you have taken then to include all of the people in that 

constituency -- all the people rather than all the voters. 

 

Now in equality you would expect that if it was equal for me to 

have a constituency with Cumberland in delivery of services, 

then the member from Cumberland should have the same 

telephone services that I do, and he does.  He has the equal 

opportunity to phone his constituents that I have.  That's equal 

opportunity.  And as much as it is, it's effective.  That is 

supplied for equality in the province. 

 

For reaching individuals in your constituency, as compared to 

mine with postal service, we don't have equality.  We have a 

rate that's equal, but we don't have equality of opportunity 

because it costs me just as much . . . I'll use the city of Swift 

Current as an example and myself as an example in my 

constituency.  The people in Swift Current number about 

15,000; the people in my constituency about 12,000.  The 

voters would be seven and ten, given about nine and seven and 

a half, but I get paid for delivering communications on a set 

framework according to my voters and so does the member 

from Swift Current, but his costs are exactly the same.  Do we 

have equality?  No we don't. 

 

In those cases we have to take and say, is there equality, or is 

there effectiveness in delivery of the system?  So we have to 

say we'll make a decision based on effectiveness.  He has the 

same cost as the other individual; therefore, we'll pay him the 

same volume of dollars, which is exactly what is done in the 

telephone communications but not done in other places. 

 

That's exactly what you're doing with how you're asking people 

to represent . . . have a representative for them in the northern 

part of this province and in the southern part of this province.  

And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that that isn't fair for those 

people who have greater distances to communicate with their 

elected representatives than other people have. 

 

And I'm not going to belabour the point any more than that, but 

to say to you that I don't agree with you, and the justices of 

Canada don't agree with you.  And I would say that the 

principle of effective representation is established on why you 

separated the North from the South, and that same principle has 

to be set aside for the rest of Saskatchewan.  I believe that, and 

I will always believe that because it has to do with a Canadian 

perception of effective representation along with equal 

representation, and the Supreme Court said it's equal suffrage.  

In my view, it means that effectiveness is an equal component 

of equality of representation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think, Mr. Chair, that the justices of the 

Supreme Court referred to by my friend would not disagree 

with the legislation that we've been proceeding under.  They 

made it clear in dealing 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

with the other legislation that it met minimum standards but 

obviously left all kinds of room for improvement.  And I would 

venture to say that those same judges would find that the 

principles underlying our legislation in this Assembly are an 

improvement. 

 

Let me also say this, that in talking about effectiveness as 

opposed to equality, we provided to the commission the 

opportunity to vary the size of constituencies by 5 per cent, 

plus 5 or minus 5 from the mean, from whatever the term was 

in the Act, sort of from the average.  And the average was 

17,182. 

 

In 45 of the 56 southern constituencies, the commission 

established a number that was a variance of less than plus or 

minus 1.  So my point is that the commission didn't see fit, in 

spite of all of the submissions that were made to it, to use the 

opportunity to vary the size of the constituencies by plus or 

minus 5 per cent to take into account the points that were being 

made by the hon. member. 

 

So whatever the validity of the arguments -- and I acknowledge 

that they are based upon democratic principle as I think mine 

are -- they did not impress the Malone Commission sufficiently 

that they would use the running room that the legislation gave 

them to meet his argument about effectiveness of 

representation. 

 

Most of these variances are in fact less than a half of one per 

cent.  But 45 out of the 56 constituencies are less than plus or 

minus 1 from the average of 17,182.  The member may know 

that the only riding in Saskatchewan that came in exactly with 

the 17,182 figure was the Saskatoon constituency of Fairview.  

That was a coincidence, but it is interesting, and I didn't realize 

it until I looked at these numbers tonight. 

 

We took encouragement from the way in which the federal 

Boundaries Commission had operated in Saskatchewan at the 

time of the last redistribution.  They were directed by statute to 

create 14 seats in Saskatchewan and they had a possible 

variance of plus or minus 25 under the federal law.  The 

Saskatchewan commission in fact came in with a distribution 

that was less than plus or minus 1 and that's as close to equality 

as you can get.  And we took encouragement from the fact that 

if you could organize the federal boundaries in such a way in 

Saskatchewan to achieve that result, you should be able to do it 

on a provincial basis. 

 

I think the member makes a very interesting point with respect 

to the structure of allowances -- communication allowances for 

example -- as it relates to the new legislation.  I think that that 

point ought to be drawn to the attention of the Board of Internal 

Economy when they're structuring some of our allowances 

when the new legislation goes into effect because I think he 

makes a very, very good point and it addresses the question of 

equality. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Schedule agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the minister and 

his officials for having been here this evening and discussing 

this issue.  We didn't totally agree with his responses, but we 

thank him for his responses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'd like to also thank the 

officials for the work that they did in assisting the committee 

tonight.  And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Chair, I would like to 

move that the committee rise and report progress and ask for 

leave to sit again. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act respecting Victims of Domestic 

Violence 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 39 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

create a Family Law Division and to enact Consequential 

Amendments arising from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move that the amendments be now 

read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 

I move that Bill No. 39 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 58 -- An Act respecting Representation in the 

Legislative Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The division bells rang from 9 p.m. until 9:03 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Anguish Trew 

Teichrob Whitmore 

Johnson Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Atkinson Cline 

Carson Wormsbecker 

 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

 

Mitchell Knezacek 

Cunningham Keeping 

Koenker Jess 

Lautermilch  

-- 21 

Nays 

 

Martens D'Autremont 

Boyd Goohsen 

TothMcPherson  

-- 6 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Justice 

Vote 3 

 

The Chair: -- It has been some time since the department was 

first here and I would ask at this time the minister to 

reintroduce the officials who have joined us here this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Beside me is the 

deputy minister, Brent Cotter.  To Mr. Cotter's left is Kathy 

Hillman-Weir, who is the executive assistant to Mr. Cotter.  

Behind Mr. Cotter is Twyla Meredith, who is the director of the 

administrative services branch.  Behind me is Ron Hewitt, the 

assistant deputy minister of registry services.  And to my right 

is Doug Moen, the executive director of public law and policy.  

Other officials are present in the Chamber and will participate 

as needed. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and again welcome to 

the minister and his officials.  I look forward to the 

deliberations we'll enter into this evening. 

 

Mr. Minister, just a couple of questions.  Number one, I'm 

wondering if you would happen to have an extra copy of the 

global type of questions we had inquired about and asked to 

come to our office.  I'd appreciate a copy if you've got one 

handy, please. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Minister, it's been a while since we have 

been before the House and there were a couple of viewer mail 

questions that I just don't remember if I raised them, and just to 

be on the safe side, to make sure that I brought the questions to 

your attention.  One comes from a Cicely Booth from Carnduff 

regarding: why are you so strict on rifles?  Why not do 

something about knives? 

 

And the other one from Zelma Deg from Gravelbourg: why 

does the Justice minister not hire investigators to look into 

cases before taxpayers' dollars are spent on court cases that are 

costly? 

 

I have a feeling I may have asked this the last time and I just 

wanted to be clear whether or not I had so that . . . because I 

forgot to stroke it off as having already been 

asked.  But to make sure that I didn't leave someone's question 

unanswered, I just bring that to your attention. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- These questions sound familiar, Mr. 

Chair, so I think we've answered them.  But let me answer them 

in any event, just in case, and let us hope . . . let's hope that my 

answers are similar. 

 

So far as knives are concerned, the danger is obvious.  And 

there have been assaults with knives, with most unfortunate 

results, and it is a difficult area to do anything about.  There are 

provisions in the Criminal Code now that cover certain kinds of 

knives, and beyond that I'm not sure where we can go. 

 

It isn't the kind of weapon that lends itself to the kind of 

controls that we have seen the federal government put on guns.  

As my deputy has just said, we can't require a steak knife 

acquisition certificate.  So there's some limits to what we can 

do in that area.  But it is of great concern and the police forces 

in this province do the best that they can in those 

circumstances. 

 

So far as the question of investigator looking into cases before 

charges are laid, this is what the police forces do.  They 

investigate crimes, and at the end of the investigation they 

weigh up their evidence, and decide whether or not a charge 

should be laid.  In the ordinary course it then comes to the 

department for prosecution and presumably the matter has been 

investigated thoroughly. 

 

Just because a case is subsequently dismissed doesn't mean that 

the investigation was deficient or that it ought to be criticized.  

The member will know that everyone in this country is 

presumed innocent until proven guilty beyond a reasonable 

doubt and the evidence is normally given verbally by people 

who are called as witnesses. 

 

Sometimes that evidence holds up.  Sometimes -- particularly 

under skilled cross-examination -- it doesn't hold up. And it's 

almost impossible to predict how it's going to come out in 

terms of the quality of the evidence and the integrity of the 

evidence.  And therefore dismissals may happen in cases where 

the prosecutor is practically certain of obtaining a conviction.  

And there's no way that you can predict that in advance. 

 

But in answer to the question that the member raised, that's 

what the police forces in this province are for: to conduct 

precisely those kind of investigations. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, a couple 

questions and they're relating to questions that have actually 

been raised in question period, and on a number of occasions, 

and my colleague from Rosthern as well has raised the 

question.  It's regarding the Martensville case and you're quite 

well aware of it.  And of course, Mr. Minister, we're aware of 

the fact that no one is really satisfied regarding the case.  I 

would suggest the parents aren't happy with what's happened.  

The individuals who were convicted and tried aren't happy with 

what transpired in the case. 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

There's a lot of uncertainties as to whether the police did a 

proper and thorough investigation; whether the prosecutors 

handled the case well.  Just so many questions that were left 

unanswered to the tune . . . And as I look over just some of the 

headlines and some of the information that has come out, I also 

note that in one of the arguments I think you've given for the 

fact that you didn't feel a review was necessary, it was we've 

got a substantial cost already, and to add to that cost may not 

necessarily answer a lot of the questions that are out there. 

 

And I can also respect the fact that to do an inquiry and to 

really open up the doors, the children right now who are in a 

situation of having faced some very traumatic circumstances as 

they testified before the court regarding the incidents and the 

allegations that were brought forward, faced a lot of trauma and 

a lot of challenge in their lives. And their lives certainly were 

disrupted, and to have another inquiry possibly just increases 

that. 

 

(2115) 

 

But, Mr. Minister, as I indicated just at the beginning of my 

remarks, there are a lot of questions unanswered, a lot of 

questions that are still outstanding, and a lot of people that are 

very concerned.  And I'm wondering what your department has 

done to try to alleviate some of the concerns; what the 

department has learned from this particular case as far as, 

should it face another similar type of circumstance.  And as 

we're well aware, we've just passed the victims of violence 

legislation earlier on this evening and no doubt at the end of the 

day we may even see some court challenges regarding that 

legislation as people come forward with some of the abusive 

situations they've been under. 

 

And it would seem to me that whether people are satisfied or 

not, there certainly are a number of questions and a number of 

observations that have probably been made and I'd wonder if 

you would just take a moment to explain to the House and to 

the people of the province what the Justice department has 

seen, what avenues they feel they could serve better.  And in 

view of the fact that I believe the Crown was really not brought 

in until a little later date, or the provincial Justice department 

wasn't really involved right off the bat, so it makes it difficult 

after the fact as well.  So maybe you could give us some of 

your observations regarding this whole scenario, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This was, I think, the longest criminal 

trial in Saskatchewan's history, and a very, very difficult trial 

because of the age of some of the witnesses, and a very 

emotional trial because of the circumstances of the town of 

Martensville and the fact that so many people in the town knew 

the families of the children and knew the accused.  And it 

created a very, very difficult situation, and I don't have to tell 

the member or any member of this Assembly about that 

because we all felt it in various ways. 

These kinds of trials, where the allegation is so serious, so 

shocking, elicit strong reactions.  That's normal, that's natural. 

 

And the reaction is on both sides, the people who sympathize 

with the children, and on the other hand, the people who 

sympathize with the accused.  And each side has strong 

feelings, and the member has heard from both those sides, as 

we all have. 

 

And it makes for a tough situation.  And it's tough if there's a 

conviction and there's tough if there's an acquittal.  And as we 

have learned in the Martensville situation, it is tough when 

there is both a conviction and an acquittal.  And we have taken 

the heat on that from both sides, and all of us have heard those 

criticisms. 

 

It has, as is so very often the case, raised questions about the 

functioning of the justice system, and I understand that.  These 

cases always seem to do that.  And as in any complex and long 

case, ably defended as this was, there will be holes poked in the 

Crown's case for one reason or another, and criticisms that flow 

from the defects or alleged defects in the investigation or in the 

kind of evidence that was put forward. 

 

And that's, and it's tough to say it, but that's normal in this kind 

of a case, for one side or the other to level criticisms on that 

basis.  And in this case, doubly so because both sides are 

critical.  There was a great outpouring of sympathy for the 

children; there was also a great outpouring of criticism of the 

system from those who felt that the charges should not have 

been brought. 

 

Well, there we are.  We have a system that presumes that 

everyone that is charged with an offence is not guilty -- is 

innocent until they're proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt 

before a jury.  And that's what occurred here. 

 

It is the obligation of our prosecutors to place before the jury, 

in an objective, dispassionate way, all of the evidence, and they 

did that.  And it is the right of the accused persons to be 

represented by counsel, as they were, and to test that evidence 

by cross-examination and by calling other evidence, and they 

did that. 

 

And at the end of the day it was for a jury of 12 -- in this case 

11 eventually -- plain, ordinary folk to listen to all of that 

evidence and to come to a conclusion about guilt or innocence.  

And they in fact came to both conclusions.  They came to the 

conclusion that one of the defendants, one of the accused was 

guilty on a number of counts, and the two other defendants not 

guilty. 

 

Now you can look at that situation and say the system has 

worked as it was designed to work.  The member will know 

when I use those terms that the system wasn't so much 

designed as it evolved over centuries of experience in the 

United Kingdom and more recently in Canada.  And it has 

resulted in a system that by and large serves us fairly well. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

But it is not a perfect system, and it's not a perfect system 

because at the end of the day you have to rely upon evidence 

that can be called into court and offered to a jury.  And that's 

about the only way you have of dealing with these crimes.  

There is not a video camera working while these alleged 

offences are being committed, so you can't prove something in 

the sense that you could produce a video. 

 

Nor are these the kind of crimes that are committed with 

witnesses around.  So an allegation can't be normally proven by 

the evidence of some third person.  You are left then with the 

evidence of little children.  In this case there has been criticism 

of the investigation. 

 

I don't comment on that, nor does the member, because we're 

both aware of the fact that the investigation itself was a major 

issue during this long trial, and that this same jury heard 

evidence day after day, week after week, practically month 

after month, on how the investigation was conducted.  And that 

evidence no doubt assisted them in making the determinations 

that they made. 

 

We don't know what makes a jury come to the decision it 

comes to because their deliberations are held in secret and there 

is no way that we can find out just what went on, nor should 

we.  We are simply interested in what is the view of these 11 

ordinary citizens on the basis of all of the evidence that they've 

heard.  They're in the best position of any of us to determine 

whether there is guilt or whether there is innocence. 

 

All we know about the case is what we read in the newspapers, 

and all we know about the case was less than normal here 

because of the publication ban.  So in effect we didn't know 

what was happening in the courtroom, but the jury did, and the 

jury came to the conclusion that it came to.  And I think that we 

simply must accept it.  Now having said that, I think we must 

learn from it. 

 

I have said before, and I say again here tonight, that our system 

of justice really doesn't have very much experience dealing 

with allegations of abuse of young children; we really don't.  

Notwithstanding that young children have no doubt been 

abused for heaven knows how long, our system does not have a 

great deal of experience in dealing with those crimes. 

 

There are a number of reasons for that.  It wasn't too long ago 

that the court just wouldn't accept the evidence of a young child 

without substantial corroboration of that evidence by some 

independent evidence that would corroborate what the child 

said.  Well that, of course, made many of these cases 

impossible to prosecute, and it isn't until recently that 

parliament shaped up that area of the law and we now are 

seeing some of these cases going to trial. 

 

We're learning -- and this is most important, Mr. Chair -- how 

to handle the evidence of children.  There was a great deal of 

reported . . . a large number 

of reports in the papers about the way in which that evidence 

had been handled, and we all learned from that, including 

officials in my own department, as to how it could be done 

better to ensure that the evidence of young children is not 

compromised, is not dealt with in such a way that later at the 

trial someone will poke holes in the evidence and create 

confusion and create doubt where there ought not to be any. 

 

So we've learned a fair bit from the Martensville trial about 

how to handle the evidence of young children so that 

investigating officers, and indeed prosecutors, don't 

compromise the evidence of the children unwittingly.  Just to 

make it clear what I'm talking about -- for example, questioning 

a child using leading questions, or suggesting the answer in 

your question, or trying to lead the children's evidence into 

particular paths.  I don't know whether that happened in this 

case but it certainly is one of the criticisms that I've heard 

since.  So I think the important legacy of Martensville is that 

we've learned a lot. 

 

And indeed in the child action plan announcements and the 

discussion in this House, I talked about the creation of a special 

investigation unit to deal with the evidence of young children, 

the creation of a children's house where we could . . . where 

young children who had this kind of unfortunate experience 

could come and spend time with a team of professionals who 

would know how to deal with that child and who would start 

the process of healing the child.  And in the course of that, take 

the evidence down and preserve the evidence and ensure that it 

was dealt with in a way that didn't compromise that evidence, 

so that the evidence could be received in court without the kind 

of criticisms that we heard in the Martensville case. 

 

I think that's an important thing to do.  I have . . . I'm optimistic 

that that is going to make a difference.  That special unit in that 

special facility will avoid some of the pitfalls that were 

apparent in the Martensville case. 

 

Now I have said that we will not have a public inquiry because 

that's about the first thing people asked for the very day of the 

jury's decision.  They wanted an inquiry.  My response is that 

we had just finished the most intensive kind of an inquiry 

before the jury.  And every aspect of the investigation had been 

questioned most thoroughly of all of the people who had been 

involved in the investigation.  So I didn't understand what there 

was left to inquire into.  And I still don't. 

 

I do, however, try to maintain a flexible attitude towards the 

situation.  And for that reason, with respect to the petition that 

was brought to this House on a day when I unfortunately wasn't 

here -- I had been saying publicly for some time that I wanted 

to meet with those petitioners so that I could hear them and I 

could deal with their request and I could explain what my own 

thought processes were on this question.  I was absent that day 

on a commitment that had been made weeks in advance. 

 

My office has been in touch with Ms. Dalton on a 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

number of occasions trying to set up an early meeting date in 

Saskatoon, and I think that we will accomplish that by about 

the end of this month -- within the next two or three weeks, I 

think.  And I'm looking forward to that meeting because these 

are very, very concerned, very sincere, very well-meaning 

people with a very strong viewpoint on these questions.  And I 

want to hear it out. 

 

And I want them to hear my answers, or my thinking.  And 

we'll reason together and see what we can come up with.  I'd 

like to tell them some of the things that we are going to do and 

get their reaction to that and get any suggestions about other 

things that we should do. 

 

But I certainly take it seriously and as I sit down I want to 

repeat that I certainly understand the depth of the emotions that 

surround this unfortunate case and my sympathy to the people 

who are upset by it. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, when it 

comes to sexual abuse cases, and allegations of sexual abuse, it 

seems that there probably should be some safeguards in place 

as to how the whole process is conducted.  I know that you 

have referred to the fact that we've read things in the paper 

regarding the whole Martensville case. 

 

And we certainly were aware of the fact that were some 

suggestions made that through the investigation there was 

interrogation of children, or trying to derive information to the 

point that children were in a room being asked questions and 

became so frustrated one child was supposed to have said, well 

at the end just so he could get out and play, he was getting tired 

of the question, finally said okay yes, this is what took place, 

basically almost as was indicated by the media through leading 

questions. 

 

I think that's something of major concern, Mr. Minister, 

because it seems to me even . . . I'm not sure if it was just the 

other day I caught an article talking about some proposed 

changes to the sex education in schools and some of the 

education that will be brought forward through the health 

program to talk about sexual problems, sexually related 

problems, and what have you. 

 

And I'm concerned, Mr. Minister, based on the fact that for 

young children, I think young children can easily be 

manipulated as well and depending on who is presenting the 

information, who is presenting the . . . seen as the teacher or 

sharing the information, trying to put forward that information, 

a young child could make a comment about something that 

happened in the home that may have not even be related to 

some kind of foul play type of format. 

 

But the concern I have is what safeguards do we have that we 

really are legitimately dealing with situations of actual sexual 

abuse rather than a person just . . . well say for example your 

daughter walks by and you pat her on the backside.  And the 

way we're getting to nowadays you almost don't want to reach 

out and hug 

your daughter or your son in case it's going to be termed as 

something aggressive versus something done in a loving 

manner out of fun as you enjoy your children. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that we need some safeguards in 

place as well to protect people from being falsely accused 

while at the same time trying to determine what is actual sexual 

misconduct.  And I wonder where the department is in trying to 

raise some of those concerns and set out some guidelines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member, Mr. Chair, has raised a 

matter of obvious public concern.  We read magazine and 

newspaper articles on this subject, and see it canvassed in 

television documentaries and reports, and it is something that 

the whole justice system is concerned about. 

 

On the one hand, the abuse of children, particularly sexual 

abuse, is I think the most horrifying of crimes.  On the other 

hand, the whole system has for centuries been solicitous, has 

been concerned about the possible innocence of people who are 

alleged to have committed an offence, to the point where the 

system has created the presumption of innocence.  And 

therefore for the justice system to convict someone, it is 

necessary for us to prove their guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. 

 

So it is a point of obvious concern and concerns this 

Department of Justice as much as it concerns anyone because 

our people here make the decisions about prosecuting or not 

prosecuting, about appealing or not appealing, and they have to 

take into account some of the matters that the member has 

raised. 

 

To return to the special investigation unit for young children 

that I was referring to earlier, I believe that there is an idea that 

will in the long run provide some comfort in this area, because 

the people involved in this unit will have special training and 

special skills to equip them to handle this evidence in the most 

appropriate ways.  These are highly trained, highly professional 

people and they will, I'm confident, be able to deal with this 

evidence and to handle it in such a way that some of the 

problems that the member has raised won't be such problems.  

And the system will work with a large measure of confidence 

as a result of this special effort.  That is my hope and I'm 

optimistic that we'll make a lot of progress as a result of that 

idea. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, another 

area of concern that really affects people and is coming to the 

forefront even more in the last few days is the Young Offenders 

Act.  The other day, I believe it was on the weekend if I'm not 

mistaken -- Friday or Saturday, I just don't remember -- but 

there was an individual, I believe in the city of Regina, an 

individual who was tried and convicted and there was some 

accusations of sexual molestation.  There were other 

accusations of physical assault.  One of the, if I'm not mistaken 

. . . here again I'm going based on media reports -- I believe one 

was a child complained about spankings in the home. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

Mr. Minister, what I'm beginning to wonder about our whole 

system, when it comes to giving some correction and direction, 

is where we're headed.  Just last night I happened to catch the 

news and there's a gentleman on who was confronted just on 

Wascana . . . or in Wascana View, driving a vehicle, was 

confronted.  One vehicle cut him off, another vehicle beside, 

and then they started knocking the windows out.  And he said 

he was almost sure that had another. . . not a second vehicle 

happened to drive up or be driving up, that the individuals 

might have hurt him physically. 

 

He didn't indicate how old they were but the indication was it 

was some young people.  I'm not exactly sure what was up.  

But it seems to me there's a real failure in our whole system.  

And I come back and that's why I talk about discipline.  I've 

been taught that there's a place for discipline in the home.  I've 

been taught on the Biblical principles that you train up a child 

in the way he should go and when he's old he'll not depart from 

it.  Give him some leadership. 

 

There's also a Biblical principle that says you spare the rod and 

spoil the child.  Now some people would say well if you talk 

about the rod, the rod that comes to their mind is some kind of 

a steel prod or whatever.  Certainly I don't believe that's what 

the Biblical writer was talking about at that time. 

 

But I think what we see, Mr. Minister, and I read another article 

recently where it was Warren Allmand's, basically it was his 

idea to start changing the Act, and becoming a little more 

lenient and suggesting rather than applying discipline in the 

home or applying discipline in the schools.  And I think even if 

you talk to a lot of teachers across this province they're at a 

position of not really knowing what to do or how to deal with 

children in their classrooms who are misconducting 

themselves, and children who are just being disobedient and 

disruptive in the classroom.  They don't know what to do 

because they dare not lay a hand on them in case that child 

would accuse them of physically assaulting them. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, when we look at what's happening with 

the young offenders and we see how . . . And I go to this 

incident in Edmonton.  This 36-year-old mother so savagely 

stabbed to death in her home by three young offenders who 

happened to break in.  Something is wrong with our society. 

 

And I would suggest part of the problem with our society and 

part of the problem with young people today is that they have 

no real direction.  They haven't been given direction.  They 

haven't been shown leadership in the home, and possibly that 

leadership hasn't come about because parents haven't been there 

to give it. 

 

We've been so busy building for ourselves.  Both the husband 

and wife have jobs and they're in and out late.  The child comes 

home and there's nobody at home to give direction.  They come 

home and after supper you're gone again on another errand.  

You don't take the time to give some direction.  And even 

through their own lives, through maybe abusive situations, 

maybe alcohol related situations . . .  

 

And I would even suggest, as we've seen in the paper today, 

Mr. Eisler's column talking about VLTs (video lottery terminal) 

and this bar manager in the Black Bear Inn and Blaine Walsh 

when he was talking about the problems that affected him 

regarding VLTs and how he became addicted to video lotteries 

and the situation he relates of an individual, a gentleman who 

had spent a thousand dollars in two days.  I would suggest 

there's going to be some major problems in homes even related 

to gambling as people spend their money foolishly and come 

home and there's nothing to meet the basic needs. 

 

Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that while we're trying to 

attack the problem with young offenders, maybe we have to 

look back to the homes.  Maybe we have to give families or 

encourage families to take some leadership, parents to accept 

some of the responsibility.  Give them that ability to show 

responsibility. 

 

And when I talk about discipline . . . And I've known what it 

was to be corrected by my parents when I disobeyed them, and 

it certainly wasn't just a tongue-lashing or . . . but I had the rod 

of discipline applied as well.  And maybe we've all . . . the 

older generation may have had that opportunity.  But, Mr. 

Minister, I think there's a place for parents to give some 

direction, to set an example. 

 

There's a place for governments to set an example.  We won't 

go into the court Act, but there's a place for governments to set 

an example, ministers to set examples.  And if we're going to 

attack the whole situation of the young offenders, I think we do 

need something in our court system that means something.  

That applies where . . . If a person is charged with a 

wrongdoing, be they a young offender or whoever they are, 

there must be some penalties that mean something so that at the 

end of the day that individual and other individuals know that if 

they commit an offence that this is what's going to happen. 

 

I set up the guidelines in my home.  If my children disobey 

those guidelines, there are certain consequences.  And 

generally speaking, Mr. Minister . . . And it's interesting.  I 

went home one weekend and my wife said to me, the boys had 

been misbehaving.  And she said, well I'm going to tell your 

dad.  Don't tell Dad; don't tell Dad.  They knew what the limits 

were and I think we've gone past that.  We've forgot that.  

Certainly there's a place for hugging, as Warren Allmand talked 

about -- hugging and showing love and showing concern -- but 

there's also a place when you're showing love and concern, 

where you set some guidelines and you apply some discipline 

because you do it out of love. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, when we're dealing with the Young 

Offenders Act, we've got to start in the home but as well, 

because we have so many homes that do not have the ability to 

give some direction, we also must take some initiative to apply 

some meaningful 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

principles of justice -- and whatever the convictions might be, 

that there's some meaningful charges, and not only charges, but 

the ability for the justice system to hand out meaningful 

sentences. 

 

And I know that the Young Offenders Act comes under the 

federal legislation, but I also noticed last night on TV . . . I 

happened to catch the federal House and I believe it was a 

Reform member was asking the minister what he was going to 

do about the young offenders question.  He indicated that he 

sent out notices to all the provincial Justice ministers asking for 

information, I believe . . . I'm not even . . . I just didn't catch it 

all whether it's a meeting as well to address this issue. 

 

But I'd like to know what your office is doing, what the 

department is doing, to address some of these concerns, and as 

well -- not just saying that it's the government that has to do it 

all -- but are we doing something to relay to parents and to even 

give educators in the school system an ability to give some 

direction in the whole training process starting from a young 

child right through till they're out of school and on their own?  

Is there any of that format being adopted so that we're not 

interfering but we're in fact encouraging people to take some 

leadership? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member 

that our society is . . . I think what he's saying is that our 

society is not doing a very good job of raising our kids, and the 

statistics are available that would bear this out, although on the 

other side of the equation the incidence of crime committed by 

youth has not been rising.  It seems like it has, but if I'm correct 

in my understanding it is a flat kind of a situation.  But I don't 

want to dwell on that.  I want to just pick up and agree with 

some of the points that the member has made. 

 

(2145) 

 

Perhaps what we lack in our society is teaching people how to 

be parents.  That's what the member was referring to in part of 

his remarks, saying that we have to take some responsibility 

and we have to show some leadership, and I think that our 

society has this failing.  We don't spend much time teaching the 

people who are to become parents how parents should act, and 

so we have parents who ignore their children and the member 

referred to that. 

 

On the other hand we have parents who over-control their 

children and in so doing create resentments and hostilities 

which later break out and result in behaviour just as bad as the 

children who are being ignored.  So we've got parents making 

all kinds of mistakes out there and not giving their children a 

chance to grow up in the mainstream of society and enjoy what 

we would call a normal life. 

 

The young offender system and the justice system catches all of 

these shortcomings.  We don't create them.  Society itself 

creates them.  But they result in situations that wind up in the 

justice system and have to be dealt with.  And by the time it 

reaches that stage, 

very often the offenders are quite far gone, and they are 

difficult to rehabilitate or reform. 

 

The whole idea of the young offender approach, and before that 

the juvenile delinquent approach, was that it is . . . I mean 

crime must be noticed and must be dealt with in an appropriate 

way, but you just can't give up on the little kids.  So you can't 

send them off to jail with hardened criminals for long periods 

of time and expect to get anything back.  You've got to deal 

with them in a way that's appropriate considering their age and 

circumstance.  The young offender system tries to respond to 

that. 

 

Now it receives a set-back every month or two when some 

horrific crime is committed by some psychopath who happens 

to be of young offender age.  And then we ask ourselves, my 

goodness, what's happening to our society?  How will we deal 

with this crime?  We're not tough enough on these kids.  And in 

those cases we probably aren't.  And yet at the same time we 

would not want to give up on a 14-year-old who has committed 

one break and enter or a number of break and enters.  We have 

to have the hope that that child can be reformed, that somehow 

the system can grab hold of that child and put that child on the 

right path. 

 

I'm optimistic about that and I'll tell you why.  In aboriginal 

communities in this province and elsewhere, where they have 

these problems in spades, if you look at the statistics, they are 

making rapid and dramatic progress in dealing with these 

troubled children.  And they're doing it by involving their 

communities in ways that have been described in this House in 

the debate over the healing circles by the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, where the sentencing circles and the 

healing circles got the whole community involved in the 

situation and really made progress in setting the children upon 

a right path. 

 

Now if that's possible in our aboriginal communities in 

Saskatchewan, it should be possible in the larger society.  As I 

have said before, I think we have much to learn from some of 

these developments that are taking place in aboriginal country.  

And for that reason I'm optimistic.  I think that it's not a 

hopeless situation at all. 

 

Now changes are afoot across the country.  The Justice 

ministers and their officials have been working on a number of 

ideas with respect to the Young Offenders Act.  The Young 

Offenders Act has a lot of critics and those criticisms have been 

collected and the officials have been working on them.  And 

the ministers meet regularly and review this work and give 

further direction.  I think we're making progress.  

Saskatchewan is fully involved in this.  There is not a 

unanimity about what should be done across the country, but 

there are a number of ideas that I think are going to see their 

way into legislation soon at the federal level. 

 

When the federal minister was here in Saskatchewan in late 

April we discussed a number of ideas.  He told me some of the 

things he was thinking about.  I 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

indicated support for some of those reforms.  He indicated that 

he was prepared to act on some of the concerns that we have.  

So there are changes happening, and I think that Canada will be 

responsive to those changes and will find them beneficial. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Certainly the 

family of this 36-year-old mother of two in Edmonton may not 

think the changes came quickly enough.  And there's no doubt 

that I think we're going to have to look at some forms of 

punishment that address the seriousness of the crime. 

 

Mr. Minister, you may not have caught the news -- I think it 

was mid . . . last week -- where there was an 11-year-old in 

Vancouver whose parents have basically given up on him; he'd 

stolen 30 vehicles.  He was like a kleptomaniac at getting in 

vehicles, and the family had asked the police to come and arrest 

him and put him in jail already because they couldn't really 

stop him.  He'd just get in, and he'd take off with these vehicles. 

The last one, well I guess he's banged up a few, but this one he 

went through a red light and fortunately no one was killed. 

 

And it seems, Mr. Minister, that sometimes some teenagers 

may need some shock treatment.  I heard of one case where a 

group of individuals were dealing with some young offenders, 

and it just seemed they weren't getting anywhere, and so they 

had made arrangements to take them into a federal penitentiary 

and to talk with some very, I guess, long-time convicts.  And 

they took them into the prison, and they took them into that 

environment, and basically they had a half a dozen inmates 

come and talk to them about conditions and the prison system.  

And needless to say, they basically asked the inmates not to bar 

anything from them of what some of the things that take place 

which I think aren't worth discussing in this House.  It's 

certainly something that, for a prison system, it's hard to 

describe, but I guess when people are put behind . . . 

incarcerated for a number of years, you get to a point where 

you almost would do anything. 

 

And the bottom line was these teenagers left with a dramatic 

impact of what prison life was like.  I guess the impact it had 

was a shock to their systems to the point that they decided 

maybe they better do something to try and correct themselves 

and to correct their lives.  So I think, Mr. Minister, we need 

some meaningful laws, and we need some meaningful 

penalties. 

 

And when I say that, Mr. Minister, I also want to bring to your 

attention an incident that took place in my community just this 

past winter, where an individual who happens to farm outside 

of one of the small communities -- but because he resides in 

about six miles in the community, six miles away from the 

community -- had gone out to his farm, and his fuel tanks were 

chained and locked, and he noticed the chains were off on his 

fuel tanks.  So he went to investigate.  He had his tanks filled 

up in the fall and, lo and behold, his tank was half empty of 

gasoline.  So he got the local retailer to come out and deliver 

some 

fuel.  And there was something roughly in the neighbourhood 

of 65 gallons of fuel was put into this tank, and he locked it all 

up again. 

 

Two weeks later he went out.  It just so happened that we had 

had a new snowfall a couple days before, and lo and behold, 

there are tire tracks up to that fuel tank and the lock was again 

cut.  And he checked and sure enough the tank was down 

again, so he called the retailer out.  In the meantime he put 

some plywood over these tire tracks and he called the RCMP 

out to investigate.  And they actually put in about 75 gallons 

worth of fuel into the tank to replenish what was lost. 

 

The RCMP came out, they took pictures of the tire tracks, and 

basically they shrugged their shoulders and said, there's 

probably not a lot we can do.  Well he wouldn't accept that, so 

he took the pictures and he started kind of . . . he went around 

the school and he went around the rink, and lo and behold, if he 

didn't find out which vehicles matched up the tire tracks.  He 

confronted . . . he waited for the individuals to come out -- they 

were young offenders.  He confronted them and they actually 

indicated, yes, we were out there and yes, we helped ourselves 

to some of your gas.  Well the RCMP came out, they did an 

investigation.  Just from his own records it showed that there 

was roughly 150 gallons of fuel had been stolen from his 

property besides the tank being broken into. 

 

Through the process of the justice system and the arguments, 

the children were . . . or these young offenders were charged 

with I believe it was possession of stolen property.  They went 

to court.  The last I heard the lawyers have basically argued 

down between themselves that maybe -- maybe -- 50 gallons of 

fuel had been taken.  And the RCMP finally said to the 

individual, you may as well forget it; from what we see here it's 

all circumstantial evidence.  We're going to go to court; it's 

going to get thrown out; we're going to lose.  There's no sense 

in us wasting our time any longer dealing with this case.  And 

on top of it, even if we did win, you wouldn't get your gas 

replaced.  You wouldn't get paid for that. 

 

So what does a person do?  What does that say about our 

system?  When the individual himself went to a lot of work 

trying to determine who . . . and the kids involved themselves 

actually admitted being out there, actually admitted taking the 

fuel, and yet at the end of the day they're walking away from it.  

So if they've done it once, Mr. Minister, it seems to me in this 

case they didn't even get a slap on the wrist.  If they've done it 

once, what's it going to say to them?  Next time we can do it 

again because we'll find a lawyer who can argue our way 

around it. 

 

I would think even as I've seen here, the local police force are 

becoming so frustrated trying to investigate matters of this 

nature because they go to all that work only to get to court and 

find out at the end of the day that lawyers have been able to sit 

down and argue back and forth to the point that there's nothing 

left to stand up in court, and no one has to answer for it. 

 

So how do we set up some guidelines that say our 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

justice system is going to operate so that people themselves 

aren't always the victims?  In this case, this individual is out 

150 gallons of fuel at roughly 2.50 a gallon.  That's in the 

neighbourhood of almost $400, 350 or $400.  Any one of us 

losing that amount, that's a substantial sum of money to be out, 

Mr. Minister, and I think we're sending the wrong message 

when even the police have a hard time going to court with any 

kind of evidence. 

 

And I guess the other case right in front of us is the smuggling 

case with cigarettes here in Saskatchewan where the judge has 

basically indicated he's not going to turn his court into a 

collection agency.  I think, Mr. Minister, we're sending the 

wrong message. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The justice system, Mr. Chair, is just not 

set up to put people in a position where they have to take 

responsibility.  It is not any kind of an inquisitorial system 

where the court's trying to draw out the evidence or 

determination about who did it. 

 

The system in effect in this country and in this Commonwealth 

system for centuries has focused on the accused and has said 

that if the accused is charged with an offence, that accused is 

presumed innocent until proven guilty. 

 

And it is a system with obvious shortcomings.  We consider 

them to be important, you and I and all members of this House, 

because it is a foundation of our rights as citizens of this 

country, and it's important that it be so because we ought not to 

be punished for crimes that we did not commit, and that's 

fundamental.  So our protection is that in order to be punished 

for an alleged crime, we have to be proven guilty of that crime 

beyond a reasonable doubt.  Now I know that I'm saying things 

that the member knows, but it's well to remind ourself of that 

every once in a while. 

 

It leads to situations such as the one that the member told the 

House about where the farmer loses 150 gallons of gas, and the 

farmer knows who did it.  But when you get to the courtroom 

and get down to the strict rules of evidence and the 

presumption of innocence and the need to prove guilt beyond a 

reasonable doubt, you start running into problems.  Those 

young people who are charged are entitled to due process just 

as would you or I if we were charged with a criminal offence.  

And it is the way that we want it to be because it is the bedrock 

of our web of rights that we all enjoy as citizens of this country. 

 

(2200) 

 

If we were to change it, we would be launching upon the most 

radical sort of changes to the very nature of our society.  If we 

were to say that people were not presumed innocent, that itself 

would be a revolutionary idea to impose upon this country.  I 

for myself am content with the presumption of innocence.  I 

think it has served the common law system well, and we should 

continue with it.  And indeed our constitution is built around 

that idea, as least as far as the charter of rights is concerned.  

Better 

that any number of guilty people walk free than that one 

innocent person be punished by imprisonment or otherwise. 

 

Now that leads to all kinds of unfortunate results, and it is 

frustrating to the police, and it is frustrating to the prosecutors.  

Although I want to say this to the member, of the contested 

cases that we have in this province -- that is where the accused 

enters a plea of not guilty and there is a trial -- the accused are 

convicted about 80 per cent of the time.  So four out of five 

cases there is a conviction.  By the same token, one out of five, 

there is an acquittal.  And that is just a result of the 

presumption of innocence and the strict rules of evidence that 

surround criminal trials. 

 

I know that it creates controversy, and the member cites the 

situation that obviously created controversy, and everybody can 

understand why.  But yet in its fundamentals, I think we have 

to carry on as we have with the kind of due process rules that 

we have in our system.  Everyone in the system has to act with 

integrity.  Everyone in the system has to do their job.  But at 

the end of the day, considering all cases, I think we are well 

served. 

 

Now we're trying other things.  We're trying mediation, we're 

trying diversions, and where all situations don't have to be dealt 

with through criminal charges and proceedings in court, but 

you can find a solution.  Perhaps in the one that you mentioned, 

if those two accused, those two youngsters and the farmer 

could have been gotten together in a room and talked about it, 

there may have been a solution found that wouldn't involve 

anybody being charged with anything but yet would have 

involved those youngsters paying back the farmer for the 150 

gallons of gas by working it off, or by paying it off over time, 

or providing services for the farmer, and apologies, and all the 

sorts of things that you can have. 

 

And again I cite the sentencing circles that were the subject of 

debate in which the member participated just the other day.  

There is hope on the horizon that there are other ways of 

dealing with these things.  But within the criminal law system, 

although we are subject to criticism from time to time, we -- 

and understand why -- I think we're still well served by this 

system that we have had for so long in this country. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, 

unfortunately it seems, as in the scenario that I just laid out for 

you though, that we've created a system whereby we've given 

an open door for lawyers to build up their coffers through the 

court process.  I think there was, in this situation where the 

farmer with the police had confronted the individuals and the 

individuals had indicated yes, they had indeed taken this fuel, 

and yes, they possibly took this amount because they indicated 

they had a slip tank that they had also put fuel in.  So if it was 

just the vehicle you might question the amount. 

 

And you talked about the mediation process.  And I'm not 

exactly sure what form that it ended up, where you 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

ended up with lawyers and it going to court, but it seems to me 

it would have been the appropriate forum that would have 

allowed a process of mediation to take place. 

 

But certainly I know that the local community is frustrated with 

how it was handled.  The local RCMP are somewhat frustrated 

with the investigation, the fact that the individual went to a fair 

bit of work and at the end of the day all the work that they had 

was basically dismissed.  They just said it wasn't really worth 

the process of going to court any more. 

 

Sometimes I wonder, Mr. Minister, how much we actually 

spent on court cases that maybe we could resolve outside of the 

courtroom.  Maybe there is more of a . . . If there was a little 

more responsibility put on people for their actions if a person 

was proven guilty. 

 

One example.  I think a prime example is the whole court case 

that was surrounding the Alameda-Rafferty dam project.  I 

don't know how many times that went to court -- whether it 

ended up in court about three times, if I'm not mistaken.  And if 

I'm not mistaken as well, on every occasion the plaintiffs were 

voted against by the court. 

 

And yet the court all relayed the cost of those proceedings to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  No onus was put on the 

individuals involved, Mr. Minister, to have to show . . . or to 

have some responsibility in the cost of the court case.  They 

could keep appealing the process because they didn't have to 

account for it.  They didn't have to put anything out on that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And I think even if people . . . whether people are going to 

accuse someone of a wrongdoing, Mr. Minister, at the end of 

the day if the courts would find that it was a false accusation 

and some onus was put on the individual to at least be 

somewhat responsible even in costs of court cases, we may find 

that people wouldn't be going to court as much as we see 

nowadays because they would rethink the fact . . . the 

accusation that they may be putting forward.  Whether it's 

against the young offender or whether it's someone making an 

accusation in anger or jest, Mr. Minister, I think those are some 

areas that we need to certainly address, and that's what I talk 

about when I talk about responsible attitudes in the court 

system. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'd like to get on to a question here that arises, 

and it comes back to the mediation process and the mediation 

legislation.  One of the major concerns regarding The 

Matrimonial Property Act . . . and it's again relating to another 

circumstance that was brought to my attention.  I've discussed 

the matter with you.  I've discussed the matter with some of 

your officials, and I appreciate their comments.  I'm not sure 

exactly where we end up at the end of the day. 

 

But one of the major concerns is what is identified as property 

to be included in a divorce settlement.  Mr. Minister, when we 

do . . . Is an inheritance that's passed on from a parent to a son 

or daughter, would that or should that become part of an 

inheritance or a  

marital settlement?  Who does an evaluation of property, Mr. 

Minister?  In the case I've brought forward, as I've gone 

through the report, it seems that the plaintiff and the accused or 

the . . . well both parties, the husband and the wife each did 

their own evaluations of what they observed or felt the property 

was valued at at the end of the day.  It appears to me by looking 

at the court documents that the wife's side of the evaluation was 

taken.  It would seem to be that a proper evaluation . . . the 

courts should've at least had an independent individual go out 

there and assess all the property the couple were involved in or 

owned and come up with an independent report as evaluation 

of the property, rather than just taking the one side or the other 

because you can expect the fact that the husband's going to 

have one view and the wife's going to have one view as to 

value of property. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, is the Department of Justice doing anything 

to address these concerns regarding whether inheritance should 

be part of a divorce settlement, whether that should be 

included, and whether or not we are going to look at 

establishing or asking the courts to make sure that when there's 

a conflict over valuation of property, that the court would apply 

for an independent individual to go out and assess the property 

and come up with an independent valuation of that property for 

matters relating to that divorce proceeding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want to say at the outset 

that I am not an expert at these matters.  It's been many, many 

years since I practised any family law.  But let me try and deal 

with the questions that the member put and then make a general 

comment about these kind of cases. 

 

It is my understanding that with respect to property that is 

inherited, the following are the rules. If it is clear from the will 

or from other evidence that the deceased intended the property 

to go to one of the marriage partners, if that were made clear 

that it go to one of the partners and not to the other, then that 

would be the result, and the court would so find.  If it were not 

clear that the deceased intended the property to go to one and 

not to the other, if there was ambiguity about that, then the 

court would presume that the property had been given to them 

both and the division would be 50/50.  Now I could be wrong 

but that's my understanding of the law. 

 

On the question of who evaluates, in the final analysis it is the 

court that evaluates, and the court will respond to evidence that 

is brought to it.  So that in a typical case where the husband and 

wife are really trying to kill each other in the courtroom 

through this litigation, they would each call their own experts 

who would give evidence of value which would be 

cross-examined by the other lawyer.  And at the end of the day 

the judge would choose between the evaluations and would 

attach a value to property.  Sometimes that makes both parties 

happy; sometimes it doesn't.  Most often, I think, it doesn't, but 

the court has to decide those questions in the final analysis.  I 

don't know that there is . . . well I just don't know.  I don't know 

whether the court has any capacity to 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

order a separate evaluation or not.  I think that I'm being 

advised that it does have that capacity, but I don't personally 

know. 

 

But here's what I want to say about these cases, and I say it 

from the perspective of . . . I had a law firm for many years in 

which some of my partners and associates practised family law, 

and my wife, Sandra, was active in the field of family law.  

And I learned this much, that the courtroom is not the place 

where they should be when they're working out these property 

questions.  Somehow the system has to encourage them in 

every way that it can to resolve these problems themselves. 

 

When I said a few seconds ago that the husband and wife are 

trying to kill each other in the courtroom, this is what I was 

referring to.  They go in there armed for battle and they just 

slash and hack and cut, and it has very little to do with the 

home quarter or the section or the combine or the bank account.  

It has a lot to do with their hostility to each other and they can't 

agree on anything. 

 

And what we're trying to do is to make some changes to the 

system that will help them to get into a discussion frame of 

mind where they can work these things out, so we have 

mediation, which the member has supported very strongly.  

And we have the Unified Family Court where you'll have 

special judges, specialized judges handling pre-trial 

proceedings where these things have a great chance of being 

worked out, and indeed handling trials where the judge can try 

and keep the heat down so it doesn't explode all over the place 

and really rupture the relationship and impact on families. 

 

As I said in my second reading speech on one of those Bills, 

these family law trials are not one-time events.  They live on 

and on and on and affect other people, and particularly the 

children of the unhappy couple. 

 

(2215) 

 

If we can find a way to make them less unhappy, to resolve 

their problems by negotiation and discussion rather than by 

litigation, that will impact in a good way I would think, as far 

as their children is concerned and their friends and their other 

family members, and create a more wholesome environment 

even though they may not be able to patch up their marriage. 

 

So I want to make the point with respect to The Matrimonial 

Property Act, I strongly believe those questions should be 

worked out and the system should do everything it can to 

encourage people to work out their matrimonial property 

questions and not take them into litigation before courts. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wholeheartedly 

agree with you because I think the court process certainly 

doesn't build for relationships, and maybe part of the problem, 

Mr. Minister, is just the way the whole process is set up.  

Maybe if there was a limitation, maybe if . . . and when I talk 

about limitations I talk to addressing the question that even 

limitation to what lawyers can receive at the end of the day, we 

might get on with the business of settling issues rather than 

dragging it out, because I think there are so many people, by 

the time the courts have finally settled the issue there is nothing 

left to divide.  It's already gone to third parties who have been 

involved in the issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this one case scenario, now you indicated if it 

was a will.  I believe in this one case the mother had actually 

passed the quarter on to the son prior to her passing away.  And 

that was a couple of years before she had been deceased. 

 

Another case that arose after the mother had passed away.  The 

father still had a half section in his name and he decided he'd 

pass on the land to his son.  There was a house in town and he 

thought, well to save the hassle of dividing and making a will 

and having this divided, I'll put my son's name.  But he was 

going to farm the land, but he had his son's name put on the 

title.  Well that all got dragged in, even though he's been 

actively farming and deriving the revenue.  So now the father's 

out a half a section. 

 

It just seems to me, Mr. Minister, I don't know what went 

wrong in the situation.  And I know the individual didn't help 

himself by the way he responded to the situation.  Some of the 

comments he made, he certainly didn't help himself. 

 

But there must be a way that a person can address . . . and we 

talked about the question.  I asked about an appeal.  And they 

did have an appeal.  Now I talked to a couple of lawyers since 

then regarding the appeal process, and they indicated to me that 

the appeal process should have at least listened to some 

evidence or some arguments for and against why the decision 

maybe should have been somewhat different than what it was. 

 

And as we discussed it, I think you had indicated at the time, 

the appeal process basically looks at the court documents and 

whether or not the proper legal procedures were followed rather 

than allowing the defendants to speak to the appeal judges.  

And in this case, when the defendants asked for an opportunity 

to address the issues and some of the inequities they saw in the 

original court case, they were told that no, they weren't able to 

do that. 

 

The result today, Mr. Minister, is a young man -- whether it's 

right or wrong and whether some of his actions were right or 

wrong -- is basically looking at losing a farm that he had pretty 

well paid for almost before he was married.  And part of the 

reason for that is the fact that he was able to buy land about 20 

years ago when it was fairly low.  When they had decided to 

split and the couple left, land prices were up, and now where 

land prices are today, based on the recommendations of the 

court, there's just no way he can come up with the type of 

money.  And it seems to me that even his wife has probably put 

out a fair bit in legal bills.  So what we're doing through 

mediation isn't really going to help them. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

What I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, is there another process, if a 

party feels that they haven't been heard properly, that they 

could refer it to another court rather than ending up . . . We've 

just had the same situation where they've gone a third time and 

guess what?  They ended up before the same judge and a judge 

that, it seems to me, has some biases when it comes to 

matrimonial property.  And I don't anticipate they're going to 

get anything favourable . . . even have been listened to. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister . . . Is there any way that the court 

system would at least allow in arguing this . . . I shouldn't really 

be arguing for it because if it goes through another court 

procedure there's probably definitely nothing left at the end of 

the day.  But what does a couple do in this situation?  What 

does a person do if they felt they haven't really been treated 

fairly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the answer to the member's 

question, in a word, is nothing.  All the court system is, so far 

as these kind of cases are concerned, is a dispute settlement 

mechanism, and it is a mechanism that tries to bring some final 

solution to a disagreement.  And it's very structured.  It 

provides for a certain pleading, certain documents to be 

exchanged, certain processes to have examinations of the other 

person before trial.  But at the end of the day a judge hears all 

the evidence and says to one of the parties, you win, and to the 

other party, you lose.  And that's it, subject to a right of appeal 

to the Court of Appeal. 

 

Now that sounds like a big deal but it's a limited idea because 

the Court of Appeal is only interested in acting with respect to 

errors of law and obvious oversights and that kind of mistake in 

the trial judge.  But they won't generally interfere with the trial 

judge's findings of fact.  So if a trial judge says, I believe one 

person and I don't believe the other one, then only very rarely 

will the Court of Appeal differ from that finding. 

 

And then having got there, there is, in a very, very small 

number of cases, an appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.  

The Supreme Court isn't interested in hearing many cases.  

They only hear about 75 a year, something like that.  And they 

want to hear cases of national importance involving important 

national principles. 

 

So they're not the sort of place where the person you were 

mentioning in your example could expect to go and receive a 

hearing, because his complaint is not that kind of an issue.  So 

in effect the Court of Appeal is the last resort.  Now if you lose 

there, forget it.  There's nothing.  You've lost. 

 

All the system does is do its best.  They're not infallible.  They 

will sometimes get it wrong.  But they are the mechanism that 

we have selected for finally resolving these disputes between 

citizens. And I can't think of a better one. 

 

Now we can find other ways of dealing with these disputes, and 

sort of make them go away, and I think 

that's something we should encourage and we both believe in; 

but if they can't do it that way then they've got to go to court.  

And that maybe is the last place they should go but they don't 

leave themself any alternative because they can't deal with each 

other and they can't negotiate a settlement.  So they have to go 

to some stranger sitting there in the solemnity of the courtroom, 

dressed in black robes with white tabs a lot like the Clerks at 

our table here tonight, and hear the evidence, and pronounce 

upon it, and that's it, and there is nothing beyond that. 

 

And that leads to some unhappy citizens and your constituent is 

obviously one.  We in our department have looked closely at 

that situation with you, and we have offered some views which 

I know you have communicated to your constituent, but at the 

end of the day that's about all there is. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I know it doesn't totally 

answer the question out there and I realize that this is a 

situation that took place prior to this legislation.  I just trust that 

the legislation that's been introduced into the House is going to 

alleviate some of the concerns, such as the one that we've just 

been discussing, down the road; that we will be able to get 

around some of these major conflicts and help people get on 

with their lives rather than . . . and leaving in a more amiable 

mood and feeling towards each other rather than with the 

knives all pulled out. 

 

Mr. Minister, as well . . . I'm not sure why I get all these little 

requests coming in but I guess that's what you get for being 

Justice critic sometimes. 

 

Mr. Minister, there was one call came and I'm not exactly sure . 

. . and because I'm not a lawyer I'm going to ask this anyway, 

just for my own information.  Is such a charge as bribing a 

witness considered an indictable offence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes it is.  It's a serious offence. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- And, Mr. Minister, if a person is charged with that 

or a charge is laid of having bribed a witness and a request is 

made to appear at a certain date before a certain court, does a 

person have to appear in person or can a person have 

representation made? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That charge would normally be by 

indictment and that would require the person to appear 

personally. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I'm not sure how much further I should head 

with this question, Mr. Minister, or just come to your office.  

Certainly I think I'll do that rather then just bringing it totally 

out into the public debate in this Assembly.  I'm not sure if the 

gentlemen in black here have the ability to judge on this basis 

of this case. 

 

But there were certainly some major concerns raised by an 

individual and I've talked to the person.  He certainly wasn't 

afraid of having his name brought forward in the House but I 

think I'd prefer just to talk to you about it personally, Mr. 

Minister, and raise it in that format and see if there's anything 

that can be done 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

to address that concern. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have a few questions here and I'm not sure how 

long you want to sit here, but if you want to give me a minute 

or two, I could probably go through a few global questions that 

are fairly, I think, straightforward, depending on how long you 

want to take to answer them. 

 

But I noticed from some of the questions arising from the 

globals, this year you hired 76 new in-scope, permanent 

employees over last year and paid out an additional 2.3 million 

in salaries over last year, and I'm just wondering how you 

justify that dramatic increase in both staff and salaries and what 

the new positions were for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, the bulk of these are as a 

result of the conversion of temporary positions to permanent 

positions.  And we made a decision to do this some time ago 

because it is . . . the temporary employees were working full 

time anyway and deserved to be treated as permanent 

employees and have the benefit of permanent employment.  We 

did in fact hire 76 more in-scope permanent staff in '93-94, but 

we also reduced the number of non-permanent in-scope 

employees by 61.  We set that number off against each other. 

 

Eighty-four positions were identified for this conversion from 

temporary to permanent, and we have filled 51 of those 

positions on a permanent basis to this point.  The average pay 

per person did not change year over year. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what was the total number of 

in-scope and out-of-scope temporary casual workers your 

department employed over the past year?  A note here indicates 

that the employees in the payroll were to March . . . represents 

only the temporary employees on the payroll to March 31 '94. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As the member will have seen, I think, 

by the material that we sent, there were 501 employees as of 

March 31, 1994 who are in-scope, temporary, or casual or 

labour service employees. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, from your globals, in '92-93 you 

spent roughly 250,000 on out-of-scope temporary positions.  

This year you spent approximately 1.5 on this class of 

employee. 

 

Is this the correct number and how do you justify that number 

or figure or increase, Mr. Minister? 

 

(2230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm advised that that's an increase in 19, 

as the member noticed. 

 

The figures for '92-93 do not include the staff of the Human 

Rights Commission, but the '93-94 figures do include them.  

And the commission accounts for 18 of those people.  

Therefore there's only an increase of one, and that relates to the 

net change in the number of students at law which we had on 

staff at those . . . on 

those two dates. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I also understand your contract 

employees went from 19 in '92-93 to 36 this year.  The contract 

payments went from 672 to 1,000,087.  Can you explain these 

numbers, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, Mr. Chair.  These were contract 

prosecutors.  Prior to '93-94 these people were treated as 

regular suppliers and were not recorded on these reports.  But 

during 1993-94 it was deemed that these contract prosecutors 

were in an employee-employer relationship with the 

department and they now receive payroll cheques. 

 

This new relationship, if I can call it that, doesn't have any 

financial implications for the department.  We still continue to 

pay them what we paid them before.  We just report them on a 

different basis. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I also notice that you have a column 

that's called "other," and there's almost $3 million marked for 

that "other".  What kind of expenditures would be included in 

"other"? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The "other" category includes the 

following major types of expenditures: overtime, which was 

approximately 1.5 million; temporary performance of higher 

duties; shift differentials; camp differentials; honoraria for 

members of boards and commissions and committees.  Those 

are the major items. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the committees, I noticed 

going through my questions here that actually there's . . . I've 

got some significant questions and a couple other areas that are 

going to take more than just a matter of a few minutes, so 

possibly we should just report progress and meet another day to 

finish.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- We're prepared to stay if you want to 

stay. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I'm not sure if all the other members will like it, 

the fact that we stayed here and discussed business while they 

were enjoying whatever.  But anyway, Mr. Minister, last year . 

. . a question regarding computers.  In '92-93 your department 

went through what appears to be a major overhaul of your 

computer system.  At the very least you spent a lot of money on 

computer equipment last year to the tune of about 3 million, yet 

this year again we see a major expenditure including one 

purchase of some personal computers for 327 . . . well almost 

328,000, and another for 117,000.  Mr. Minister, can you 

explain why the ongoing expenditure for, or large expenditures 

for, computers in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'll undertake to write a letter 

to the member answering that question.  We're a big 

department with very complex computer needs and it's not an 

easy question for us to answer as we sit here tonight.  We don't 

have a sort of prepared script on it and there's many different 

parts to the 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

answer.  So we will send a letter to the member and I undertake 

to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, this next 

question, if you feel so led you're as well welcome to do that.  

It's regarding advertising and communications.  I noticed a 

number of advertising communications.  We've got a number of 

companies that were given, I believe they were contracts.  

Were any of these contracts tendered?  Did contracts for 

advertising go to the lowest bidder?  I wonder if you could 

provide information on all the advertising contracts here.  And I 

notice some for Brown & Associates for 66,000; Brown & 

Associates again for 3,800; and Palmer Jarvis for 8,000.  And 

there's a number here.  I wonder if you could give us a 

breakdown on the advertising and what it was for, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'll undertake to write to the 

member in response to his question. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Public Accounts 

'92-93 states that Coopers Lybrand received seven million, one 

hundred and thirteen thousand and a few dollars change under 

other payments.  Could you explain that to us, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Coopers Lybrand were retained to 

handle the Principal Trust matter, and they had a lot of work to 

do in connection with the settlement of that matter.  And that's 

what that was about. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Was there anything left for the investors? 

 

Mr. Minister, regarding committee reviews, Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission, 1,042,176.  Does this figure reflect 

the total operating costs or just payments to boards and 

commission members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That's the total operating cost for the 

commission. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- What were the costs in the year '92-93 and the 

'91-92 fiscal year, Mr. Minister?  Could you relay those to us, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I don't have the '91-92 numbers with me.  

Again, would it be satisfactory to the member if I wrote in 

response to that question? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes.  Thanks, Mr. Minister.  Regarding the 

Provincial Mediation Board and Office of the Rentalsman, 

some expenditures of six hundred and fifty-five thousand and a 

few dollars change, how many cases were handled by the 

Mediation Board in the last fiscal year?  How does this 

compare to the '92-93 fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I'm sorry to tell the member 

we don't have the information with us as to the number of cases 

handled by the Provincial Mediation Board in those years, so I 

will undertake to write to the member and respond to that 

question. 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I have three or four questions.  

Maybe I'll just give them all out and if there's some that you 

can respond to directly you will, and if not you can give them 

to us by letter at your earliest convenience. 

 

Mr. Minister, does . . . I think I asked this earlier on too, as 

well, and maybe you could get back to me.  Does your 

department have any projections on how much will the 

case-load expand after Bill 40, An Act to amend The Queen's 

Bench Act to provide for Mediation, is in effect and couples 

start taking advantage of the services available? 

 

Second question: does the department have any projections on 

additional costs after marital mediation is made available?  

How has the office of the Rentalsman changed since the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) took power?  What are people charged 

to use this office's services?  What was the total revenue taken 

in by this office in the last fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, with the consent of the 

member I'll write to him in response to all of those questions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, regarding the Farm Land Security 

Board and the Farm Ownership Board, how many bankruptcies 

were addressed by these boards in the past year under review?  

And how many clients came before the boards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The notices received are I think what the 

member means when he talks about cases handled.  Let me 

give you the numbers for calendar '92 and calendar '93.  In 

calendar '92 the number of notices received was 1,286, and in 

calendar '93 it was 754. 

 

Now the member also asked about bankruptcies and that is 

under the federal legislation, so we don't deal with them as 

bankruptcies.  They may be bankrupt, but the majority of them 

would not. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, we just addressed another issue 

earlier this evening, The Constituency Boundaries Act, and I 

wonder if you could provide us with the costs of the 

commission to the taxpayers. 

 

As well, maybe you could indicate what the costs were 

regarding the LaChance-Nerland inquiry, and whether or not 

the monies were well-spent.  It would be appropriate to ask if 

the changes to the boundaries were politically motivated. 

 

(2245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Dealing with the last question first, the 

answer is an unequivocal no.  They were not politically 

motivated at all. 

 

The cost of the Constituency Boundaries Commission as at 

March 31, 1994 -- and that would be practically all in -- was 

$169,826.32.  If the member wants details of it I'd be glad to 

provide it to him. 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

So far as the LaChance-Nerland commission of inquiry is 

concerned, the expenses paid in the 1992-93 fiscal year were 

$325,527.  Expenses paid to March 31, '94 in the '93-'94 fiscal 

year were another $103,591, for a total expenditure of 

$429,118.  It was an important inquiry.  It was important 

because the city of Prince Albert was plagued by questions that 

simply wouldn't go away about the way in which that case had 

been handled.  And we tried to deal with it in a number of ways 

to satisfy the community that the case had been properly 

handled by the police, by the prosecutors, by the court.  And we 

couldn't seem to satisfy those concerns.  They carried on. 

 

So in the final analysis, we ordered an inquiry to try and close 

the debate on some of those questions.  I believe we have.  

There are still general concerns on the part of some citizens of 

Prince Albert about racism, and to them all I can say is an 

inquiry can't deal with that question.  That's a matter of attitude 

of mind.  And all of us have to deal with that on a personal 

level and a community level, and the appointment of a 

commission of inquiry to inquire into those questions would 

not, in my view, result in any substantial progress so far as 

racist attitudes are concerned.  But at least in the way in which 

this case was handled, I think the inquiry did put to rest the 

questions of the appropriateness of the police action, the 

prosecutor's action, and the way in which the matter was 

handled by the court. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, I've 

got another series of questions here that I'll relay to you, and 

again you can feel free to give them this evening if they're at 

your fingertips. 

 

Fees and services -- I wonder if you would take a full moment 

to provide us with full details of fees and services that have 

been increased since October 1991.  I wonder if you would 

provide this by year, indicate which are new fees and charges, 

indicate how much additional revenue was raised from each 

increase and indicate where the increased revenue is going. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- With the member's consent, we will 

compile that information and provide it to him by letter. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, again a 

series of questions that I'll relate to you and we can dispose of 

them in the same format if you don't have all that information 

just right handy to relay it verbally. 

 

Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board, if you would please 

provide the following information.  Total number of 

applications reviewed by the board in '91-92 fiscal year.  

Applications reviewed in '92-93.  Total number of applications 

reviewed by the board to date. And for each year provide 

information as to how many were lenders and how many were 

non-lenders. 

 

And then a second one, the Farm Land Security Board, which 

is a little different.  Basically the same 

information.  The total number of applications made to the 

board in '91-92.  The total number of applications made to the 

board in '92-93.  And the total number of applications made to 

the board to date.  For those years, how many were applications 

to waive home quarter protection? 

 

And then for mediation services, if you would provide the 

following information.  Total number of applications made for 

mediation services since its inception.  Please provide this 

information by year.  How many of the applications were 

property related?  How many were related to machinery 

disputes?  And to what did the balance pertain? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll write to the member as soon as I can, 

providing all that information to him, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, there's been a case that's received some public 

attention down in my neck of the woods.  No, it's not quite 

close to home.  It happens to be an area that isn't really in the 

Moosomin constituency and I don't think the boundary is going 

to change that matter neither. 

 

But how much has the government spent on court eviction of 

farmers?  We're quite well aware of the Gerald Pander case 

down in the the Corning area.  Have you had a number of 

cases?  And how much has been spent on those types of cases 

over the last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, those 

would be eviction cases by ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan), I would think, that we're talking 

about.  If it were somebody else, of course, those are private 

evictions that don't come to our attention.  In all of those cases, 

we don't think there are any costs involved so far as the 

government is concerned, just in our brief consultation here.  

We provide the legal service from the government's own 

lawyers -- the department's counsel.  And the sheriff's fees are 

paid for by the creditor and so far as the government is 

concerned, just doesn't involve any extra expenditure at all. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, regarding 

closures of judicial centres.  Now I've raised this; I raised this 

in question period.  I chatted with you a bit about it.  I received 

a letter from the legal firm of Osman, Gardner & Gordon.  

They've actually faxed me a copy of a letter they sent to your 

office and I think, Mr. Minister, that they brought up some very 

significant points that maybe I didn't relate as clearly as I 

should have in asking a response of you regarding the closure 

of the municipal judicial centre. 

 

Certainly, I think, you indicated to me at the time, the 

department indicated that people could get service out of either 

Estevan, Weyburn, Regina, or Melville, possibly even Yorkton.  

I think when you take a look at the geographic make-up of that 

part of the province, Mr. Minister, it almost seems that, where 

Moosomin is sitting, that there's a good reason to maintain that 

court-house. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

The interesting part about the letter that came in, the firm of 

Mr. Osman and Ms. Gordon gave a number of reasons why 

they felt the closure wasn't totally necessary.  And they felt that 

the judicial centre could continue to operate in the community 

of Moosomin, given the length of drive and the difference in 

mileage from the centre of Moosomin to any one of the other 

centres suggested. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that in a lot of cases 

Moosomin itself could be somewhat of a hub, and we do 

continue to have . . . I believe it's Court of Queen's Bench 

continues to operate out of the Moosomin centre.  So the fact 

that they're renting space from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) and we've got the . . . I believe they 

also indicated sufficient revenue has come in over the last few 

years that would pay for the cost of maintaining the Moosomin 

judicial centre. And I'm wondering if you could explain to the 

House tonight the rationale -- whether or not this could be 

reviewed, and the fact that the Moosomin judicial centre would 

have enough solid arguments here as has been presented, to 

justify maintaining or keeping the courtroom open. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I have agreed and arranged to 

meet with Mr. Osman and Ms. Gordon on May 25, and I think 

my office has advised the member of that, or will advise the 

member, and the member would be quite welcome to come to 

that meeting if you wish. 

 

Some of our judicial centres have been quite inactive, and it 

was clear that they -- I don't want to say anything inappropriate 

-- but they just didn't have much future as a judicial centre and 

that we should in these difficult times, try and focus our 

resources a bit more on the centres where there was a good deal 

of activity. 

 

I have in my hand statistics on the number of cases tried, the 

number of proceedings commenced, the number of chambers 

applications, and the sheriff workload in each of the judicial 

centres of Saskatchewan. And in general they would all go a 

very long way to substantiating the decision to close down the 

judicial centre at Moosomin.  In last year's budget, we closed 

down the judicial centres at Shaunavon and at Gravelbourg for 

the same reason.  But I am moved to have a flexible attitude 

towards this, an open mind towards it, and I'll be approaching 

the meeting on May 25 with that kind of an approach.  

Certainly if there are factors that I have not taken into account, 

I'll be glad to review the decision.  I'll share the statistics with 

the people who I'll be meeting with, as I believe I've already 

shared them with the hon. member, and we will have an 

opportunity to discuss it at that time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A question comes from 

a Bonnie Herauf in Regina here regarding the child 

maintenance, and the question is: I'm writing to voice my 

concerns with regards to the provincial government's policy of 

including child maintenance as income of the custodial parent 

for 

purposes of assessment of qualification for various social 

programs.  And she goes on to describe how she appreciated 

the social assistance or the assistance that was available; 

however, she suggests that social programs are in serious need 

of review and is thinking that, since it's the international year of 

the child, it might be appropriate to review some of the social 

programs. 

 

But I think the major concern is the fact that child maintenance 

is considered as part of her income and affects her ability to 

derive sufficient income supplemented by social assistance to 

maintain a family and maintain the home, the environment 

she's providing for her family and children. 

 

I'm wondering if there's . . . if you could make any comments 

or any suggestions regarding this process and if indeed the 

department is looking at ways of how we can address the child 

maintenance funds in relation to this matter? 

 

Mr. Minister, maybe just before you respond if I could just 

relate another sentence here I probably should have brought in, 

she says here the child maintenance payments have placed my 

income at a level where I no longer qualify for any of the 

subsidies or grants that were previously allowed to me.  The 

child maintenance has disqualified me from receiving these 

subsidies and yet does not equal the increased amount I am 

now required to pay for housing and child care. 

 

So those are some of the . . . and as she writes this letter, I 

noticed as well that she's writing it specifically relating some of 

the concerns she has.  But now that she indicates a little later on 

she now has a clerical position where she's getting paid better 

which is helping.  But she's concerned for other individuals that 

would be in the same situation she originally was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I can say to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, 

that these questions are caught up in the current review of the 

social security net.  And many of them are pretty good 

questions. 

 

My department has only a partial connection to this whole area.  

We are not responsible for the policy that results in the kind of 

situation that his correspondent indicates.  We are though 

involved in the collection of maintenance and so we have that 

attachment to the system. 

 

I don't feel competent or qualified to answer to the policy 

questions that he raises.  But my department is involved in the 

social security review and the way in which maintenance 

payments relate to the social safety net is part of that review. 

 

I think that I shouldn't try and carry the discussion any further 

this evening considering my rather limited involvement in that 

area of policy. 

 

(2300) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and it's possibly 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

a question we can raise with the Minister of Social Services as 

well, bringing forward this matter.  There's one other one here I 

notice that might be more appropriate, so I'll leave that for that 

time. 

 

One more area of discussion I'd just like to raise momentarily, 

and that's gun laws.  Now we've had major discussions.  We 

discussed that last week.  And again, Mr. Minister, I think your 

famous words were, that is not our problem; that's the federal 

government's problem.  It's federal jurisdiction.  I think, Mr. 

Minister, that there's certainly a lot of gun dealers and 

sportsmen in the province of Saskatchewan that are very deeply 

concerned about some of the directions that the present federal 

government is now leaning again as far as gun laws and relates 

to one or two incidents. 

 

And certainly we are sympathetic to the individuals and people 

that have been hurt through the misuse of firearms and guns, 

and we want to do everything we can to make sure that guns 

don't actually fall in the hands of individuals who would not 

use them for appropriate . . . or would misuse guns.  And so, 

Mr. Minister, I think I had asked you the question last week, if 

you would relate the concerns of the firearms dealers and the 

gun owners of Saskatchewan and the sportsmen to the federal 

minister, bringing out the fact that in the province of 

Saskatchewan, I think when it really comes down to it, what we 

have seen in more cases than not . . . and I think probably most 

of the cases as far as some of the violence in our province and 

lethal weapons, we're probably seeing more uses of knives as a 

weapon versus guns being used against people. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, it's appropriate to stand up . . . And 

certainly the trading of guns and gun shows in this province 

brings tourism dollars into the province and certainly into 

communities across the province.  We sell hunting licences to 

people across this province who enjoy the sport of hunting.  

Some enjoy it for the sport.  Some enjoy it for wild meat.  And 

one of the major problems we're having in this province is 

certainly the last few years we've had some pretty great 

winters, and we're getting an abundance of wildlife that's 

creating a problem on the farms. 

 

And if we're going to really limit guns, Mr. Minister, basically 

what we're doing is we're taking the guns out of the hands of 

law-abiding citizens but that doesn't necessarily take the guns 

away from individuals who would use them in lethal ways 

against people. 

 

So I'm asking, Mr. Minister, if you did take the time to address 

these questions with Minister Rock when you met him last 

week, and what kind of a reception Mr. Rock gave you 

regarding these questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This has been a very interesting 

experience.  And by this I mean implementing the federal gun 

control legislation in the province of Saskatchewan.  And we 

have in this room accumulated a lot of hours in trying to 

accomplish that in a way that is appropriate to Saskatchewan. 

I support the idea of gun control, and I certainly do understand 

that in high-crime areas in Canada where the use of weapons is 

common, gun control makes a great deal of sense, and I support 

that without question. 

 

It's when you get into Saskatchewan the point doesn't really 

hold because guns are not the kind of problem here as they are 

in Montreal or Toronto or Vancouver.  Further, our population 

in Saskatchewan and our traditions and our culture involve a 

different mix of weapons for different purposes than you will 

find in Quebec or Ontario or British Columbia, and those 

differences came to light in these questions involved in the 

implementation of the gun control law to the Saskatchewan 

situation. 

 

I want to say this to the member and to those who may know 

what we're doing tonight: Saskatchewan has been as generous 

and as liberal as we possibly can in interpreting the federal law 

and applying it to the Saskatchewan situation.  We have leaned 

over backwards as far as we can in order to accommodate the 

interests of Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan hunters, 

Saskatchewan gun dealers. 

 

Wherever we had any discretion at all under the federal law we 

exercised it on the side of the hunters, the gun show people, 

aboriginal hunters, and did what we could in order to soften the 

impact of a law that had not been designed with Saskatchewan 

in mind. 

 

So we did everything we could.  And I think we've achieved a 

certain satisfaction in the communities of Saskatchewan, and in 

those interested in these issues with the way in which we've 

handled the matter. 

 

Now I used this experience to discuss the question of further 

gun control legislation with Mr. Rock when he was here on 

April 29, and I impressed upon him the need for consultations 

of a rather intensive variety in the event that he's planning any 

more changes to the gun law.  He has speculated in public 

about possible changes and we want to be able to sit down with 

him and talk for a long time before that idea goes very much 

further. 

 

I want to also mention -- and this is to commend our people in 

this province -- the question of education and safety training.  

We have a most remarkable record in this province, and we 

should all be very proud of it.  About 135,000 people have 

taken a pretty extensive training program in firearm safety.  

And we have over a thousand people in this province who 

voluntarily act as trainers and give these courses in firearm 

safety and the handling of firearms. 

 

A most remarkable record and it's without parallel anywhere in 

this country.  And it reflects itself in the experience that we 

have in the field.  And the member knows what I mean when I 

say that.  So we're very proud of that.  I think by far we have 

the best record in North America and I just wanted to mention 

that before I sit down. 



May 10, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Just one more question 

in relation to that and it comes from the Saskatchewan 

Responsible Firearms Owners.  You're aware of the resolution 

that this House passed and they also sent a resolution to the 

Assembly, basically acknowledging the fact and asking the 

Government of Saskatchewan to support in principle the 

continued right of residents of Saskatchewan, both urban and 

rural, to enjoy the safe and responsible use of ownership of 

firearms including rifles, shotguns, and handguns. 

 

And as you've indicated, Mr. Minister, we certainly have had 

an extensive program of education across this province.  And 

we've had a fair bit of consultation, Mr. Minister, with you 

regarding these organizations such as the wildlife federations 

and a number of local organizations that have put on hunter 

safety courses.  I thank you for working out some areas of 

resolve that allowed these programs to go on while we were 

trying to figure out how we would comply with the federal Act. 

 

Another thing I think we did come to an agreement and 

consensus on in discussions was the ability to have someone at 

a gun or a trade show available to sell FAC (firearms 

acquisition certificate) licences.  I know the one in Moosomin, 

when it was held there, the RCMP came and were there as not 

observers, but they basically took part and basically promoted 

the force. And at the same time because they were there they 

offered the service free, of being able, if you inquired for an 

FAC licence . . . although that is becoming a little more 

complicated with the regulations and possibly that's one area 

we should take a moment to discuss. 

 

But I don't know if we want to go through the 35 questions that 

they're asking in that report and the fact of whether you've 

made any violent threats or whether you've had any marital 

problems in the last little while in this question you have to 

respond to.  But certainly it's putting a lot of onus on 

individuals, getting fairly personal and I'm not sure, Mr. 

Minister, that it's actually going to take the guns out of the 

hands of individuals who would abuse their privileges. 

 

I guess as I look at one of the penalties, or the penalties that 

have been suggested regarding the new gun laws, having 

handguns without permit is punishable by up to five years in 

prison.  First offence with firearm carries one year jail term to 

be served consecutively, second and subsequent offences carry 

minimum three years and a maximum 14. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think that comes back to some of the comments 

I was making earlier about our justice system, where we can 

institute a law that basically says if you've got a handgun in 

your possession without a permit it's almost an automatic 

five-year prison sentence.  And yet another individual could go 

and systematically take a person's life and they get a slap on the 

wrist.  I think there's something definitely wrong with our 

justice system and as I indicated earlier those are some of 

things I think we need to raise 

with the minister, with the federal minister.  I think he has to be 

somewhat a little more understanding and recognize the fact 

that there are law-abiding, honest and responsible individuals. 

 

Not everybody with a handgun is going to take and abuse their 

privilege to own that handgun.  The only people that I know of 

in our province that really have handguns are the individuals 

who are in competitive shooting and what have you.  Not a lot 

of people have them because there's an expense involved in 

owning and keeping a handgun or even guns of any kind, so I 

think this is where some of the inequities of our justice system 

come in and we must take a look at them. 

 

And that's why I suggest at the end of the day we need to look 

at more reasonable and effective sentences and punishment for 

people, sentences that would meet and fit the crime, so that 

we're indeed sending a message that no, we believe in 

innocence until proven guilty, but at the same time when there's 

guilt definitely is brought forward, that the sentence you 

receive will reflect the seriousness of the crime. 

 

I thank you for your time, Mr. Minister. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 3 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Legislation 

Vote 21 

 

Ombudsman 

 

Item 7 agreed to. 

 

Freedom of Information and Privacy Commissioner 

 

Item 8 agreed to. 

 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Item 9 agreed to. 

 

Subvotes LG07, LG08, and LG09 agreed to. 

 

(2315) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the minister, and 

to his officials, I thank you for taking the time to be here and 

entering into the deliberations.  I'm sorry to disappoint you -- 

there's probably two or three hours of questions we could have 

got into yet, but I appreciated your time and the answers you've 

given and the responses. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member 

for those remarks on behalf of the officials and also 

compliment him on the way in which he conducts himself 

during these exercises.  I think it's exemplary and we do 

appreciate it. 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 1994 

I'd like to thank the officials for coming and staying to this hour 

to assist the committee in its consideration. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Chair, I move that the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:18 p.m. 

 


