




















































Hansard: May 06, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  

 May 6, 1994 

 

2095 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It 

gives me great pleasure today to introduce two friends who are 

sitting in your gallery.  And I would like all people to take note 

of Lou and Dave Coderre from Wynyard.  I hope that they have 

a pleasant stay in Regina today and enjoy the proceedings. 

 

Would all of you join with me in giving them a warm welcome, 

please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to introduce to the members of the legislature and to you as 

well, sir, a group of 41 grades 8 and 9 students in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker.  They are from Osler, accompanied by teachers 

Glen Osmond and Elaine Borden. 

 

And I would just like to point out to members that Osler is well 

known to me; it's really part of my home stamping-grounds.  

And I actually taught in Osler -- it's a fair number of years ago, 

Glen, as you'll know, when we still had division 4 there -- and I 

taught there actually for four years.  So undoubtedly I taught 

many of the parents of the students that are here today. 

 

So I'd like all members, please, to welcome the students and the 

teachers from Osler. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly a 

group of 60 grade 4, 5, and 6 students that just arrived from the 

community of Kipling, Kipling School. 

 

They're accompanied by teachers Mrs. Jane Fischer, Mrs. 

Shoemaker, Mr. Bates, Mrs. Hollowatty; and a number of 

chaperons -- some 8 chaperons, I think I've got them all here -- 

Mrs. Batters, Mrs. Walker, Mrs. Rygh, Mrs. Whiddup, Mr. 

Kearns, and Mrs. Doka.  I'd like to welcome them to the 

Assembly. 

 

I understand they'll just have a short time with us this morning; 

I trust that they'll receive some educational value from their 

time here.  They're going to be running to the Imax theatre.  We 

trust they have a great day and a safe trip home.  I met with the 

students for a minute just before question period for photos; as 

they leave the Assembly, they'll receive some refreshments and 

would you join me in welcoming the students from Kipling. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

4-H Public Speaking Competition 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 3rd annual 

Saskatchewan provincial 4-H public speaking competition was 

recently held at Indian Head. 

 

A total of 18 students, six in each of the junior, intermediate, 

and senior age classes were selected from the six provincial 

regions to participate in the finals.  All speeches were very 

informative and well presented; the judges had a difficult time 

in selecting the top three presentations in each category. 

 

In the junior classes, the top three winners were Carrie Anne 

Smith from Abbey-Lancer Beef Club; Adrienne Roy, 

Sylvanian Multiple Club; and Lancey Jess from the Hanley 

Multiple Club. 

 

In the intermediate class, David Stock from the Foothills Light 

Horse Club was followed by Krista Penny from the Kennedy 

Lang Bank Club; and Tracy Kirsch, Three Lakes Beef Club. 

 

The senior finalists were Roxanne Kirsch from the Three Lakes 

Beef Club; Dean Kuntz of Indian Head Club; and Olivia Unger 

of the Rush Lake Multiple Club. 

 

We extend our congratulations to the finalists and all the 

participants for their hard work and dedication in preparing 

very fine speeches.  We also extend our thanks and 

appreciation to all those who volunteer their time, energy, and 

knowledge in working with our youth in the very worthwhile 

4-H movement in Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dedication of Shepley Island Sea Cadet Camp Interpretive 

Panel 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, last 

Sunday, May 1, was the Battle of Atlantic Sunday.  Three 

thousand miles away from the Atlantic and some 50 years later, 

a very interesting ceremony took place on the banks of the 

South Saskatchewan River in the Meewasin Valley Authority 

protected area, just south of Saskatoon, in the land-locked 

constituency of Biggar. 

 

The ceremony was held to dedicate the Shepley Island cadet 

camp interpretive panel near what is now called Wilson Island, 

but for about five years during the war was called Shepley 

Island.  Shepley Island was the home every summer for 

Shepley Island sea cadet camp. 

 

This camp took sea cadets from across the province, and for 

two weeks taught them naval skills as well as instilling 

leadership and personal development qualities.  Some of the 

camp graduates went on to naval careers.  Many became 

officers in the Canadian Navy, and one even made it to the rank 

of admiral. 



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

The camp was under the command of Lieutenant P.K. Wilton, 

who is remembered as a fair man who taught the virtues of 

discipline to his charges. 

 

In a very pleasing irony of history, Ms. Peggy McKercher, 

current chair of the Meewasin Valley Authority Board, is the 

daughter of Commander Wilton.  She took part in the 

dedication. 

 

I was very happy to be there representing the government, and I 

congratulate all involved for commemorating this unique 

moment in Saskatchewan history.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moose Jaw Dance Festival 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if 

you are looking for a hotel room in Moose Jaw over the next 

eight days, you may well be out of luck, Mr. Speaker.  The 

reason is the 35th annual Moose Jaw Dance Festival, running 

May 6 to May 15. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, last year from personal experience, 

that there were occasions last year when you couldn't get a seat 

in the auditorium; and this year, Mr. Speaker, there are even 

more entries.  This year, as I speak, there are 1,300 young 

people entered in the festival in Moose Jaw coming from every 

corner of our province, coming to compete in tap, jazz, ballet, 

ethnic and character dance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to adjudicate this year will be individuals like 

Doug Jacks who choreographed the opening of the Barcelona 

Olympics, and Mercedes Ellington, granddaughter of the 

famous Duke Ellington. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, of note in the list of dancers are the two 

talented daughters of both Moose Jaw MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly). 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the next week Moose Jaw will be alive with 

young people who will not only be enjoying the festival, but 

the famous Moose Jaw hospitality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish best wishes to the dancers, the 

adjudicators, the organizers.  Because, Mr. Speaker, to dance is 

to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Queen's Baton Relay 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased to 

remind all members that the Commonwealth Games' Queen's 

Baton will be arriving in Saskatchewan next week.  The Baton 

is on its way to the Fifteenth Commonwealth Games in 

Victoria which are scheduled August 18 to 28. 

 

SaskPower has coordinated special events in Regina and 

Saskatoon to ensure that everybody has a chance to welcome 

the Baton when it arrives.  The Baton will 

be in Regina on Monday, May 9 -- the best place to be is 

Victoria Park at noon on Monday the 9th. 

 

And it will be in Saskatoon on Tuesday, May 10.  On these two 

days community groups and Sask Sport organizers will join in 

a team relay welcoming the Baton to each city. 

 

In Regina these groups include the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police), the Regina City Police, the Saskatchewan 

Science Centre and the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

In Saskatoon the Meewasin foundation, Wanuskewin Heritage 

Park and the Saskatoon Fire Department will participate, 

amongst others. 

 

I commend all of them for their support of the relay. 

 

Residents will have a chance to see and hold the Baton in a 

circle of friendship before a formal presentation is made to the 

Lieutenant Governor.  SaskPower is pleased to join with all 

other citizens of the province to offer its best wishes to 

Saskatchewan athletes as the final game selections draws 

nearer. 

 

I invite all members and well-wishers from around the province 

to join in the celebrations in either Regina or Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Beef Exports to United States 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You got my 

attention there. 

 

This morning my question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, April job figures are showing us 

now that they are down by 16,000 in the agriculture sector 

compared to last year at this time, Mr. Minister.  Now we see 

that there's a potential trade war with the United States 

threatening to reduce those numbers even further.  We see once 

again U.S. (United States) protectionism rearing its ugly head. 

 

Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon is concerned that the 

amount of beef entering the U.S. from Canada may soon be 

restricted and that would have a detrimental affect on the cattle 

producers in this province and meat packers alike, Mr. 

Minister.  Immediately following the signing of the FTA (Free 

Trade Agreement), Intercon made a major, major expansion, 

and I asked Fred Mitchell at that time, why are you doing this?  

He said our markets and access to U.S. markets have now been 

guaranteed. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it looks as if this may not be the case.  So 

I'm asking you: what have you done and how have you looked 

into this matter; and what steps have you taken to ensure that 

indeed the beef exports into the United States from Canada, and 

in particular Saskatchewan, have been assured. 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite again raises a very good question.  It's a very deep 

concern for us in Saskatchewan as we continually become 

harassed on trade issues, including durum and wheat, and now 

beef and others. 

 

I think the question should well be directed to the people who 

signed the national trade deal.  I think Mr. Chrétien promised 

that he was going to renegotiate NAFTA (North American Free 

Trade Agreement) and be sure that this deal would work. 

 

Again we have a deal that was a bad deal to begin with; and we 

have one party to the agreement threatening not to live up to 

their side of the agreement.  And I think hopefully it is threats, 

and that reason will prevail and that the federal government 

will stand up to the Americans and we will get the advantages 

of this deal that are there, if indeed the other side lives up to 

their side of the agreement. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  

At least over the last four or five years in the red meat sector 

it's given trade peace up until this point.  But now it seems that 

we're back to some old games.  And that is that the threat of 

trade actions appears to be the result of the U.S. Department of 

Agriculture's laying off of import meat inspectors.  That seems 

to be the crux.  So we have another red herring being thrown 

forward, a red herring that has nothing to do with the 

practicality of the situation. 

 

The argument that a lot of contaminated meat is now entering 

the U.S. is simply not valid, Mr. Minister.  It's not valid.  And 

the reduction of these meat inspectors is being used as a red 

herring, just as '84-85 it was with the chloramphenicol issue 

that I've made you aware of in the estimates. 

 

Mr. Minister, have you spoken with the federal Agriculture 

minister about this serious matter?  And what steps is he taking 

to protect the Saskatchewan beef industry against the threat of 

any unjustified trade restrictions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well again the member raises a 

very good point.  This is indeed a foundless claim that is a red 

herring.  I think the Americans are less concerned with fair 

trade than they are with trade that goes in one direction only 

and there is obviously not . . . I think Canadian standards are, 

by everybody's judgement, higher than the American standards 

and certainly is not a problem with contaminated meat.  This is 

simply a way to get around the agreement. 

 

And certainly we are in contact with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture on an ongoing basis on all of these trade issues and 

attempting to urge him to do what they can to straighten out the 

agreement and to come to a settlement.  Again, we've urged 

him to make peace with the Americans, but not at the expense 

of selling the farm.  And I think that's what the Americans 

appear to want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, this 

raises the hub of what I'm getting at, and that is it raises the 

whole larger issue of the damage that could be caused by an 

all-out trade war with the United States, particularly to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the other day I heard the Premier say that he would be 

prepared to support any measures, any measures that Mr. 

Goodale deemed necessary in fighting a trade war with the U.S. 

-- an act, I agree, at first blush that sounds as if that's the 

popular thing to say, Mr. Minister, politically at least. 

 

But have you and the Premier given full consideration to the 

implications of such a statement?  Saskatchewan tends to and 

stands to lose a good deal in the event of an all-out trade war.  

Other products that Saskatchewan produces are at stake, like 

beef, like pork.  Other products might be restricted as well and 

that could end up hurting Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you have discussed this matter with 

the Premier since I raised it with you last.  What industries in 

this province are you prepared to sacrifice in a trade war with 

the U.S.  and what Saskatchewan industries is Mr. Goodale 

prepared to sacrifice in an all-out trade war with the U.S.?  Are 

you prepared to answer that today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously 

there's a fine balance and nobody benefits from a trade war -- 

nobody benefits from a trade war.  But nobody benefits or 

certainly we don't benefit by acquiescing to every demand that 

the Americans make.  And we can back down and back down 

as far as we want to go. 

 

We were concerned, the Premier was concerned, I was 

concerned that Mr. Goodale was not being strong enough in the 

negotiations.  We urged for a stronger stance.  I think all the 

provinces in the country are onside with that. 

 

We had an Ag ministers' meeting in Regina here two or three 

weeks ago at which time all Agriculture ministers across this 

country urged Mr. Goodale to take the stand that he has now 

taken -- that we are not going to put a cap on our wheat.  We're 

not going to give up our industry.  We're not going to trade off 

our Saskatchewan industries or commodities, such as wheat, 

for some commodities such as sugar or peanut butter for some 

other province; that we must stand up and live with the 

agreement and take the stance that we have to take to make the 

Americans live up to their side of this agreement which they 

have signed as well as us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Unemployment 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My colleague raises 

some good points today, Mr. Speaker, about what the 

government is up to as far as 



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

job creation in this province.  Agriculture, our main industry in 

this province, continues to lose jobs. 

 

My question this morning would be to the Minister of 

Economic Development.  Mr. Minister, your government's 

all-out attack on working men and women in this province 

continued in April, as evidenced by today's unemployment 

stats.  There are now just 426,000 people working in the 

province.  That's 5,000 fewer than last year, Mr. Speaker, at 

this same time.  That's 16,000 fewer than April of 1991, the last 

year of the previous administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government's record in job creation has 

been a dismal failure and yet you've wasted this entire session 

of the legislature destroying even more jobs rather than 

building the economy of this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much more evidence do you need before 

you admit that your economic plans are failing, and why have 

you wasted the entire session on measures that will destroy jobs 

instead of measures that will create jobs?  Why would you do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to 

respond to the member's question.  First of all, I want to point 

out something that the member very well knows already and 

everybody in this House knows, is that Saskatchewan continues 

to have the lowest unemployment rate of all the provinces in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- But we're not hanging our hat on 

that, Mr. Speaker; that's an important statistic.  We are saying 

that where we are now still isn't good enough and that's why the 

government, the Minister of Economic Development, and 

everybody else in the government is working hard to see what 

we can do to provide more employment. 

 

And I'll just tell the member opposite, in counter to his question 

that this session has been one of not encouraging job creation: 

only the other day we announced a $10 million rural roads 

program which is going to create 500 jobs throughout rural 

Saskatchewan.  There are a large number of municipal 

infrastructure programs which now have come forward which 

will soon be announced which will create many hundreds of 

more jobs. 

 

There was recently an announcement by the Minister of 

Education of more than a 50 per cent increase in summer job 

program for students, which will create jobs for 1,200 students 

and young people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Partnership for Progress document and strategy 

which the government introduced some time ago is working.  

The Minister of Economic Development today is in north-west 

Saskatchewan, in the northern part of north-west 

Saskatchewan, yet 

announcing another regional economic development strategy; a 

strategy which over the long term and in the medium term is 

going to work for creating jobs and economic development in 

Saskatchewan far better than the megaproject approach which 

was used by the former government which was a complete 

failure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, we 

know how the Minister of Economic Development likes to 

travel around this province delivering strategy seminars.  He 

does that very well.  What he doesn't deliver is any jobs. 

 

Maybe the Minister of Finance should answer the next 

question.  This year's budget predicted 5,000 new jobs in 

Saskatchewan this year.  Well you got the number right, you're 

just moving in the wrong direction, Mr. Minister.  There are 

now 5,000 fewer jobs in this province in the same time last 

year.  Thousands of people are giving up and leaving the 

province, Mr. Minister.  They're turning to welfare; for the very 

first time in our history over 82,000.  Are you proud of it?  

Over 82,000 people on welfare, Mr. Minister. 

 

Your job record is abysmal, Mr. Minister, and the facts bear 

that out.  You cannot hide from the facts; excuses simply won't 

do.  Now you predicted 5,000 new jobs this year.  You have 

failed to meet the goal so far.  Give us a number, Mr. Minister, 

that you can predict with confidence for this year.  Give us a 

number.  Are you sticking by the 5,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me respond to the 

member opposite with some of the information which he has 

requested.  I think the use of the selective numbers which he 

has chosen to use does not point out the fact that the total 

number of jobs in Saskatchewan are up by 2,000 this month.  

He does not point out, Mr. Speaker, that employment is up 

1,800 in manufacturing; it's up 6,000 in wholesale and retail 

trade; it's up 5,800 in services over 1993; non-agricultural 

employment is up by 7,500 overall from the same period last 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about diversifying Saskatchewan's economy, 

this is evidence that that diversification strategy which we talk 

about is actually working, which is something it has not done to 

this extent in previous years and under the previous 

administration. 

 

There is momentum in the economy.  And I can tell the 

member opposite that the strategy which has been put forward 

is working, and the statistics which I have just told you, 

member from Thunder Creek, prove that that to be the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that's 

2,000 over abject failure the year before. 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

I remind you, when you were elected, Mr. Minister, you 

predicted your government would create 30,000 jobs when you 

released your Partnership for Renewal document.  The 

statistics today show there's 25,000 less jobs in this province in 

total than in 1991. 

 

Okay, Mr. Minister, you take the 30,000 you projected and the 

25,000 that you're short, you're a long ways away; you have an 

abysmal record. Partnership for Renewal, Mr. Minister, isn't 

a bad document except for one thing -- you aren't doing what 

you're saying.  An example.  It says: "Ensure a competitive tax 

system for business" and yet you continue to tax business out 

of business here.  It says: "Rejuvenate labour market policy . . . 

(by allow) working people to participate in economic renewal . 

. ." and yet you bring in labour legislation that kills jobs. 

 

It says: "Identify energy options . . ." and you can 

co-generation.  It says: "Maximize trade opportunities" and you 

oppose free trade and refuse to lower interprovincial trade . . . 

 

Mr. Minister, when are you going to follow your own 

recommendations, stop attacking business and working people, 

and start creating jobs instead of making excuses for the 

garbage that's going on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, we have long learned 

in this House that numbers that the members opposite when 

they were in government and now that they are in opposition . . 

. are not numbers that anybody can rely on. And I think that 

that has to be emphasized here once again. 

 

I want to point out to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 

once again he is incorrect in some of the things that he is 

saying.  We have in fact reduced the small business corporate 

income tax in Saskatchewan by 20 per cent since we took 

office.  We have reduced the tax for the manufacturing sector 

on those things that they use which they need to replenish from 

time to time in their process by a substantial amount.  And I 

wouldn't doubt that that's one of the reasons why the 

manufacturing jobs in Saskatchewan have increased quite 

dramatically because of the good management and good fiscal 

approach that this government has taken. 

 

I want to also point out to the member opposite that while 

Saskatchewan has an unemployment rate of 7.8 per cent, 

Conservative provinces on each side of us -- in Alberta, an 

unemployment rate of 8.8 per cent and they have a lower tax 

system than Saskatchewan; and Manitoba has an 

unemployment rate of 9.5 per cent. 

 

And I want to use the model which the Liberal member uses all 

the time -- New Brunswick, a Liberal province, which has an 

unemployment rate of 15.1 per cent.  Now that's not quite as 

bad as the Liberal province of Newfoundland which has an 

unemployment rate of 23.1 per cent, and Prince Edward Island 

with an unemployment rate of 22.3 per cent, and Quebec which 

has an unemployment of 

13.3 per cent. 

 

We're prepared, Mr. Speaker, to compare Saskatchewan to any 

other jurisdiction in Canada and there's no one can deny that 

we don't compare very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Gaming 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions 

today are for the minister in charge of Gaming.  Mr. Minister, 

for more than two years you've been expanding gambling 

without providing your strategic plan, without open 

consultation or public debate, and without concern for the 

consequences of your policy. 

 

Mr. Minister, a gambling strategy should come complete with a 

detailed impact analysis for public examination and debate.  

Why have you failed to provide this analysis, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me 

say to the member opposite that not only have we done internal 

analyses, there have been studies done with respect to the 

economic impacts and the economic benefits by independent 

bodies.  And I will send across one done by a national 

accounting firm with a very strong and reputable reputation, 

Peat Marwick, that was done with respect to the Regina Market 

Square's proposal for casino expansion.  If the member hasn't 

had a look at that, I will send it across. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is quite clearly the 

member from Greystone does not support the government's 

policy with respect to the expansion of gambling in this 

province.  So I would want to ask the member from Greystone 

what her position is.  Do you have a policy with respect to 

gaming, or do you not? 

 

Can the people in the hospitality industry expect if someday -- 

heaven forbid! -- you would ever form government, that you 

would turn the power off to the video lottery terminals in the 

beverage rooms, thereby taking $15 million out of the hands of 

that industry?  Would you be shutting down the bingos that are 

operating in this province and that your staff helped to expand 

and increased from $4 million to $100 million and the $85 

million that over that period went to the charities, would you 

shut that tap off?  Would you be shutting down raffles?  Would 

you be shutting off the 6-49 machines? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

problems that the people of Saskatchewan are having is that 

you don't have a strategic plan, Mr. Minister, and you are 

presently in government and you are in charge of gambling for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The research used by governments to decide about casino 

expansion have been called into very serious 



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

question.  There's more than 200 pages of study that's been 

financed by the Ford Foundation and the Aspen Institute -- 

institutes and organizations that have absolutely no interest, no 

vested interest in gaming.  And Professor Robert Goodman 

evaluated the research done by 14 different governments.  And 

he concludes, and I quote directly, Mr. Minister: 

 

 Of the 14 studies analysed, most were either totally or mostly 

unbalanced in describing cost impacts of casino expansion.  

These studies tended to cover the increase of unemployment 

and tax revenue generated, while neglecting or downplaying 

the fiscal and social costs associated with these ventures. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is: what study is your 

government using to direct your plans for casino expansion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me answer the 

member's question by a quote from Emmet Reidy, the 

executive director of the Liberal Party, who was a proponent of 

casino expansion in the 1980s. 

 

In an article it's indicated that: the economic benefits will be 

felt throughout the entire district, according to Reidy.  He 

believes that about a thousand new jobs would be directly 

created by the project. 

 

Can you tell us, madam, since you work with him on a regular 

basis, what economic analysis that Mr. Reidy did in 1988 

before he made these studies?  And can you tell me, Madam 

Minister, what . . . or Madam Member, what kind of advice you 

get from Elaine Hughston who sits in your office, who was 

involved in the bingo industry? 

 

And I want as well to say, madam, will you tell the aboriginal 

people who are looking to this industry to create some job 

opportunities, will you be pulling the plug on the opportunities 

for those people?  Can you tell this House where you stand 

with respect to aboriginal jobs in the new casinos?  Or have 

you, madam, not got a plan at all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I reiterate, Mr. 

Minister, you are in charge of gaming for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It is the NDP (New Democratic Party) who are 

in charge presently, governing the province of Saskatchewan.  

You, sir, are the one who is to have a strategic plan and to lay it 

before the people of the province, and you have been 

incompetent and you have not been able to do that. 

 

I have asked repeatedly, Mr. Minister, for copies of all research 

used to develop the NDP casino expansion policy, including 

the Eadington report. 

 

And in a letter dated March 31, 1994 from you, you said that 

the report by Bill Eadington and all other research used by the 

government in developing the casino expansion policy has been 

undertaken for review by cabinet and its committees and as 

such is 

exempt from release under the freedom of information and 

privacy Act. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to 

determine whether the research you are using is objective and 

complete.  What is it that you don't want the people of 

Saskatchewan to know? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Madam, I'll tell you what it is that I 

want the people of Saskatchewan to know.  I want the people of 

Saskatchewan to know that the member opposite is playing 

politics with new job opportunities for hundreds of aboriginal 

people in this province.  That's what I want them to know. 

 

I want them to know that she surrounds herself with people 

who've been involved in gambling in this province for a decade 

and who have been proponents of gambling.  And I want the 

people of Saskatchewan to know the hypocritical approach that 

she takes with respect to this issue. 

 

She won't explain to the people whether or not she supports 

gambling, and that's fine -- take that position.  We've taken a 

position that there will be regulated and controlled gambling in 

this province, and we have announced a policy in that regard.  

She asks for reports that have third-party information for which 

-- and I think she can understand this -- very simply we can't 

release because of the information and its impact on third 

parties. 

 

Now I would offer again and I will be sending across a study 

done by Peat Marwick with respect to one of the proponents 

and one of the proposals for expanded casinos in 

Saskatchewan.  And if she would take the time to sit down and 

read what's in these documents, I think she might better 

understand why we are creating and how we're going to be able 

to create job opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, as well . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

there is one individual in this Chamber who has made a 

180-degree turn in his stand on gaming, and that happens to be 

the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1990 he told the people of Moose Jaw he would under no 

circumstances support casino expansion in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and if he were the premier of the province it 

would never happen.  He's the one that has to explain his stand 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, Candace Fox of the University of Reno, Nevada, 

was paid to do a study on casino expansion by your very 

government.  Professor Goodman, in this extensive research, 

has examined one of her studies and considered it to be 

unbalanced because little or no information . . . no mention was 

even made of the negative costs of casino gambling. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the definitive study being used 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

by the Government of Saskatchewan that includes a complete 

and objective analysis of the negative impact of expanding 

casino gaming in our society? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, we have looked at a 

number of studies, and not only information gathered within 

the province but outside of the province in other jurisdictions, 

and it has been a long process by the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority to put this together.  And based on that 

information we have put forth a policy that calls for casinos in 

both Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

And I want to say to the member from Greystone that instead 

of attacking jobs and the job opportunities for aboriginal 

people, that she should join with this government in attempting 

to stop the outflow of dollars from this province; she should 

join with us to create employment opportunities for some of 

our Saskatchewan residents. 

 

But I ask her: what would you do, madam?  Would you shut 

the tap on gaming?  Would you shut down the lotteries, the 

raffles? Would you shut down the bingos? Would you shut 

down the VLT (video lottery terminal) programs? Would you 

shut down the casinos that are funding the exhibitions in this 

province?  Would you do that, if heaven forbid, you would ever 

become the premier of this province?  What would you do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cigarette Smuggling 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, a decision 

is expected today in regard to the cigarette smuggling trial 

which has being ongoing for some time in the community of 

Melville. 

 

Apparently, Mr. Speaker, some $120,000 worth of illegal 

cigarettes were smuggled in from the East into the Peepeekisis 

Reserve and then sold to Saskatchewan residents, and I 

understand this was the largest seizure of its kind in 

Saskatchewan's history. 

 

I think this is disturbing, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

minister is this -- many people believe that this is just a 

problem in the East, but apparently it has begun here in 

Saskatchewan -- have you any indication from the RCMP or 

from your department, the scope of cigarette smuggling in the 

province? To what extent is this activity going on in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the member for that question.  I 

was worried that he was going to ask me to comment on the 

proceedings in Melville and of course I couldn't do that. 

 

The reports that we have from the RCMP and the federal and 

provincial governments, departments that are concerned with 

this, is that cigarette smuggling, at the moment, is not a big 

problem.  It hasn't been yet and it's not today.  It is a situation 

however which the RCMP and the two levels of government 

are watching 

very, very carefully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Goulet that Bill No. 56 -- An Act to 

amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

make a few comments regarding the Bill before the Assembly, 

the Bill that's addressing automobile insurance in the province 

of Saskatchewan, Bill No. 56, and raise a few concerns that 

have been brought and are being brought to our attention on a 

daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly as we review the Act before us a number of questions 

must be asked.  And there's no doubt that once we enter 

Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker, that there will be more 

questions coming before us and being brought to our attention 

that will be something that we must bring to the minister's 

attention as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've been receiving questions from individuals 

regarding the no-fault insurance plan that the government is 

proposing to bring forward; or has, not proposed, but has 

already introduced into this House.  We've also been receiving 

requests, Mr. Minister, that we should take a look at it and ask 

the government to reconsider and take the time to sit down and 

rethink the whole program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We've also been . . . individuals have indicated that possibly 

there are some good points to the no-fault scheme that should 

be considered and we shouldn't just throw it all out.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I acknowledge that and certainly wouldn't disagree, 

won't disagree with that. 

 

In fact one of my local legal firms, I've asked for their 

viewpoints regarding the Bill.  And these are just a few of their 

comments: 

 

 We do appreciate that there is a problem and a concern of 

keeping costs affordable to the citizens of the province.  Our 

concern is that the costs not be controlled by unfairness to 

injured persons.  We are concerned that the prescribed 

benefits may, in many situations, be insufficient to properly 

compensate injured parties. 

 

And then they go on to say: 

 

 Our general concern is that the government is 



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

removing a right which people have acquired over a long 

period of history. 

 

That sentence, Mr. Speaker, would indicate to me that this 

right, to seek compensation through the courts has been 

something that wasn't there a number of years ago and that 

people have worked for determinedly over a period of history 

to gain. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as others of my colleagues enter the 

debate, we will be pointing out some of the discrepancies in the 

arguments being brought forward by the minister and by the 

government as to the real reasons for the no-fault insurance 

program. 

 

Will the government not be tempted to restrict benefits to 

control its costs?  Is this not the real reason for legislation in the 

first place?  How can people actually receive more benefits 

while at the same time the government sees big savings? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I view the legislation I have to ask myself, why 

would I even buy additional insurance over my SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) general insurance?  

Why would I go and buy a package policy?  Is there any need 

to carry a package policy now that the no-fault insurance is 

before us, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I think there's no doubt when the residents of 

Saskatchewan start asking themselves, well if there's no-fault, 

if I'm in an accident and I was at fault but I'm not responsible, 

and there's a specific pay-out that's going to be coming, then 

why should I carry additional insurance?  And I think that is a 

legitimate question that many people will be asking themselves. 

 

And when the government talked today and the Minister of, I 

believe it was Labour, had brought up when we were asking 

questions regarding job creation in this province, and the 

government talks about the new jobs that have been created 

across this province, and you look at a number of the small 

businesses such as in my constituency where people may find 

themselves at a point that a lot of number of these small 

businesses and the insurance industry have basically been just 

hanging on by a thread, dangling by a thread trying to maintain 

their business, should they lose -- or even the legal firms -- 

should they lose that ability to offer additional insurance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we also note on the order paper that the government is 

possibly coming forward with their credit union Act.  Many of 

these small businesses that generate . . . and hire maybe two, 

three, four, even as high as ten or twelve people in rural 

Saskatchewan, may be closing their doors, Mr. Speaker.  And 

what does that do for our rural economy?  What does that do 

for our local economy? 

 

A lot of these businesses hire even students in the summer to 

come and work for them.  Will they be in a position?  It's not 

just The Trade Union Act that's going to give them a problem 

or The Labour Standards Act, but now the no-fault insurance 

Act that we have 

before us is going to create another problem before them. 

 

And before long, Mr. Speaker, the economic hub and engine 

that drives this province is going to be put in a position where it 

will not be affordable for them to even keep their doors open.  

And there isn't a community in Saskatchewan that is not aware 

of the problems that are associated when a business shuts a 

door.  Because when a business shuts the door, it's not just the 

jobs that leave the community, it's not just that tax revenue 

that's generated and leaves that community -- the property taxes 

and the business tax, Mr. Speaker -- Mr. Speaker, it's the fact 

that individual lives are hurt on a daily basis. 

 

So as I've indicated, Mr. Speaker, there are businesses, even 

this legal firm, whose firm would be challenged through the 

no-fault program and would probably lose some of the 

customers and the clients that may have come to them on 

occasions prior to this legislation, may find themselves at the 

end of the day possibly cutting back in the services and in the 

people they employ in their office due to the fact that the 

services and the work on their behalf may be reduced.  And so, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a general concern. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the . . . I just noticed another comment 

that came to our office from Mark Brayford speaking on behalf 

of lawyers and the legal community.  And he says this and he 

raises this question: 

 

 It is debatable whether no-fault will reduce premiums since 

so many drivers that are at fault would be entitled to 

substantially increased benefits under a no-fault scheme at 

the expense of the innocent victim. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can relate that.  My colleague, the member 

from Souris-Cannington, was raising that question with the 

minister the other day, the fact that the no-fault scheme may 

allow a person who was intoxicated and created an accident to 

receive a better benefit or a higher benefit through the no-fault 

program than he would have on the other side; and yet the 

victim, who may have been a student, who may have been a 

housewife without any substantial income to talk of, is going to 

receive a lower compensation.  And because of the fact that 

they're in the lower income bracket, Mr. Speaker, they aren't 

even going to have the ability to sue or go to court. 

 

And the government says well, we haven't taken away the 

ability to go to court.  The unfortunate part, they have set a 

standard in there and a guideline that is so high that it's only 

going to be individuals with substantial incomes like, for 

example, Mr. Speaker, the individuals on the front row on the 

government side of the House, and cabinet, because of their 

income, could go to court; back benches will not be able to go 

to court, as I understand the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you have to ask yourself who is being 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

treated fairly?  What is the real reason? 

 

Mr. Brayford goes on to say: 

 

 Even if SGI could show that premiums would level off, the 

transient appeal of lower premiums would be short-sighted 

and flawed.  Nobody wants to pay less to get less. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when people buy insurance, they buy 

insurance so that they can cover a loss.  They don't buy . . . they 

don't look at insurance as just a premium, they look at the value 

of the insurance for the dollar that they are putting out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we have pointed out here, if there isn't 

going to be much of a return at the end of the day then there 

isn't going to be any real reason to invest in higher costs and 

better compensation protection because it isn't going to be there 

under the present Act.  By deliberately allowing premium 

increases to fall far behind inflation and by failing to reflect 

changes in legislation and home-making awards, SGI has 

succeeded in manufacturing its own crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons the minister has given for the 

present Bill before the Assembly on no-fault insurance was the 

fact that premiums were going to be going up and possibly 

going through the roof.  And, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt that 

when the economic times change, the rate of inflation comes 

into play, the insurance levels.  It doesn't matter what we're 

paying for as consumers, Mr. Speaker, there's always a cost 

associated.  As things become expensive, as insurance become 

more expensive, premiums rise.  No doubt about that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did increasing the cost of SaskPower, the fact that 

it was going to affect citizens across this province and 

increasing the rates, hinder the government from increasing 

those rates, Mr. Speaker?  Their argument for increasing the 

rates was that they must keep up with the times, they must keep 

up with inflation, they must make sure that they keep 

SaskPower in a healthy and viable position.  And who can 

speak against that?  We all believe in that too.  Businesses can't 

operate if they're losing money. 

 

What about SaskTel?  SaskTel's rates have increased 

substantially, and the government argued that they needed the 

increases to keep up with inflation and with the costs of 

providing a service. 

 

But all of a sudden SGI might be facing some increases -- no, 

we're going to change the insurance program; we're going to 

bring in no-fault insurance because we do not want rate 

increases coming forward. 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the reason the 

government doesn't want any rate increases coming forward at 

this time is because they've had enough rate increases; they've 

had enough people in the public sector and the public in general 

complaining about SaskPower and SaskTel and SaskEnergy. 

 

And members are shaking their heads.  Those in rural 

Saskatchewan know of the impact it's created, know that when 

the Minister of Finance stood in this place and said no increase 

and no new taxes this year that she was speaking out of one 

side of her mouth, because on the other side they were taking 

increases on a daily basis that were affecting each and every 

one of us. 

 

So all of a sudden they've heard that.  I'm sure many of the 

back-benchers have raised those concerns as they've debated in 

caucus.  And so SGI, which should be facing some increases as 

well, now has said no, we changed the insurance scheme, the 

insurance program.  No more increases. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because we're possibly a year, year and a 

half away from a general election, and they want to paint a rosy 

picture.  And no doubt the Minister of Finance is going to be 

very deliberate in painting even a more rosy picture or a rosier 

picture come next spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that fair?  Is that right?  Is that fair to the people 

of Saskatchewan that the government should be manipulating 

the books or changing the Acts?  To suit themselves, I would 

say, Mr. Speaker.  As we've noted the government has certainly 

not been afraid of changing Bills when they haven't been 

pleased by the legislation they've brought forward.  In fact they 

have had no problem, Mr. Speaker, in making changes 

retroactive to protect themselves.  But when it comes to 

consumers, it seems that consumers are on the outside looking 

in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder what happened to the surplus 

that was in SGI when the government took over office.  What 

happened to the $48 million that was there -- the $48 million 

surplus in the auto fund, Mr. Speaker?  How come all of a 

sudden SGI is facing such a shortfall?  Where did the money 

go? 

 

Was the money channelled from SGI to CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation) and from CIC into the Consolidated 

Fund?  Was SGI put into a loss position in order that the 

Minister of Finance could show a more positive and paint a 

more positive and rosier picture on the consolidated side of the 

financial picture in this province, or problems in this province, 

Mr. Speaker?  Is that what happened to the surplus?  Where is 

that $48 million surplus?  What has the government done, what 

has SGI done with the funds that were at its disposal and the 

surplus that was already in place?  Where is that, Mr. Speaker?  

Those are some questions that we must ask. 

 

The unfortunate part with the legislation before us, Mr. 

Speaker, as well is that SGI bureaucrats will be the insurer.  

They will be the judge, they will be the jury -- just like Crop 

Insurance.  So who do you complain to? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that when 

constituents come to me and when my colleagues, I'm sure, 

would come up, would indicate the same thing, that any time 

people are dealing with SGI, SGI seems to be the most difficult 

insurer to deal with. 



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

You're carrying a good source of liability insurance . . . And 

just for example, let me give an example, Mr. Speaker, a 

personal example.  We had an old hip-roofed barn that my 

brother and I had hogs in and the barn was insured and the 

livestock were insured; my brother and I had them insured with 

SGI.  The barn, the building was still owned by my father and 

he had it insured with Wawanesa Insurance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had  . . . at that time we had $10,000 

worth of insurance on the livestock that we had in that barn.  

And that $10,000 worth of insurance was actually much higher 

than the value of the livestock in the barn at the time.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, a lightening bolt hit that barn and within an hour that 

barn was levelled and we lost somewhere in the neighbourhood 

of 350 hogs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The interesting part was the way the insurance was handled.  

Mr. Speaker, Wawanesa Insurance was out, and within two 

weeks time Dad had his cheque in his pocket for his protection 

of the building.  He had the amount of the money that he had 

protected the building for in his pocket within two weeks time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my brother and I argued back and forth with SGI 

for some six months and finally settled at a value, a dollar 

value, Mr. Speaker, about $2,500 less than the livestock simply 

because we happened to be running some . . . our breeding herd 

out in a separate barn.  And because they weren't included, or 

had been omitted, or the agent had omitted putting on the SGI 

form that there were hogs housed outside of the barn, Mr. 

Speaker, we lost $2,500.  It took us six months even though 

SGI was not and would not have even come close to paying out 

the full amount that we had insured those hogs for because of 

the level of hogs we had at the time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it just shows to me that even at the best of 

times SGI, and most people would say, has become a difficult 

insurer to deal with. And as I've indicated, we had that 

problem.  That problem was one of the areas that we've been 

discussing.  And yet private insurers on many occasions, most 

people have found that dealing with the private companies, 

they've had good, positive service almost immediately, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one has to wonder what kind of service we're going to 

receive with the no-fault insurance.  What kind of hassles are 

people going to have to go through to prove the injuries that 

they've received are related to an accident. 

 

The minister can argue today that you're going to receive 

certain compensation; it's going to be forthcoming. But who's 

going to judge whether or not that injury is eligible for the 

dollar value that you're to receive, the compensation.  Who's 

going to prove that?  Can you go to a lawyer to argue it, Mr. 

Speaker?  There are some very serious questions we must raise 

there. 

 

So you're in an automobile accident and you have a whiplash.  

Is the insurer going to indicate to SGI that 

yes, this is a legitimate claim, or is the insurer going to say, we 

don't really think that this person has that significant an injury. 

So at the end of the day, no compensation.  All of a sudden 

they're on the outside looking in. 

 

Those are some of the questions that we must raise, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to bring a few points . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- To introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  I'd like to introduce 

to you, Mr. Speaker, and to members of the Assembly, a friend 

from Kipling, Saskatchewan, the United Church minister, 

Reverend Vic Greenlaw.  He will be visiting I think this 

morning.  We'll have an opportunity to speak together.  Would 

you warmly welcome him, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd just 

like to take a moment as well to recognize Mr. Greenlaw's 

presence in the Assembly.  I'm not sure if he's coming here to 

get some information and then practice a little bit in 

anticipation of seeking a nomination in the constituency that I 

represent, but we trust that he receives some valuable 

information and he doesn't take it out on his congregation 

Sunday morning if there's something that he doesn't really 

enjoy here.  But welcome, Mr. Greenlaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 56 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Coming back to the 

no-fault insurance program, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to bring a few 

comments forward that have been brought to our attention by 

one Mr. Gary Tompkins, associate professor and head of the 

department of economics, the University of Regina, regarding 

the no-fault program.  And he says this: 

 

 The purpose of liability insurance is to protect the purchaser 

from claims for economic losses for which the purchaser is at 

fault.  In theory, a compulsory, no-fault insurance system 

carries with it two major benefits: the reduction of legal costs 

from eliminating the need to litigate over the share of 

responsibility for an accident; and the ability to guarantee, for 

the most part, 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

that everyone operating a motor vehicle has insurance 

coverage. 

 

 The provincial government has indicated that the Sobeco 

Ernst & Young report, hereafter the Sobeco report, on the 

motor vehicle liability insurance system in Saskatchewan, 

will be the foundation upon which the system will be 

restructured. 

 

 The report, however, is riddled with unsupported claims, 

inaccuracies, and misleading statements.  The 

recommendations would go far beyond what is necessary to 

obtain the benefits normally associated with no-fault 

insurance. 

 

 The Sobeco report deviates from recommending no-fault 

insurance by including two additional objectives.  The first is 

that there should be compensation for people who sustain 

losses that are not the fault of another individual; the second 

is that automotive insurance premiums should remain 

affordable, and the report proudly points that out. 

 

 Saskatchewan insurance rates are among the lowest in 

Canada.  The primary method by which these goals are to be 

met is through purported savings achieved by reducing the 

involvement of the expensive legal system and placing caps 

on the awards that may be claimed, which the report suggests 

are growing rapidly and will continue to increase at the same 

rate. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might add, in a recent article and information 

brought to our attention, most people surveyed indicated that at 

the end of the day when they've gone to court on an insurance 

claim, Mr. Speaker, where the government minister has argued 

that some 40 or 50 per cent goes into the lawyers' pockets, 

individuals who have actually been in court would indicate that 

the reality is somewhere between 6 and 20 per cent.  And 

they've been more than satisfied with the compensation they've 

received and the payment that they have paid to their legal 

personnel or to their lawyer to represent them in the case. 

 

 The first question that should be raised is whether there is a 

basis for believing that the amounts and numbers of claims 

will continue to rise and whether the increase is necessarily a 

bad thing.  The report cites a number of factors which have 

contributed to recent increases in claims, most of which may 

be attributed to one-time events and, as such, should only 

lead to one-time increases in the level of awards. 

 

 The report also casts aspersions as to the legitimacy of 

particular heads of damage.  The courts have recognized only 

recently two 

 important factors with respect to damages.  The first is that 

there should be compensation for the lost value of unpaid 

work, such as housekeeping -- we agree with that -- home 

maintenance, provision of day care services, and so forth. 

 

 The second is that the courts have belatedly recognized that 

the $100,000 limit placed on pain and suffering awards in 

1978 should keep up with inflation.  The Sobeco report 

suggests that these changes are somehow inappropriate and 

are resulting in the need for unwarranted premium increases.  

It is more easily argued that the increases in awards are 

justified and represent an improvement from previous, 

inadequate levels of compensation. 

 

Does the death of a spouse who provided unpaid day care 

services eliminate the need for those services, Mr. Speaker?  

These are a number of questions being raised by Mr. 

Tompkins. 

 

 The second issue that arises is over the method by which 

savings will be achieved.  The report cites the figure that in 

1992, 44 per cent of liability claims involved a lawyer.  It 

fails to mention that most claims are settled out of court and 

that claims for lawyers' fees are not allowed.  Personal injury 

claims are based on an assessment of economic damages, not 

including legal fees. 

 

 Legal fees have the effect of reducing the amount of money 

received by the injured party.  And while the fees are indeed 

a cost to the system, they are not responsible for increases in 

the amount and number of awards. 

 

And I'd repeat that. 

 

 Legal fees have the effect of reducing the amount of money 

received by the injured party (Mr. Speaker).  And while the 

fees are indeed a cost to the system, they are not responsible 

for increases in the amount and number of awards.  The 

lawyer is paid based on what the client receives and the client 

pays the lawyer. 

 

 Whatever form the new system happens to take, the extent of 

injuries and required health care costs will need to be 

assessed and estimated by people recognized to be experts in 

those areas, and victims who are not experts will probably 

want to hire lawyers to represent them at whatever form is 

necessary or is used to assess the claim. 

 

 The savings, if any, (Mr. Speaker) that will be achieved by 

this new system is through the capped awards for serious 

injuries that result in losses in excess of the award ceiling.  It 

will not be necessary to litigate over the extent of injuries.  It 

is not obvious that the bureaucracy that is proposed by the 

Sobeco report will be less expensive to operate (Mr. 

Speaker).  The 



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

savings will come primarily and arise from paying an 

inadequate level of compensation to victims of accidents. 

 

And I think that was one of the major concerns that people 

have been raising time and time again.  Individuals who have 

been there, individuals who are presently in the court system or 

in the legal system, challenging the awards that are possibly 

coming their way or seeking compensation for losses incurred 

through an accident-related injury. 

 

 The system proposed by the Sobeco report creates a new 

social security program for accident victims who cannot sue 

for damages. 

 

He indicates, Mr. Speaker, that what we're doing is creating a 

new social security program for accident victims who cannot 

sue for damages.  And the report uses an example of a child 

who runs out in front of an oncoming vehicle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know what the problems associated with 

social insurance programs in our province and across this 

country.  Do we want to add to that, Mr. Speaker?  Is there 

indeed a saving at the end of the day?  Will there be a saving at 

the end of the day, or will we find after the next provincial 

election, Mr. Speaker, that there are going to be some definite 

changes and increases in insurance rates in this province? 

 

 While it is not difficult to support the creation or enrichment 

of such a program, it is not clear why victims of other 

accidents should pay for this program by being forced to 

accept inadequate compensation for their injuries.  The 

Sobeco report does not address this inequity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tompkins also indicates: 

 

 The report raises more questions than it answers and is full of 

bizarre assertions.  For example, apparently the writers 

discount the need for awards for non-pecuniary losses by 

placing quotations around the phrase, "pain and suffering." 

That is a famous way of arguing that the awards are too high. 

 

 In a recent case a 64-year-old plaintiff was awarded 35,000 

for a whiplash injury which was expected to give her 

headaches and periodic pain for the rest of her life.  Is 

$35,000 an excessive award for enduring pain and restrictions 

on activities for two or three decades? 

 

Is that an excessive award, Mr. Speaker?  That is the question 

being raised. 

 

 Another example of the report's lack of consistency is in the 

assertion that interest on past or prejudgement losses is not 

justified.  Awards are calculated based on the present value of 

losses. Past losses for injuries occurring after 1986 are 

awarded interest, while future 

 losses are reduced by interest.  Interest on past losses is 

justified on the basis of compensating for the delay in use of 

the money and inflation. 

 

 If the application of interest is not justified, does this mean 

that future losses should not be discounted with interest? 

 

 The report also asserts that in a structural settlement where an 

insurance company agrees to pay a schedule of fixed dollar 

benefits to victims, that the risk is transferred from the 

individual to the insurance company. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tompkins says this is nonsense. 

 

 If an accident victim agrees to perpetual 4 per cent annual 

increases scale for medical expenses, he or she runs a risk of 

actual expenses increasing at a higher rate and not being able 

to afford proper care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tompkins goes on to say: 

 

 Automobile drivers in Saskatchewan cause injuries to other 

people and should pay for the costs they impose on others.  

The refining of the approach the courts have taken to evaluate 

economic losses has led to fairer and larger awards, and 

perhaps it will be necessary to increase minimum levels of 

liability coverage to allow for these changes. 

 

 It is clear that the writers of the Sobeco report believe that the 

primary responsibility of a liability insurance system is to 

hold rates down rather than to adequately compensate the 

victims of accidents.  As such, the suspicions that have been 

expressed that the report was a set piece for a government 

which wants to reduce or eliminate insurance premium 

increases, may have some validity (Mr. Speaker). 

 

 There is a great deal to criticize in the Sobeco report.  And 

the large number of errors, unsupported claims, and 

superficial arguments contained therein precludes addressing 

each one in this space. 

 

 Unfortunately the criticisms of the proposal in the report 

made by the legal community who are, after all, 

knowledgeable in the area, have apparently been summarily 

dismissed by simply suggesting that private interest 

motivated the criticisms. 

 

 However, (Mr. Speaker) at some point the criticisms must be 

addressed regardless of source. 

 

 The provincial government would be well advised to not use 

the Sobeco report as a foundation for anything other than 

possibly a demand to renegotiate the fee paid by SGI for the 

report. 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

Mr. Speaker, I believe Mr. Tompkins brings out a number of 

very real concerns that this piece of legislation is bringing to us 

and that people across this province will continue . . . will begin 

to address and bring to our . . . and as we have found, are 

bringing to our attention on a daily basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Tompkins is right when he indicates 

that the legal profession, in speaking out against it, are going to 

viewed by the public as just defending their own interests.  

And, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to victims, you will find that 

there are many victims who would feel that there have been 

times when the legal profession has certainly worked well on 

their behalf.  Their ability to go to court, their ability to seek 

legal compensation, is something that people want the ability to 

have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't doubt that people across 

Saskatchewan are very concerned with the deficit, are very 

concerned with insurance premiums, are very concerned with 

the costs that are incurred upon them as premiums rise. 

 

And people in general, Mr. Speaker, are fair.  They believe in a 

fair form of compensation.  They believe in fairness and I think 

. . . I don't think there is anyone in this Assembly this morning 

or across this province who doesn't believe that there have at 

times been compensations paid out to individuals that would far 

exceed what would be a normal and fair compensation. 

 

There's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that many people in the legal 

field would also indicate that generally it's their intent to get as 

much as they can because if they're paid on a percentage, the 

higher the compensation package, the higher their payment. 

But I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, when push comes to shove, what 

they are seeking in general is a fair and adequate compensation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder how the changes to 

compensation packages will actually save SGI money.  The 

fact that premiums may not increase . . . If premiums don't 

increase, Mr. Speaker, that means that SGI isn't drawing 

revenue from the consumer.  So yes, SGI will not be receiving 

any increases in premiums.  And so there's that revenue that is 

going to be lost. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you just have plain losses in 

compensation awarded you . . . And I just want to quote from 

the news release put out by the minister on April 15.  And a 

couple of points he brings out: 

 

 The improved benefits of the plan include: 

 

 Loss of income benefits will rise from a maximum $200 per 

week to a maximum ($500) per week; these benefits cover 

full-time employees, part-time and temporary employees, 

students, homemakers, farmers and others who are 

self-employed. 

 

But how do they receive them?  Who is going to judge 

whether they receive that?  And if they do receive it, Mr. 

Speaker, if they do receive that compensation, for how long?  

Mr. Speaker, that's an increase of $350 per week.  That's an 

increase of $1,400 a month.  Mr. Speaker, in a year that's an 

increase of over $16,000 over the normal process that was there 

before, Mr. Speaker -- $16,000.  And for how long does that go 

on? 

 

 Rehabilitation benefits will increase from a maximum 

$10,000 to a maximum $500,000. 

 

 Victims who suffer severe permanent injuries will qualify for 

a maximum payment of $125,000 for pain and suffering, with 

smaller payments for less severe injuries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is 125,000 fair to an individual who may have lost 

the use of their upper body or may become a quadriplegic due 

to an accident?  Is $125,000 going to be fair to an individual 

who, say in their prime of life, say a student or a young parent 

with a young family at home, is going to face the rest of their 

life in a wheelchair?  Are those fair, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Bill before us has a lot of flaws.  There 

are a lot of questions that must be raised.  Mr. Speaker, as I've 

indicated before, no doubt the Canadian Bar Association would 

speak out against this piece of legislation.  No doubt the legal 

community across this province would want to speak out 

against this legislation. 

 

And I don't doubt, Mr. Speaker, as we've seen, individuals who 

have already been through the court system to seek legal . . . or 

use the court system to seek compensation for loss of wages or 

loss of income would probably indicate to us -- and on many 

occasions have already indicated to us -- that they felt treated 

fairly by the court system. 

 

But there's one thing I might add, Mr. Speaker.  I have also 

found that when we're dealing with a bureaucracy and dealing 

with government, that for many people it becomes very 

frustrating.  A good example is Workers' Compensation.  And 

my colleagues and no doubt members of this Legislative 

Assembly have dealt with many people regarding Workers' 

Compensation claims.  It's got to be the most frustrating form 

to go through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we seem to have bureaucrats who interpret the 

laws differently.  And it doesn't matter who you speak to, a 

different bureaucrat or a different person in the Workers' 

Compensation Board seems to come up with a different 

interpretation as to what pain and suffering is, as to whether the 

fact that you're working in the home may constitute an avenue 

of deriving revenue; therefore you cannot claim under the 

Workers' Compensation. 

 

(1115) 

 

Even unemployment insurance.  And I think what we're going 

to see with this no-fault insurance, there are many people are 

going to be found in the same 



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

position.  And what it's going to do at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, is create an additional workload for members of this 

Assembly as people come to us because they do not have the 

ability to go to the court system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when push comes to shove -- as one 

headline reads: public recognizes no-fault con job -- as people 

end up and no-fault comes into place and is put into effect and 

people have to live with it and work under it, Mr. Speaker, I 

think only then will the general public begin to realize the 

significance of the changes to no-fault insurance. 

 

Another headline says "Existing no-fault coverage scary." 

 

 No-fault benefits have existed for 50 years in Saskatchewan.  

If you see how they are administered you will have as much 

insight into what is being proposed as you want.  Head office 

dictates that people can have no more than 15 chiropractic 

treatments regardless of the need or their doctor's advice. 

 

We've had many arguments over the years, Mr. Speaker, about 

whether or not people are being treated adequately and fairly 

through insurance programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another headline, "No-fault insurance not the 

answer to problems."  I think one of the biggest reasons SGI 

and as the minister has indicated SGI wants to change the 

program, Mr. Speaker, is because of the costs and cost to 

government and their perceived cost to the consumer.  The fact 

is, Mr. Speaker, consumers will buy the type of insurance that 

they feel adequately covers them.  And, Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated earlier, if that insurance costs a little more, consumers 

themselves will determine the amount of insurance that they 

want to pay to cover themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to insurance claims and insurance 

compensation that's being paid out, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

there are compensation awards that are being granted which far 

exceed which was probably necessary, which would be 

probably appropriate.  Is that the problem of SGI?  Is that the 

problem of the insurance program?  Or, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

problem of a justice system that has maybe gone awry, where 

we start giving the legal awards that far exceed what would be 

fair and adequate to address the situation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've seen it across our nation.  We've seen 

it in this province.  We've seen it across the United States.  Just 

talk to people who go south for the winter and the cost of 

buying health insurance, the additional insurance that's needed.  

Mr. Speaker, a lot of that comes about because of the awards 

and the cost of health costs and the insurance costs and the 

awards that are being handed out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would it be possible or would it have been 

possible for us to find another way rather than 

radically changing SGI and bringing forward this Bill that we 

have before us?  Was it possible, Mr. Speaker, or would it be 

possible to find simpler ways for SGI to save the no-fault 

insurance plan? 

 

The headline in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, March 10, and 

this is the personal viewpoint of the writer: 

 

 If "no-fault" insurance becomes a reality, I may or may not 

feel it by a decline in my practice. 

 

And this is a lawyer speaking: 

 

 However much people may despise lawyers, they should not 

let SGI use that issue to deflect attention away from the real 

issues involved in "no 

_fault" insurance: Is it better?  And is it necessary? 

 

His question is: 

 

 Will no-fault insurance be better? 

 

And then he brings out the fact that: 

 

 Saskatchewan already has a "no-fault" insurance scheme and 

it is known as the Workers' Compensation Act.  Ask any 

person who has ever been the victim of a work-related injury 

what he thinks of the workers' compensation scheme and you 

will hear words like "uncaring," "arbitrary" and 

"mean-spirited." 

 

And I think that just brings out some of the points I raised a 

moment ago. 

 

 Now, SGI is proposing to do the same thing for victims of 

vehicle accidents. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part is that most people will 

not really sit up and take notice until they are involved in an 

accident or in a situation where they are left . . . their only 

redress is SGI and they start dealing with the bureaucracy and 

find that these bureaucrats are really uncaring, really don't care 

and just arbitrarily decide what the compensation will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe what I should do is take a moment to read 

the full headline, or the full article into the record: 

 

 To understand what is coming, take a look at where we have 

been. 

 

 Since SGI's inception, our insurance scheme has always had 

an element of "no-fault."  These benefits are known as 

weekly indemnity benefits and are paid to accident victims to 

replace the income they lose due to their injuries. 

 

 These benefits started at a paltry $60 a week.  It took 10 years 

before they were raised to $150 a week and another 10 years 

before the benefits were raised to $200 a week. 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

 These benefits, which are meant to replace lost income, do 

not even meet the poverty level in Saskatchewan. 

 

 If "no-fault" comes into being, as envisioned by SGI, once 

the amount of weekly indemnity is set, people are fooling 

themselves if they think it will bear any relation to the 

amount of money needed to really replace the income lost 

because of an injury or that the weekly benefits will keep 

even a distant pace with inflation. 

 

 If SGI's proposal is accepted, only those who have a job at 

the time of the injury would receive weekly benefits. 

 

And this is something we've been pointing out daily in this 

Assembly.  Home-makers, students, and the unemployed would 

receive compensation for their loss of ability to perform their 

duties or earn an income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question raised: 

 

 Is no-fault insurance necessary? 

 

 (And the writer says) SGI claims that it is proposing 

"no-fault" in order to avoid "mounting" losses in the auto 

fund.  These losses, it claims, are caused by having to pay 

compensation for pain and suffering and small injury claims 

such as minor whiplash. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to laugh at that because I know a 

number of people who have been struggling day in and day out 

for a number of years just to have their pain recognized as 

having begun through an accident that they were involved in. 

 

 The "no-fault" system represents a radical departure from our 

current system, with substantial impact on many different 

interests.  It does not target these "problem" claims. 

 

 To use a tired cliche, it's like shooting a fly with an elephant 

gun.  If SGI's true desire is to save money, there are simpler 

ways to do it: 

 

 Impose a $5,000 deductible on all bodily injury claims.  

Then, if the amount to be paid in pain, suffering and lost 

income does not exceed $5,000, the individual will receive no 

additional compensation out of that provided for all victims 

regardless of fault. 

 

 SGI claims that in 1992 (which is the year which gives rise to 

SGI's current problems) there were 5,400 claims.  At $5,000 a 

claim, that would be a saving of $27 million. 

 

 Create a graduated licensing system whereby new drivers 

would be on a two-year probation during which there would 

be zero tolerance on alcohol use and a curfew respecting 

vehicle use. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe there are a number of 

states in the United States that are now looking at it.  And if I'm 

not mistaken, in Canada some provinces are looking at setting 

up some stricter rules regarding young drivers.  The Insurance 

Bureau of Canada reports that such systems result in a 

significant reduction in accidents. 

 

 Stop reimbursing the Workers' Compensation scheme for the 

benefits it pays to accident victims who are able to sue the 

person responsible for their injuries. 

 

 Stop reimbursing Saskatchewan Health Services Plan for 

services provided to the accident victim. 

 

 Stop reimbursing the Medical Care Insurance Commission 

for visits made to doctors by the accident victim. 

 

 (And) stop reimbursing the other insurance companies for 

money they pay to the accident victim to replace lost income. 

 

The writer goes on to say: 

 

 If SGI were to make these changes, it would save more than 

enough money to extricate itself from its current financial 

woes and start paying benefits to victims that will make a real 

difference to their recoveries. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've indicated time and time again, I 

believe there are many ways, a number of ways that SGI 

could've looked, could've taken the time in addressing this 

problem.  But they didn't necessarily have to change the whole 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes down to compensation and what is 

fair, and whether it's through insurance or whatever program it 

is, Mr. Speaker, would it be logical for us for us to sit back and 

at the end of the day decide that a certain amount is fair and 

equitable and that maybe there should be some ceilings put on 

certain demands versus taking people's total ability to seek 

compensation and limiting compensation and at the end of the 

day taking it away from people who need it the most? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what we find with the Bill before us is it 

in some ways tries to address some of the concerns.  But at the 

end of the day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may find SGI has just 

found another way of spending more money, of digging a 

deeper hole than it is in today.  And it doesn't answer a number 

of the questions that are out there and it doesn't answer the 

problem that individuals injured in accidents may face, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I will take my place and 

allow other members of this Assembly to stand up and to bring 

some of the concerns that have been brought to their attention 

forward to the House so we can have that wide-open debate 

that I'm sure the 



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

minister was expecting and was looking for in discussing this 

piece of legislation. 

 

And I would trust and hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we 

continue the debate and as we raise the questions, that the 

government and the minister are taking a moment, are carefully 

listening and that we will see some changes to the legislation 

that will protect injured workers, that will adequately protect 

injured workers, that will certainly put SGI in a better financial 

position, that would help SGI out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let's not just throw out the old program simply 

because we need to save a few dollars for today.  Let's think of 

tomorrow -- where will we be two years from now?  The 

changes today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will they indeed be 

beneficial two years from now or are we going to be back here 

debating the same issue two years from now, finding ourselves 

with major increases in SGI costs because they have found that 

they are continuing to lose money. 

 

Maybe we need to look at the administrative side of SGI.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there are a number of questions that I will 

raise, my colleagues will raise, concerns that we must continue 

to bring before this Assembly.  And I thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, for the opportunity of being able to continue the 

debate and to bring these concerns to the attention of the House 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Well I 

would like to say it's a pleasure to rise today but with this Bill 

under consideration I can't really say that in all honesty, 

because this Bill will hurt the people of Saskatchewan.  It will 

benefit perhaps SGI, but it will be a detriment to all of the 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And people, when they look at insurance, think of it as 

something that they have to buy; it's a necessity; they really 

don't like it.  And when people are buying insurance, 

particularly automobile insurance, it's forced on them by the 

government, by legislation that says, you will buy auto 

insurance from SGI if you wish to license a vehicle in 

Saskatchewan.  You're not given an option; you're not said you 

can buy insurance from some place else.  No, you buy 

insurance from SGI.  You have no option. 

 

And so when people buy their licence plates and pay their 

licence fees, they don't look at what kind of coverage they're 

receiving.  They simply realize that they have to pay it so they 

pay the bill and they go on about their business.  But what 

people do when they do that and not look at what they receive 

for coverage, they're missing what they're buying. 

 

And in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, when people buy 

insurance, they don't look at what that coverage might be until 

such time as they need to make a claim against it.  That's when 

they look and find out what is involved in their insurance.  And 

because people have not paid attention to what kind of 

coverage they are receiving, the government has been able to 

get away without consulting with the people on these very 

dramatic and very drastic changes to automobile insurance in 

this province. 

 

(1130) 

 

And we're not talking about the insurance on getting your 

fender fixed; we're talking about the personal injuries that may 

result from a vehicle accident.  And the government is claiming 

they have consulted, but very few people have been talked to at 

all, Mr. Speaker, on their consultation. 

 

In fact when questioned about it the other day the minister 

suggested that their consultation effort was involving a 1-800 

number.  Well I think this is the first time that this Assembly 

has heard of using a 1-800 number as a means of consulting. 

 

We tried the 1-800 number.  We phoned up with some very 

specific questions.  And the people at the other end of the 1-800 

number didn't have the answers, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Their 

response was, leave your name and we'll get back to you 

sometime. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as this Bill proceeds through the House, 

that sometime may very well, and perhaps in probability, will 

be after the legislation has passed because they haven't got back 

to us yet. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the 1-800 number is a joke, is a sham, 

when the minister says that's his method of consultation. 

 

You see the minister trying to push ahead with this Bill in the 

face of growing public concern and public opposition to this 

Bill.  Mr. Speaker, we have to question when is the minister 

and the government, the Premier, going to consult in good 

faith; go out, meet with the general public, the people at large, 

explain to them what is involved, what the current state of the 

insurance is, what kind of protections they have, and what's 

being proposed under this new legislation. 

 

And don't just go through the motions, as the Minister of 

Labour has done with his Bills.  Actually go out and talk to 

people, and listen to their concerns and act on them.  That's the 

key -- act on those concerns; not walk into a meeting, say 

you've got an hour, give a 59-minute speech and say, is there 

any questions and then leave.  That's not consultation; that's 

just propaganda, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And that's 

how this government operates.  They don't really want to 

consult with anybody because why confuse them with the facts, 

they already have their mind made up.  That's what their 

attitude is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we tried the 1-800 number there was no avenues opened 

up to us to try any consultation.  They simply wanted to know 

what our question was, and if it wasn't a very simple question 

for which they could look at one of their pamphlets and give 

you the very simple answer, then they didn't know what the 

answer was, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They had to go 

back and say, we will check up on the information and we'll get 

back to you sometime.  Sometime, Mr. Deputy Speaker; no 

specific time, just 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

some future, later date. And so far the later date has not 

occurred.  But the minister is trying to rush this through the 

House. 

 

Because if they were actually going to use this line for 

consultation, if it was possible, they would be asking, what do 

you think about this?  What are your concerns?  But no, Mr. 

Speaker, they don't really want this to happen because to have 

the public actually give that kind of input would be a bother to 

them, and they really don't want to hear what the public has to 

say.  Because if they did, then they would have to listen to 

letters such as the one that was in the Leader-Post a few days 

ago from a Mona L. Dovell of Regina.  And her letter was 

actually a very good one, I believe.  I'm not sure what the 

minister thinks about it, but I think it brought out a lot of the 

points that the minister is trying to avoid. 

 

And I'll read the entire letter from the paper, Mr. Speaker, and 

make a few comments on it as I go along.  And it says:  "Public 

recognizes 'no-fault' con job".  Because that is exactly what this 

minister is trying to do -- he's trying to pull the wool over the 

public's eyes on this issue, not give them the real information, 

simply slip it through before the people realize what's 

happened.  And only after they have been involved in a vehicle 

accident and received an injury, will they find out what this 

minister has actually done to them. 

 

I quote: 

 

 The NDP government has bought into the crass conservative 

economic model of loss advocated by insurance companies 

everywhere:  If it can't be measured with a calculator, it's not 

a loss. 

 

 SGI has been pressing for no-fault at regular intervals ever 

since SGIO was created in the 1940s.  However, up until 

now, the public has always been protected by politicians with 

the backbone to stand up to the SGI bureaucrats. 

 

And I think that's a very good and true statement.  Because the 

other day we saw in the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

minister respond to a question involving impaired drivers.  He 

had one answer.  Then he went out and talked to his 

vice-president from SGI and had another answer.  One really 

has to wonder who is in control of SGI -- whether it's the 

government and the minister or the bureaucrats at SGI.  

Because he seems to take his marching orders and his answers 

from the bureaucrats at SGI. 

 

I quote again: 

 

 SGI cannot believe its good fortune to have found a 

government which: 

 

 Is eager to score political points by bashing the legal 

profession. 

 

And that seems to be a fairly popular sport in a lot of areas, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Two: 

 

 Proudly ignores the rule of law (repealing its own legislation 

setting up a commission to set provincial court judges' 

salaries) 

 

And again we see the example of the arrogance of this 

government when they can set the laws and then turn around 

and break them. 

 

Three: 

 

 Is only too happy to sneak in this cruel "no thought" 

legislation without having the courage to even mention it in 

the throne speech. 

 

And this is one of the government's major initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker, along with their labour legislation.  And indeed there 

was no mention in the throne speech of this type of legislation 

coming forward. 

 

Four: 

 

 Promised not to enact such legislation without full and open 

consultation with the public and whose minister responsible 

refuses to debate the Canadian Bar Association president, 

claiming it would only confuse the public. 

 

Well that's what the minister did say.  If he went out and talked 

to the people, it would confuse the public.  And you know 

what, Mr. Speaker?  It's probably true.  Because the minister 

himself is confused and would not be able to respond to the 

answers, and therefore would indeed confuse the public.  

Because when you have a confused person trying to provide the 

answers, you're going to get confused listeners. 

 

Quote again: 

 

 Does anyone remember what happened to the last politician 

(Kim Who?) after she said that social issues were too 

important and complicated to be debated publicly? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I happen to remember who that Kim was, 

and she was unceremoniously dumped from the political scene.  

And rightly so.  When you make statements like that, you 

should be chastised.  And the public has one way to chastise 

their politicians, and that's to throw them out.  And that 

happened in this case and that will happen with the minister. 

 

Because the public can indeed comprehend and understand 

these issues if they're given the opportunity and if they're given 

the information to make those kind of judgements.  And the 

minister's 1-800 phone line does not provide that information.  

They provide the very simplest and most basic of information, 

and anything more complicated than a hello, they have to 

respond with, I'll get back to you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister is simply trying to dodge the 

issue with the government.  The government does not want to 

provide any real, solid information to the 



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

general public because they know and they realize that the 

general public will oppose thoroughly their initiative on the 

no-fault insurance, or the no-fault insurance scheme, because it 

is scheme to defraud the public of their rightful amount of 

compensation they properly deserve. 

 

I quote again: 

 

 Even after the Consumers Association of Saskatchewan 

recently called for full public hearings, SGI and the 

government persist in using public funds to sell us a bill of 

goods. 

 

 Bad for lawyers or not, the public knows when it's being 

whizzed. 

 

And that's correct, Mr. Speaker.  The public more and more are 

becoming aware of this government's attempt at subterfuge to 

put their Bill through without providing the public with the 

proper information. 

 

And they are becoming aware.  That's why we're receiving 

more and more letters.  That's why more and more letters are 

going into the newspapers.  And that's why the minister, I 

would suspect, is receiving more and more calls.  If we receive 

calls, the minister will be receiving calls, and a greater number 

than what we receive, I would also suspect. 

 

So when the minister is providing his 1-800 number using 

public funds to sell us a bill of goods, why isn't he also 

providing the other half of the information, the other side of the 

story?  Because we all know, Mr. Speaker, that there's at least 

two sides to every story.  And the minister is providing his pet 

side, but not providing the information that the public needs to 

make a proper decision on this issue. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, I heard on the news this morning 

that the minister is indeed prepared now to meet with the 

consumers' association of Saskatchewan.  He's prepared to 

meet with them next week.  Well this Bill has been introduced, 

we're into second readings, and this is the minister's idea of 

consultation, I guess.  Oh, I'll bring it in and then maybe I'll talk 

to you. 

 

I really wonder though if this meeting with the consumers' 

association will be held in public, whether the minister would 

risk appearing in public to answer questions dealing with 

no-fault insurance.  I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that this meeting 

with the consumers' association will only be held behind closed 

doors, that the minister will not have to answer any questions in 

the public.  And that is probably the only way that the minister 

will meet with an organization or an individual -- as long as it's 

only behind closed doors where he can have his SGI 

bureaucrats there to answer all of the questions for him, 

because the minister himself doesn't understand what this Bill 

is about. 

 

And as the letter in the paper, Mona Dovell said: "Bad for 

lawyers or not, the public knows when it's being whizzed." 

And the public is becoming more and more aware that the 

minister and the government are trying to avoid any 

appearances in public to answer any questions.  If the minister 

wasn't hiding, he would have taken, not necessarily the first, 

second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth request 

to meet with the president of the Saskatchewan bar association, 

but maybe he would have taken the 20th request because he's 

received that many. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is simply trying to avoid appearing in 

public and answering any questions because it would show, Mr. 

Speaker, that the minister doesn't understand his very own 

piece of legislation.  And, as Ms. Dovell said: "Bad for lawyers 

or not . . ." 

 

Well Mr. Mandryk had a column today in the paper also 

commenting on lawyers.  And the member from Churchill 

Downs might be interested to know that Mr. Mandryk isn't all 

that impressed with lawyers on the most part, but that Mr. 

Mandryk is prepared to admit that perhaps the lawyers do have 

a point in this particular case, that there is some value in what 

they are saying. 

 

And I realize that that may be small comfort for the member 

from Regina Churchill Downs, that Mr. Mandryk does believe 

that at one particular instance in time the lawyers may be right.  

Because I quote the very first paragraph of Mr. Mandryk's . . . 

I'll read the title even:  "Lawyers may be right about no-fault." 

 

I don't know what the lawyers on the government side of the 

benches are saying about it, whether they have any influence 

with the minister, but the rest of the lawyers in the general 

public do have a great deal of concern and they do have a 

personal self-interest in this.  This is their means of 

employment.  But they also have a very great deal of concern 

for their clients, the people who voluntarily come into their 

offices and ask for assistance, ask for assistance in dealing with 

the people at SGI. 

 

And as the critic for SGI, I receive a large number of phone 

calls of people who have problems dealing with SGI, with the 

adjusters.  And this Bill goes even further than the current 

legislation in giving even wider powers, wider powers without 

any rights of appeal to SGI adjusters. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Mandryk goes on to explain why he believes the lawyers 

may be right in this particular issue.  And I would like to read a 

couple of paragraphs from his column which explain his 

thoughts.  And I quote: 

 

 Innocent victims -- whiplash victims being the most obvious 

-- will get less money.  No-fault offers, no dollar value on 

pain and suffering unless your injury is permanent. 

 

 And the $70 million SGI claims it will save in claim costs 

will mostly come at the expense of the victims and not the 

lawyers.  (The 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

government's own estimates suggest only $15 million of that 

would go to lawyers.) 

 

 At the very least, there should be a public debate and it's 

downright insulting for Goulet to say there can't be one 

because it would just confuse people. 

 

 Far more offensive than supposedly self-serving lawyers are 

politicians who refuse to listen to legitimate concerns and, 

instead, choose to ram through legislation. 

 

 Forgive me my friends. 

 But the lawyers may be right. 

 

And indeed, the government and the minister are doing 

everything possible that they can to avoid meeting the public, 

to avoid having to discuss this issue with the general public, 

and to avoid having to listen to the real, legitimate concerns of 

the general public -- and especially those concerns by public 

members who have had to deal with SGI. 

 

I had a fellow phone me a while back who had gone to his 

doctor and his doctor had prescribed certain therapy.  When the 

man went to his SGI adjuster, the SGI adjuster said no, we're 

not prepared to pay for that.  Even though the doctor was 

recommending a particular diagnosis and a particular treatment, 

the SGI adjuster claimed that it wasn't necessary. 

 

Now I'm not sure what kind of training SGI adjusters receive in 

the field of medical services that makes them more competent 

to judge the needs of an accident victim than what a doctor 

does.  But that is the kind of authority being used today, Mr. 

Speaker, by SGI adjusters.  And they will be even more 

omnipotent under this piece of legislation. 

 

You have no rights to appeal.  Oh, I shouldn't say no rights.  

You have the rights to appeal a case before the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  But the Court of Queen's Bench can only 

award damages based on this Act.  And those damages are 

capped.  So you might be able to claim that my permanent 

impairment should have given me $25,000 rather than 17, even 

though you're permanently injured for life and may be unable 

to work.  You're limited to what is in this Bill even -- even, Mr. 

Speaker, when you go to court. 

 

And if this is an attempt to lock lawyers out of the process, Mr. 

Speaker, any time that you put in the opportunities for appeal, 

people will take advantage of those opportunities, and lawyers 

will be involved in the process, Mr. Speaker.  So lawyers are 

not even being excluded from the minister's Bill.  They're still 

there.  But the claims possible by the victims are limited in this 

Bill to very minimal amounts in most cases -- very minimal 

amounts in most cases. 

 

The only ones who have the opportunity to expand the amount 

of coverage they receive are those people who earn in excess of 

$50,000.  They are the only ones that have the ability to claim a 

larger compensation package.  Not the housewife, not the 

senior who is 

retired, but the person whose employment income, and that's 

very important -- employment income -- not your income from 

other sources, but your employment income.  You have to have 

a form of employment that pays you a compensation before 

you can claim any lost income compensation in this Bill.  It 

doesn't take into account your investment income.  That's not 

classified as income under this Act; it's employment income. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a large gap in this Bill between the 

$550 that the minister is talking about for income loss, $550 

per week, and someone earning $50,000; $550 a week works 

out to $28,600. 

 

So what happens if you're a person who is earning between 

29,000 and $50,000?  That difference is lost to you if you 

suffer a permanent injury, in this particular case.  Or if you 

suffer an injury that is not permanent, but is somewhat longer 

term, say 179 days, because the rules change after 180 days.  

You're entitled to $550 a week, whereas your real salary may 

have been $3,500 a month, compared to the $2,200 that the 

minister is prepared to allow you.  If you earn more than 

50,000, you can turn around and sue. 

 

All the cabinet ministers over there, Mr. Speaker, would have 

an opportunity to sue for a greater loss of income, whereas all 

the back-benchers would not.  And as the member from Regina 

Albert North said, he would not be able to because he's not a 

cabinet minister, although I'm sure he has high hopes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well perhaps 

the member from Regina Albert North is interested in suing 

too, I'm not sure. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the public is going to lose under this.  The 

government is talking of saving $70 million.  The lawyers, at 

maximum, would be receiving 15 of that $70 million.  So who 

gets the other 55 million?  Where does that come out of?  

Whose pocket is that $55 million coming out of? 

 

Only one pocket, Mr. Speaker, and that's the victims of 

accidents.  They are the only ones that are losing that.  And 

that's where this is hurting, Mr. Speaker.  It's the victims of 

vehicle accidents in this province that are going to lose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was another item in the paper that is of 

interest in this particular area, and it deals with an accident 

victim by the name of Cory Hunt.  And the article dealing with 

Mr. Hunt was in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dealing with a 

whiplash case which he had against SGI.  And he has reported 

numerous problems in dealing with SGI on this particular issue. 

 

And I'd like to quote a little bit from Mr. Hunt.  Mr. Hunt says, 

and I quote: 

 

 Hunt says the hassles he experienced dealing with SGI have 

convinced him that innocent accident victims require lawyers 

and the court system to keep the corporation accountable.  

"Why shouldn't I be able to pursue my right to 



2114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

sue for damages?  I didn't ask to be put into this situation that 

I am in and I have no wish to go through life with a 

disability." 

 

And indeed Mr. Hunt was involved in an accident through no 

fault of his own.  He received a whiplash injury. 

 

And I know a number of people scoff at the idea of whiplash 

injuries.  I had a lady phone me the other day, and she works 

for an ambulance company.  She said, I always thought that 

people who complained about whiplash injuries were just 

looking for an insurance settlement, until I was involved in an 

accident in Saskatoon where I was rear-ended.  And she says: 

now I understand what it's all about because I suffer from 

headaches every day. 

 

And that was her comments. 

 

Whiplash injuries are very real, even though SGI has a great 

deal of difficulty accepting that fact, and the people working 

for SGI have a great deal of difficulty accepting that. 

 

But if you suffer from a whiplash injury, to you, Mr. Speaker, it 

is very real and it's debilitating.  People who have severe 

headaches as a result of whiplash have a great deal of difficulty 

working, because they're always under stress from that injury.  

And yet SGI does not wish to provide any support for those 

kind of injuries. 

 

And when people have to go to the courts to recover those kind 

of compensations to which they're entitled, because SGI is 

unwilling to accept those kind of soft-tissue injuries as being 

valid, then you need to have the right to go to a third-party 

arbiter, which is the courts, to receive a determination and a fair 

compensation.  And the courts will determine whether or not 

that soft-tissue injury is valid. 

 

Because in many cases the SGI adjusters, they're not there to 

see to it that the accident victim receives fair compensation, 

they're not there to see to it that the accident victim receives a 

proper award, they're there to see to it that their corporate 

employer -- Saskatchewan Government Insurance -- pays out 

the least amount possible. 

 

Insurance companies, including SGI, are not in the business of 

paying out large settlements because they want to; they're there 

in the business of providing protection and paying 

compensations when they have to.  But they don't do it 

voluntarily in a lot of cases.  They try to provide the minimum 

payments possible rather than the proper payment.  And that's 

where a third-party arbiter comes into play.  That's where the 

ability to go to a lawyer in our society and go to court makes all 

the difference. 

 

Again Mr. Hunt has to say . . . I'll read from the Star-Phoenix, 

and I quote:   

 

 During the year he was off work his adjuster tried to cut off 

his monthly disability cheques 

 because he refused to return to work against doctor's orders.  

He contacted a lawyer after his benefits were discontinued and 

the next day his cheque was waiting for him at the lawyer's 

office. 

 

 People who were not fair in the past would have full power to 

make severely unfair decisions about your claim without fear 

of a lawyer coming in to see that you are being treated fairly.  

Why would this create a better system, he wonders? 

 

And that's Mr. Hunt. 

 

Because there are many, many circumstances, Mr. Speaker, 

where the SGI adjusters have been unfair once the case has 

gone to court for determination.  Now that's not to say that 

every case brought before SGI adjusters is treated unfairly.  

Certainly not.  But even in the government's own survey that 

suggested 75 per cent of the people were happy with the 

adjustments, with the settlement they received after going 

through a lawyer, it states that, according to one of the lawyers 

I discussed this with, that only between 15 and 25 per cent of 

cases go through the legal system -- 15 to 25 per cent.  So that 

means the other 75 to 85 per cent have gone through the SGI 

system. 

 

But -- and this is a very big but -- 75 to 80 per cent of the 

claims settlement dollars were awarded to that 15 to 25 per cent 

of the claims that handled a lawyer.  So that would seem to 

indicate, Mr. Speaker, that those people who simply take the 

adjuster's figures, the adjuster's offer, are not receiving the 

awards that they are perhaps entitled to. 

 

Because when 75 per cent of the claims dollars go to 15 to 25 

per cent of the people who utilized lawyers, would seem to 

indicate that perhaps there is a problem with SGI's adjustments 

and that more people -- heaven forbid -- but more people would 

utilize lawyers.  And I know that will clog up the system if that 

happens, Mr. Speaker, but if adjusters are not prepared to 

handle claims properly and fairly, then perhaps that is the only 

recourse. 

 

(1200) 

 

While that may be the only recourse under the current system, 

the minister will eliminate that as a recourse under the no-fault 

scheme, because there is very little opportunities for access to 

the court under the government's no-fault.  I've mentioned the 

one, $50,000 or better loss of income is one opportunity that 

you have to go through the court system. 

 

The other day the minister mentioned mediation services.  And 

indeed it's in the Act.  There are some mediation services 

available.  The claimant would pick someone to sit on the . . . 

would get together with the insurer, SGI, to pick an arbitrator.  

But the arbitrator is limited to what's in the Act.  They can't 

provide you more than the funds available in the Act, only with 

what is in the Act. 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2115 

If you're entitled to 550 . . . If the Act says you're entitled to 

$550 a week for loss of income and SGI has offered you 400, 

you could go to mediation to try and lift it up to 550.  But if 

your weekly income was $700, you don't go to $700; you can 

go to a maximum of 550, and that's all, if your earnings are less 

than the $50,000 level. 

 

And if you don't agree with the mediator, you can go to the 

Court of Queen's Bench.  Again, you can only go in that case to 

the $550 per week income level, not to the 700 that you may 

have been earning, only to 550. 

 

So even though the minister says that you have the right for 

mediation and you have the right to go to court, those rights are 

capped, they're limited by this very Bill.  You're limited to 

whatever is in the Bill and no more.  The only exception is if 

you earn more than $50,000.  And that's the only exception in 

this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again from the article about Mr. Hunt, and I quote: 

 

 The government anticipated complaints about SGI putting its 

own financial interests ahead of its clients and put into place 

a three-stage appeal process. 

 

 If someone doesn't agree with the settlement, they can ask for 

an internal SGI review. 

 

If still not satisfied, the case can go to an independent arbiter. 

And finally an appeal to the Court of Queen's Bench is allowed. 

 

And again, that's true.  But as I've explained, any appeals are 

limited to the settlements provided in the Act and no more.  

And that's not fair, Mr. Speaker, because some people are 

going to be hurt by this. 

 

And the government does allow, as I mentioned, people to sue, 

but only for the loss of income if they earn more than $50,000. 

 

The minister says that the Bill is a winner for seniors, for 

housewives, for students, and others.  But what's the real 

situation?  I think on close examination one will find out that 

that is not the case. 

 

A housewife with no dependants and no employment income -- 

and that's the key word again, employment income -- receives 

loss of income compensation based on her income.  If she has 

no employment income she receives no compensation; no 

compensation for pain and suffering.  If she's permanently 

disabled there will be some compensation, but if the injury isn't 

permanent there is no compensation. 

 

And the same applies for seniors.  Seniors that are retired have 

no employment income, receive no pain and suffering 

compensation, and no income loss. 

 

Students are . . . a couple of sections on students and youth in 

the Bill.  A student is paid a certain amount of money -- I'd 

have to look at the Act, but 3,500 

 to $6,000 for loss of their school year -- but that doesn't take 

into account, Mr. Speaker, you may have lost two months out 

of your school year and then been able to go back and write 

your exams.  It doesn't talk about you failing your school year 

because you were out, but the lack of the ability to attend and 

write your tests to complete your course; that's what it talks 

about. 

 

The fact that you were out for a major portion of your school 

year and be able to return to class; you're no longer entitled to 

this compensation.  You may fail because you couldn't be in the 

classes for the proper amount of time but you still had the 

opportunity to participate at the end to complete your classes; 

therefore you're not eligible to receive the compensation.  And 

there is no coverage, no compensation for pain and injury.  If 

you lose some employment opportunities in that time period, 

you will receive some coverage. 

 

The housewife, if she is injured in an accident -- and perhaps 

housewife is the wrong term; it should be home-maker, because 

this could include men also -- if they're caring for children they 

receive a compensation based on the number of children, with a 

maximum of $400 if you have four children and lesser amounts 

as the fewer children you have.  But that's only if you have the 

children at home as dependants.  If you don't have any children 

at home, you receive no compensation. 

 

We phoned the 1-800 number to verify that this was indeed the 

case.  And they confirmed that retired people with no 

employment income would get next to nothing from an 

accident claim, and a housewife with no kids and no 

employment income would also get next to nothing from an 

accident claim. 

 

We've also determined that death benefits paid to parents for 

dependent children will be very minimal -- very, very minimal.  

And there is a serious potential loss of income taking place 

when students are permanently injured.  And the government 

awards themselves the ability to determine what type of 

employment a person would have been capable of. 

 

And when we review all the concerns and the difficulties 

people who have had to deal with SGI have, we see that the 

determinations are always made in favour of the insurer, not in 

favour of the insured.  The person who pays the bill up front 

first doesn't receive the maximum protection.  The person 

receiving the maximum protection is SGI.  And even more so 

under no-fault insurance.  It's SGI who receives the maximum 

amount of protection for the premiums paid. 

 

And yet this government, Mr. Speaker, even when they're 

providing no coverage for students, no coverage for seniors, no 

coverage for housewives, claim that they're standing up for the 

little guy.  Even, as Mr. Mandryk points out, that the savings 

obtained from this Bill will come almost entirely out of the 

pockets of victims -- out of the pockets of victims.  As the 

government estimates $70 million in savings, 55 million of that 

will come out of the pockets of the 



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

victims of accidents. 

 

Now I believe a lot of accident victims across this province 

would claim that they are not receiving proper compensation 

today.  So if you take another $55 million out of their pockets, 

I'm sure that they're going to feel a lot less happy about SGI.  

And this will be an ongoing and ever-growing concern. 

 

SGI's own study, conducted by Ernst & Young, confirms that 

the legal system costs on average account for only 19.9 per cent 

of the settlement costs -- 19.9 per cent of the settlement costs 

for those people who utilize lawyers.  That's not for the other 

group that haven't utilized lawyers; that's just for those using 

the lawyers.  But if the group using the lawyers receive 75 to 

80 per cent of the settlements, that's where the $15 million 

figure comes in. 

 

That same survey confirms that most lawyers work on a 

contingency basis, usually a contingency basis running from 6 

to 20 per cent of the total settlement.  And yes, there are those 

that are higher and there are those that are lower.  But the 

average runs between 6 and 20 per cent.  These costs are quite 

minimal, especially when you consider that any savings derived 

from this area will be undercut by whatever the government 

will have to spend on decreased costs of bureaucracy to run 

no-fault. 

 

So the government's claiming that they're going to save $70 

million, of which 15 million is lawyers' fees.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you take the $55 million out of the victims' pockets.  

That other $15 million of savings will be eaten up by an 

ever-burgeoning bureaucracy.  Because you're going to need 

more and more adjusters to make these settlements; you're 

going to need more and more adjusters to follow the cases 

along. 

 

Because under this system, as in Workers' Compensation, you 

settle the case today and you start giving that person their 

income loss, but you have to track it; you have to follow that 

because there is the opportunity for recurrence in this Bill, for 

recurring injury brought on by the accident.  And so all of this 

is going to have to be tracked more and more and more. 

 

Currently, once SGI makes a settlement, they're done with the 

individual.  They both go on with their lives -- SGI goes on 

being an insurance company and the individual goes on to 

whatever they're capable of doing.  But under this 

circumstance, the bureaucracy is going to continue to be 

involved with that accident victim and the bureaucracy is going 

to grow ever larger, somewhat along the lines of Topsy. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You have a vivid imagination. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- One of the members talks about 

imagination.  And that's what the government is hoping that the 

people of this province do not have.  That the people of this 

province do not have any imagination to envision what it 

means to them when this no-fault insurance is brought into 

play.  Because what it means for them is a lot less coverage. 

Just imagine an injury, while perhaps not permanent, but takes 

you out of the workforce for the next 180 days.  You will 

receive a maximum of $550 of income loss plus your medical 

expenses, and that may not come anywhere close to what you 

would have actually earned in that time period. 

 

But the people sitting in this Assembly on the government side 

are hoping that the people of this province do indeed lack the 

imagination to understand and to envision exactly what this 

government is about to do to them -- not for them, but to them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by the government's own admission in their 

survey in the Ernst & Young report, is that they're prepared to 

steal the money out of the very mouths of the victims that are 

paying to receive coverage from SGI. 

 

And again I have to go back to the situation that this is not a 

voluntary payment that people are making to SGI.  If you wish 

to drive a motor vehicle and own a motor vehicle in the 

province of Saskatchewan and drive it on our roads and 

highways, then you will buy this insurance and you will pay 

this premium; you are given no option. 

 

And yet the government is going to take $70 million out of any 

potential claims for their own purposes, but the minister has not 

ever mentioned that there's going to be a decrease in the 

premiums.  Indeed, he threatens that there will an 8 per cent 

increase in the premiums if you don't accept his logic and his 

argument for no-fault insurance.  As was pointed out to me, the 

government raised the premiums 4.7 per cent and dropped their 

loss from $34 million to 18 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

minister says 4.75. 

 

(1215) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They've got him briefed up pretty good. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, they've programed him to come up 

with the answers finally.  Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know 

where you're getting the additional dollars needed when you 

talk about 8 per cent this year, 8 per cent next year, and 8 per 

cent the year after that for insurance premium increases, when 

4.75 had a dramatic impact, increase, on the financial picture of 

SGI.  You must be sliding a lot of extra costs in there over the 

next three years if you need a 24 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps what the minister needs to do is look at 

some other alternatives rather than just no-fault insurance 

which are going to be a negative for every person in 

Saskatchewan who suffers an injury in a motor vehicle. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it's not a situation that you can do away with 

your other insurances under no-fault.  Indeed not.  One of the 

things that this no-fault insurance Bill does is SGI will pay last.  

Under the 



May 6, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

current system, because you're forced to buy from SGI and 

every other insurance is voluntary, SGI has paid first.  We don't 

have an option on buying SGI auto insurance, so we're forced 

into it, so SGI pays first. 

 

But now, under this Bill, SGI will pay last.  If you have some 

other form of insurance or some other form of a program that 

will pay you for an injury, then that kicks in first and SGI only 

thereafter. 

 

So let's take a look at a case of someone who's at work, driving 

down the road in their employer's vehicle, and there's an 

accident.  And the accident involves someone else who is also 

at work and both people are covered by Workers' 

Compensation.  Now Workers' Compensation will pay a 

disability.  Let's say they give the worker who was injured 

$5,000. 

 

So SGI looks at this and it's not a permanent injury but the 

worker's going to be off work for a while.  SGI gives them the 

$550 a week loss of income and perhaps that's for the full year, 

so he gets, say, $25,000.  So he's got $5,000 from Workers' 

Compensation and SGI is prepared to give him $25,000.  But 

SGI says, well you've already received $5,000 from Workers' 

Compensation, so we'll give you $20,000.  You've got a 

complete coverage now of $25,000. 

 

But under the current system when you get an insurance 

settlement, Workers' Compensation comes back to you and 

says, well we gave you the $5,000, you've received your 

insurance settlement; we want our $5,000 back now.  And 

under Workers' Compensation, you pay the $5,000 back. 

 

But now since SGI is paying last, you've only got the $20,000 

of SGI money, the $5,000 for Workers' Compensation.  So you 

give the $5,000 back to Workers' Compensation, as you have to 

do.  So your settlement, rather than being $25,000, is now 

$20,000. 

 

So again the government is avoiding paying out through SGI.  

More profits for SGI; less money for the people who are paying 

the premiums.  And the premiums are set by SGI.  Nobody gets 

an option on whether they want to buy this. 

 

So now what if you buy a package policy?  When you buy your 

package policy you're voluntarily buying more insurance.  And 

SGI will now take into account that voluntary insurance that 

you purchased and deduct any payments that they may make to 

you based on that voluntary insurance. 

 

What this means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that as people in the 

workplace buy additional benefit packages, the companies that 

are selling those additional benefit packages will take into 

account the fact that they are no longer going to be second on 

payments, rather they're going to be first, and their premiums 

will be adjusted accordingly. 

 

So your additional benefit packages, including Workers' 

Compensation, will now be forced to rise to make up for the 

decreases being paid by SGI.  Another 

tax on the working people of this province.  Another tax on the 

businesses of this province. 

 

And this is another issue which is going to drive businesses out 

of this province, Mr. Speaker; another manner to make 

Saskatchewan industry less competitive with our neighbours. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is telling the public 

that they will save on insurance premiums through this system.  

The government does not also tell the public that they are 

borrowing from Peter to pay Paul; that they had better enjoy the 

low premiums while they last and just hope that they never 

have to make a claim. 

 

SGI is going to have a $55 million gain, but the minister 

himself has said, yes, there will be no premium increases this 

year and maybe not next year.  But we're not sure about next 

year; we might have to jack it up.  SGI may need even more 

profit to funnel into the government's coffers because after all, 

these savings that SGI is talking about, how long are they going 

to last?  Because the government themselves have admitted that 

it's only this year that premiums will not be going up.  Maybe 

not next year -- maybe yes, maybe no. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well it's an election year; they can't do it 

then. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well my colleague has a good point.  

Because the next year might be an election year, the minister 

may be somewhat reluctant to increase premiums.  So perhaps 

because of political considerations, the minister might hold off.  

But after that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, premiums will most 

certainly increase -- most certainly.  That has been the case in 

most jurisdictions if not all the jurisdictions that have gone with 

the no-fault insurance scheme.  Even Ontario, Mr. Speaker, 

went in the direction of no-fault insurance. 

 

But what's happened there?  In the last couple of years, Ontario 

has made three adjustments to their Act.  Three times they've 

come back and amended the Act, and in each one of those 

circumstances they did not increase the no-fault coverage. They 

did not move further away from the tort system; they moved 

back towards the tort system, which is what we have a 

modified form of in this province today.  They went back 

towards the tort system because they found that the no-fault 

system was not serving the people of the province well. 

 

In a number of American jurisdictions they tried the no-fault 

and in those jurisdictions also, a number of them have gone 

back to the tort system.  And the tort system means that you're 

allowed to go to court to sue the insurance company for a 

proper settlement.  And that's what the minister is trying to 

avoid in this piece of legislation, but he still leaves that avenue 

open for the lawyers to get their pound of flesh.  But the 

victims will gain very little extra out of it because the limits are 

capped -- they're capped, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is about hitting a fly with a baseball bat, 

because it's radically changing the automobile insurance 

structure and it's undermining the citizens' legal rights, creating 

a flaw and an unfair system just so that the government can 

save money for two years -- two years.  That'll be the 

maximum I would suspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 

insurance premiums will remain low. 

 

And it seems to be a fairly main theme of this government 

when it comes to citizens' rights.  This is the fifth example we 

have seen in the last two and a half years where the government 

has done all that they can to deny the citizens of this province 

the right to go to court. 

 

The first time was the civil servants.  The second time was 

farmers.  The third time was the Co-op upgrader deal.  The 

fourth time was in this very session when the Minister of 

Justice broke his own law and denied the judges the right to go 

to court. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That was Bob who did that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- That's right.  That was the Minister of 

Justice that did that.  Now I would suspect very strongly, Mr. 

Speaker, that the judges might have something to say about 

that, since that law passed.  In fact, according to the paper, they 

will have a lot to say about it and they will appear before their 

colleagues at the Supreme Court to make a determination as to 

whether or not the Minister of Justice had the legal right to 

deny them their constitutional rights. 

 

And the Minister of Justice is trying to avoid having his name 

mentioned in this context because he's obviously embarrassed 

that he has to deny or that he did deny the public their rights, 

because the minister responsible for SGI is doing the very same 

thing.  And it clearly spells out in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that the public will not have the right to go to court to sue for 

pain and suffering.  It's totally denied.  And the minister shakes 

his head.  Yes, that's right.  They're denying the public the right 

to have their day in court, which is a constitutional right given 

to all of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the savings that the government is talking about will only 

take place for two years, as my colleague pointed out, because 

an election is coming up in approximately two years, unless the 

Minister of Justice wants to change those rules also.  But two 

years is how long these premiums will remain in place -- only 

two years. 

 

This change to the auto insurance Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

creates a very unfair and arbitrary system of payments for 

damages.  It's arbitrary because SGI and its adjusters will 

determine exactly what you will get and what you won't get, 

and you don't have the opportunities to appear before a third 

party for a settlement. 

 

You can go through mediation and get what's given to you by 

SGI.  You can go through the Court of Appeal to get what's 

given to you by SGI.  But there is no latitude, 

none whatsoever.  You're limited to exactly what SGI is 

prepared to give you, and that's all, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- 

that's all. 

 

And I'll get into the Bill here after a bit, on this, and we'll go 

through it and we'll point out the items in there.  And indeed 

there are a couple of good points, Mr. Speaker, and I'll point 

those out also.  But there are many more negatives in this Bill 

than there are positives. 

 

This change takes insurance rights away from the retired, from 

housewives, from the disadvantaged.  It fails to keep insurance 

rates down. This type of insurance failed to keep the rates down 

in Ontario and Quebec and many other American jurisdictions.  

And indeed as I mentioned, it was constantly being revised 

back to the tort system in Ontario. 

 

It's been widely criticized by consumer groups across North 

America, including by Ralph Nader and the consumers' 

association of Saskatchewan.  And that's the reason why the 

consumers' association of Saskatchewan wishes to meet with 

the minister to discuss this. 

 

But I would strongly urge the minister and the consumers' 

association to hold that meeting in public, to allow the public to 

see what is happening, and to gain a better understanding.  And 

perhaps even, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister can gain some 

small amount of understanding of what this Bill will actually 

mean and what impact this Bill will have on the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I have given the people enough to 

digest on no-fault insurance for over the weekend.  And we can 

carry on with this next week and the week after and the week 

after, until the minister is prepared to go out and meet with the 

public and to hear, listen, and act on the concerns that the 

public brings forward to him. 

 

Therefore at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move we adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:29 p.m. 

 


