




















































Hansard: April 11, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1475 

 April 11, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 32 -- An Act to 

amend The Labour Standards Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today to 

address this Bill regarding The Labour Standards Act.  It's been 

my desire to speak to it for some time after I'm listening to 

members opposite . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray: -- With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleague, the member from Regina North.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me this evening to introduce to you, and through 

you to my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, seven Scouts 

from the First Lumsden Scout Troup.  They are seated in your 

gallery and they are accompanied by their leader, Mr. Conrad 

Olson.  The Scouts are between the ages of 11 and 14, and on 

this very lovely day in Regina they have come to spend some 

time here and I look forward to meeting with them later on this 

evening.  I'll ask all of you to join me in giving them a warm 

welcome to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, it's my 

joy to speak to Bill No. 32, The Labour Standards Act.  It has 

been somewhat difficult from this government side listening to 

the tales of woe, the naysayers of the opposition, the members 

opposite, as they predict that The Labour Standards Act, which 

simply is a very progressive and in fact the first move of its kind 

in North America towards ensuring that working people in 

Saskatchewan are treated fairly . . . and especially aimed at 

providing prorated benefits for part-time workers.  Now that's 

something that my party campaigned on for many years in 

opposition -- far too many years; it was nine and a half years in 

opposition -- but we campaigned on that.  It comes as absolutely 

no surprise to anyone, nor should it, that 

we are now moving towards prorated benefits for part-time 

workers. 

 

Just before 5 o'clock, I heard the Leader of the Opposition 

talking about how this labour standards legislation is going to 

eliminate the competitive edge and business owners are going to 

flee from Saskatchewan.  But what the naysayer opposite, the 

naysayer from Thunder Creek, fails to recognize is that 

small-business owners all throughout Saskatchewan have 

children of their own. 

 

Having three teenagers I know of what I speak when I say I want 

my children, as I believe do all parents, want my children to 

have the very best working conditions that they possibly can.  

And if that means prorated benefits, if they have to start with a 

part-time job, so be it.  At least they are given some minimum 

provisions.  We on the government side are delighted to stand up 

on behalf of working people, as has long been our style, and this 

is genuinely ground-breaking legislation for which we are 

incredibly proud. 

 

I listen to the naysayer opposite, the member for Thunder Creek, 

talking about the doom and gloom and he said, you know durum 

prices are pretty good right now but you know they could go 

down any time.  Well you know, Mr. Speaker, that's absolutely 

true but we don't need a shot of naysaying; we need a shot of 

people that'll stand up and say you know durum prices are pretty 

solid right now, canola price is pretty solid, flax price is pretty 

solid, lentil price is very high, oats high, cattle and livestock 

prices fairly high.  We have real reason for optimism.  Can the 

bottom drop out of any of those markets?  Of course it can.  That 

has always been the case in Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 

farmers know it as does everyone in this fair province of ours.  

But commodity prices and agriculture -- coming along very 

good. 

 

I don't know why the Leader of the Opposition is so adamant in 

not recognizing some of the good news for just what it is.  I 

listened to what I could of the member for Maple Creek.  I 

confess that I don't have leather ears but, Mr. Speaker, I was 

very chagrined and somewhat taken aback when the member 

from Maple Creek started taking stripes off of the president of 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 

 

I thought it was shameless.  In fact I thought it was right in tune 

with the opposition's attack on our appointment of Mr. Garf 

Stevenson to the health election committee.  It was a 

personalization of the issue of the worst kind, and whatever one 

might say of Ms. Byers, I can assure you, Mr. Speaker and all 

people, that Ms. Byers was speaking her mind on this Bill as she 

was this evening when I saw her on the television news speaking 

about The Trade Union Act that we introduced earlier this day. 

 

Agree with Ms. Byers or not, that's fair game.  But to attribute 

some ill motive as the member for Maple Creek did is just not 

on; that was a cowardly move on his part. 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Mr. Speaker, for nine and a half years, the Liberals and the 

Tories have stuck together, and that continues.  Both the Liberals 

and the Tories voted against the introduction of The Labour 

Standards Act, voted against it on first reading, didn't even want 

to see what some progressive labour legislation might do for 

working people throughout the province.  It's no wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that many, many working people have seen through the 

Tweedledum and Tweedledumber act.  We used to call it 

Tweedledee and Tweedledum, but Tweedledum and 

Tweedledumber don't give anything to working people and 

certainly don't provide prorated benefits for part-time workers.  

That's what the opposition members, both parties in opposition, 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to some of the positive things about 

the Bill because in the four or five minutes that I have been 

speaking, I've simply pointed out what some of the naysayers 

have said.  But I am proud that this Labour Standards Act is 

going to improve working conditions and benefits for part-time 

workers.  It's going to be providing for improved maternity and 

other unpaid, family related leaves -- that's in the Act.  It's going 

to be providing better protection for working people against 

arbitrary dismissal.  It's going to provide for improved notice of 

work schedules and better work breaks, improved lay-off notice 

provisions. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, along with any good legislation, 

there is improvements in administration and enforcement of this 

legislation.  And that, I see, is a key part in it too.  There's no 

sense having an Act if you don't intend to enforce it.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, this is a very, very progressive Bill. 

 

I guess I still am puzzled though at how it is that the opposition 

parties can be so adamantly opposed to setting a minimum 

standard for working men and women.  They remind me of the 

mill owners in England, when that great country England was 

abolishing child labour.  And the mill owners said, oh you take 

away that child labour, and our mills are going to have to shut 

down; 1844 that happened, 1844.  It's only a century and a half 

ago, and yet the members opposite seem to be mired in a century 

and a half ago.  Don't let's make any improvements.  Don't let's 

make any improvements in the minimum wage.  Don't let's look 

after any working people.  And the time is long past due. In fact 

if I have a regret about this Bill, it's that it wasn't in last year.  

But we had a very heavy legislative agenda, and that's history.  

There's no point in my beating that particular thing to death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is consistent with our throne speech on 

February 7 when, amongst other things, we were talking about 

the family, and we said: 

 

 The Saskatchewan family and the Saskatchewan labour force 

are undergoing major changes.  The participation rate of 

women in the workplace has increased dramatically, leading to 

more dual-earner families.  In addition, more single parents are 

participating in the paid labour force.  Today's 

 workplace is dominated by employees who share at least 

some responsibility for the care of family members. 

 

It goes on, recognizing that: 

 

 . . . balancing work and family responsibilities faces more 

workers than ever before, my government will introduce 

amendments to The Labour Standards Act and to The Trade 

Union Act which will help respond to this need. 

 

 Amendments to The Labour Standards Act (Mr. Speaker) will 

have the greatest benefit for the 70,000 people working in 

Saskatchewan's lowest- wage jobs, most of whom are women 

and young people. 

 

Seventy thousand of the lowest-paid wage earners in this 

province and all the members opposite can do is vote no to this 

labour Bill, this very important Bill.  No, they say to the lowest 

paid 70,000 people, mostly women and young people.  And 

that's the best that they can come up with.  No way, let's stick 

our heads in the sand like ostriches, they say.  Let's ignore the 

working poor.  Let's ignore the realities of 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is of course much more that any of us and all 

of us could say, but before I close, I do want to just set the 

record straight on one little item that the member from Maple 

Creek was addressing earlier today.  And he talked about this 

labour standards, and I think he was possibly even referring to -- 

I'll give him the benefit of the doubt -- referring to The Trade 

Union Act although that was clearly out of order.  And he was 

referring to this government as having promoted labour unrest 

and that we were doing so with this legislation.  Even if the 

member from Maple Creek was accurate that this legislation 

would do that, I'm surprised that the opposition Labour critic 

wouldn't be smart enough or astute enough or knowledgeable 

enough to know that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool employees 

are -- with the exception of about 100 people -- they fall under 

federal labour legislation and there isn't a thing that is affected 

by the provincial labour legislation. 

 

I'm shocked that a labour critic from the opposition wouldn't 

have that rudimentary and basic understanding of labour 

legislation and how things work.  It amazed me to hear such an 

obvious faux pas and it also, Mr. Speaker, made me wonder 

about the credibility of the balance of the . . . certainly the 

member from Maple Creek's speech.  But with that kind of 

research in the opposition caucuses, it made me wonder about 

the credibility of anything they say. 

 

With that I am going to be taking my place, delighted to have 

had this relatively brief opportunity to stand up and proudly say, 

well done to the Minister of Labour, my good friend and 

colleague; well done to the government caucus; the labour 

committee; well done to all who have lobbied so diligently to 

make this a reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very much looking forward to the 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

day when we can vote on this Bill and it can pass third reading.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1915) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

people of Saskatchewan are very trusting by nature.  And many 

people in Saskatchewan grew up not locking our doors because 

we simply trusted that no one would violate our property.  This 

is a province in which a handshake was traditionally as good as a 

contract amongst neighbours.  It's not like other places, and that 

is part of what makes Saskatchewan unique, part of what keeps 

us here.  We don't stay for the weather or for the money or the 

big city lights.  We stay for the people and the security and the 

sense of neighbourhood and the community that each of us feels 

here. 

 

There's always been a sense of down-home concern for one 

another, a feeling that we have to look out for people, those who 

are struggling, to give a little back when we have had the good 

fortune, knowing perhaps that a loved one may need a helping 

hand one day themselves. 

 

But things seem to have changed a bit over the past few years.  

Our society seems to be getting more and more like places we'd 

rather not imitate.  And that concerns me a great deal because, 

Mr. Speaker, we have lost some our sense of community, some 

of our sense of neighbourhood. 

 

And there is a reason for that.  Saskatchewan is being forced to 

grow up, so to speak.  We're moving into a bigger, more global 

world, one much less insulated, and it's forcing us, forcing us to 

look at other kinds of priorities, priorities like competition in the 

market-place.  And that's creating a lot of change in our society 

and it is changing our standards. 

 

We want, and people demand, because they feel they deserve the 

same opportunities in Saskatchewan as we see other people have 

across Canada and other nations of the world.  People are no 

longer content with their local grocery store because they've 

been to Edmonton and Calgary or Toronto and they've shopped 

in those mega-malls and they want to buy what people there can 

buy.  In fact, if the stores don't come to us, we end up seeing our 

people go to them, leaving the independent business person 

trying to compete with marketing giants in the retail, restaurant, 

and service industries.  Then Saskatchewan people decide we 

would like to shop in the evenings just like they do in the bigger 

cities where there are hundreds of thousands of more people and 

voilà, we have night shopping. 

 

We travel outside of our borders, outside of our home province, 

and we see people shopping on Sundays and we say, gee I'd like 

to have that option, and the next thing you know some giant 

retail chain says, I can offer that option because I have the size 

and the economy of scale to do it. 

But what happens to our labour force when we become such 

demanding consumers, when we venture into the big 

market-place that our world has become?  What happens at our 

home here?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we begin to have to make 

choices.  We have to choose whether we want to stay the way 

we were and have people with nine-to-five jobs who find other 

things to do on Sunday other than shop, or we have to adjust.  In 

some instances people call it evolving, others of us call it adjust 

to the system that consumers demand. 

 

And at the moment, when we as consumers decide that we like 

the convenience and the affordability of such things as fast food 

restaurants which many of us enjoy -- in fact many of us require 

when we have the kind of lifestyle that we have -- we also 

decide that we support the right of that business person to open 

and to operate a viable business based on the rules that we have 

in place when that person makes his or her investment.  We as a 

society create a level of demand which induces investors to 

generate a supply that matches our demand as consumers and 

therein lies the risk, Mr. Speaker, for business people and for 

investors. 

 

When they make a decision to invest in meeting a market 

demand there's a great deal of careful analysis that goes into that 

decision.  Analysis that many people in society cannot fathom 

because it takes a great deal of confidence coupled with a 

willingness to take risks before an individual can commit to 

opening a business. 

 

And what are the natural factors involved?  Well first the 

investors assess the demand for a product that they are thinking 

of supplying.  And obviously nobody's going to sink money into 

providing a product that nobody wants.  So every business 

person or want-to-be business person assesses the demand for 

his or her product.  And then if the demand is there a process 

begins to determine the profitability of opening and sustaining 

that business, hopefully in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the success of the business depends on building costs, on 

equipment costs, on start-up capital, on availability of skilled 

personnel in the workforce, all kinds of variables that business 

and industry can quantify.  Sales projections are done and 

weighed against the cost of doing business to determine if the 

venture should be profitable.  And sometimes the investors come 

to the conclusion that the potential profit merits the risk.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, a business is born or purchased from an existing 

owner.  But one step that everyone follows during that process is 

an evaluation of the labour laws and the labour costs to run any 

specific enterprise.  People planning to invest need to know what 

to expect over time where salaries and wages and benefits are 

concerned because these are the elements which constitute a 

major component of their expenses. 

 

Now when economic times are tough, businesses do many 

projections in many locations before deciding 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

where to set up shop; lease rates, property taxes, operating costs, 

salaries and wages are all critical factors in determining 

profitability. 

 

Saskatchewan used to be a pretty competitive place to do 

business.  We had fair property taxes, reasonable lease rates, 

skilled labour, and average costs of doing business, but things 

are changing, Mr. Speaker.  Other economies, our neighbours, 

have done their homework.  They recognize that any one factor 

could create a competitive edge to attract investment or a change 

to their status quo could in fact scare off a prospective business 

from their community or jurisdiction.  And news of such 

changes travels very, very fast.  It travels quickly through the 

global business and investment networks.  And just as changes 

to the dollar affect the stock market overnight, changes to 

government policy -- whether it be on uranium mining or labour 

legislation -- travel like wildfire through the business 

community. 

 

Economies that are less regulated, less taxed, are attracting 

business investment, Mr. Speaker.  And those like Saskatchewan 

which are constantly subjected to instability and upward 

pressure on expenses being passed on to business by government 

have become unattractive places to invest. 

 

So what has happened in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  Well the 

current government and the administration before it have created 

the makings of an economic catastrophe for Saskatchewan.  

While the Conservatives believed that they could create their 

own false economy by spending borrowed tax money, the New 

Democrats appear convinced that they can tax their way out of 

debt and legislate a Utopian world in which everyone has a 

full-time job complete with benefits, just like the government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don't live in Utopia and I believe that 

employers, whether they are business people or private sector 

employers such as local municipalities or schools or hospitals, 

they want government to recognize that. 

 

Bill 32 proposes major changes to The Labour Standards Act 

which will enhance provisions for the extension of employment 

benefits to part-time workers, enhance maternity and paternal 

leave provisions.  Bill 32 proposes substantial changes to initial 

assessment and appeal provisions respecting wage and 

compensation loss claims.  The legislation increases protection 

against discriminatory discipline of employees reporting or 

participating in reporting unlawful employer conduct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, labour standards legislation has always been 

regarded as having the primary objective of establishing and 

statutorily imposing benefits of minimum employment standards 

upon employers and in favour of employees.  All provinces have 

enacted similar legislation dealing principally with hours of 

work, minimum wages, pay equity, maternity/paternity leave, 

general leave, public holidays, and annual holidays.  So across 

the nation labour standards deal with wage payment and 

collection issues, and with regulating certain other required or 

prohibited employer conduct. 

 

From that perspective, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, like any 

other province, has already dealt with the basic issues of concern 

between employers and employees.  I believe, therefore, that it 

can be legitimately argued that the changes proposed by Bill 32, 

rather than imposing the minimum generally accepted public 

standards of employment, imposes certain maximum benefits 

which were not previously reflected in the economic 

market-place.  What is and must continue to be of primary 

concern is that we don't legislate changes which impact upon our 

competitive position in the market-place to the extent that we 

begin to lose jobs -- jobs for the very people that we should be 

ensuring can be in a position to have the dignity of employment 

and the position to pay taxes in our province. 

 

In many areas of change, Bill 32 imposes new and potentially 

expensive obligations upon employers.  These obligations have 

not previously been achieved by unions who represent some of 

the employees affected.  Of greater significance, Mr. Speaker, is 

the fact that the market-place has not reflected conditions which 

have resulted in the assumption of many of these obligations by 

employers where affected employees are not represented by 

unions. 

 

In examining Bill 32, a number of general questions of principle 

arise when considering the nature of proposed changes.  And I 

can only take it, Mr. Speaker, from the alertness -- which was a 

facetious comment -- rather than the total disregard for anything 

that I am saying is that not only is the Minister of Labour not 

interested in what I'm saying this evening, it's become quite 

obvious that he wasn't interested in reading any of the 

information that was sent by the piles to his office, as well as the 

Premier's office, on this topic of businesses that would be 

affected and of employees that would be affected by this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Furthermore their lack of interest can only be reflective of the 

way in which they went about consulting or not consulting with 

business people and employees in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

who said that the Minister of Labour, upon each and every 

occasion when he was speaking with groups in this province, 

didn't have the wherewithal to want to listen.  All he did was to 

speak to them. 

 

But did he hear?  Obviously not, or we wouldn't have the kind of 

flawed legislation that came before this House, which never 

should have come before this House before greater amounts of 

work had gone into it, Mr. Speaker, so that it could have been 

here and doable without the kinds of unbelievable reactions on 

the part of both employers and employees across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The several questions of principle that arise, Mr. Speaker, when 

considering the nature of the proposed changes, are as follows.  

First, first among the general questions of principle is the present 

economic climate.  Can employers, particularly small and 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

medium-sized businesses, Mr. Speaker, afford the increased 

financial burden enforced upon them, imposed upon them by the 

amending provisions of this Act? 

 

Secondly, what will be the implications of the changes for both 

part-time and full-time employers, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Thirdly, we must pose the question of how this affects collective 

agreements that are currently in place.  People can't believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that in this particular piece of legislation, it actually 

says that it overrides all collective bargaining agreements in this 

province.  I can't believe that this particular government would 

choose to do that when they're so concerned about collective 

bargaining and the way in which people who negotiate and go 

through these kinds of exercises come up with arrangements.  

Why would it have said that in the original proposals, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

This, as the members opposite and the minister will know, was 

one of the major concerns of public sector employers such as 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and 

the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, as well as the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations. 

 

Like why is it that you wouldn't at least read your own 

legislation in the same kind of way that all of these affected 

employers who are concerned about their employees would read 

it.  Where employees are currently represented by unions, what 

will the impact of these changes be upon the rights of employers, 

the trade unions and employees to free collective bargaining? 

 

(1930) 

 

I'd like to make it clear that a number of changes in the proposed 

Bill are indeed positive, Mr. Speaker, and I have no difficulty at 

all in supporting these particular clauses.  The amendments that 

enhance maternity and paternal leave for pregnancy, the 

extension of other leave-of-absence clauses, now that the 

differentiation between catastrophic and unaccountable 

absenteeism has been made, are certainly improvements that 

anyone should be able to support. 

 

I believe that it is necessary to have a more practical 

adjudication process for disputed wage and related claims of 

employees and the protection of workers from discipline or 

dismissal for reporting instances of employer illegal conduct.  I 

believe that we need time for deeper consultation on whether the 

proposed changes are the best approach. 

 

But in general, the government is to be commended for those 

specific changes to which I just referred because I believe that 

they will result in improved benefits and protection for 

employees. 

 

The most controversial aspect of this legislation and 

the one most adamantly opposed by employers and associations 

representing all business sectors are those provisions that 

propose to extend to part-time workers employment benefits 

normally and presently enjoyed by only full-time workers.  

Doubtless, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, no one would argue in 

a Utopian society that part-time workers should enjoy some of 

the same benefits enjoyed by their full-time counterparts. 

 

Unfortunately, Saskatchewan business does not operate in 

Utopia but rather operates in a business market-place in an 

economic environment which has been difficult for many years.  

Government-imposed changes that have substantial financial 

impact for small to medium business and substantially change 

employer obligations, not as a consequence of the market-place 

but of government intervention, Mr. Speaker, and impositioned 

by statute, should result in sober second thought. 

 

The Regina Leader-Post reported in its issue of Saturday, 

March 12, and I directly quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 The Labour Department estimates the changes would affect 

10,900 of the province's 66,900 workers. 

 

 That change alone is expected to cost Saskatchewan business 

$4.3 million per year, and perhaps as much as $6.7 million. 

 

If the department's estimates are correct, that works out to be 

$614 per employee.  For a business of 20 employees, that would 

cut $12,293 from their bottom line.  Now that is the exact 

equivalent of a salary of a person working 40 hours a week at $6 

an hour. 

 

I wonder where the government would rather see the money 

spent, Mr. Speaker: on a new job, or on giving a part-time 

employee an extra $50.  Unfortunately, the reality is that neither 

is likely to happen.  And I believe the minister clearly 

understands why, as has been pointed out to him by hundreds of 

businesses across the province -- not dozens, but hundreds, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In any case, the Department of Labour indicates that the cost to 

employers would be about 4.3 to $6.7 million.  The Price 

Waterhouse study that the Minister of Labour likes to state as 

such an unequivocal excellent piece of work, that even the Price 

Waterhouse people say that they couldn't have done 

appropriately, given that they were never given the context in 

which this was going to be done -- the Price Waterhouse study 

indicates that the total cost to employers would be between 9.5 

million and $14.2 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we work from the Department of Labour figures, which 

established the number of part-time workers affected, then the 

cost per 20-person business would be $15,633 per year, an even 

more unaffordable amount for the small operation.  Profitability 

of small business is down, Mr. Speaker, because there have been 

so many increases to the costs of doing business 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

in our province of Saskatchewan -- costs that operators, both 

public and private sector employers, cannot afford. 

 

This is not a question of whether, under ideal conditions, I'd like 

to see any employee have better benefits or better pay.  It is a 

question of whether those conditions exist in Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the costs estimated by Price Waterhouse are 

somewhat suspect because the Bill has changed considerably 

from what they thought they were costing at the outset.  The 

estimates are conservative at best, since of the 66,339 part-time 

employees in this province, it is estimated that 35,160 of those 

work for employers with more than 20 staff.  With an estimated 

69 per cent of these workers already receiving some proportional 

full-time employee benefits, the question of whether or not the 

requirements of the Act will increase these benefits and 

therefore costs to employers requires analysis. 

 

The point is that even if it were to be accepted that these 

proposed changes are acceptable in principle, the question is: 

can businesses afford these changes now, and what serious 

impact will those changes have on people's ability to have work, 

keep work, and find new work?  To date, Mr. Speaker, there 

really has not been an accurate assessment done of those costs, 

and I contend that we must take the time to do the careful 

analysis before proceeding. 

 

If we fail to do sufficient analysis, we must be prepared to live 

with the very serious consequences.  If business decides that 

these proposed changes cannot be afforded, then employers will 

likely need to react in several different ways to minimize the 

impact. 

 

According to the hundreds of letters and faxes that I have 

received, which I'm sure have been sent as well to the Premier 

and the Minister of Labour, employers may do one of the 

following:  reduce the number of hours available to part-time 

employees, preferring rather to pay overtime to full-time 

employees.  Or second, employers not unionized may 

unilaterally discontinue benefit plans for permanent employees 

and thereby avoid prorated extension of those plans to part-time 

employees.  Three, employers may hire part-time or full-time 

workers at lower wages to be able to afford the additional cost of 

extending benefit plans to those part-time workers.  Wouldn't 

that just be really benefiting these people a great deal more?  

Four, employers may not be able to give any wage increases to 

full-time and part-time workers until the cost of extending 

benefits are either caught up or more affordable in their general 

operations.  Fifth, employers have said as well that they may 

pass off some of the increased costs of operating to consumers 

through price increases. 

 

Now the question most often posed to me by employers is: why 

these changes now?  They're really perplexed, Mr. Speaker.  

They don't understand why the government is doing this now.  Is 

it part of the political agenda or is it part of good governing? 

Employers in this province and many employees who have 

written, Mr. Speaker, do not believe that this could possibly be 

part of any intelligent plan for good governing. 

 

Has the government received phone calls and letters from 

part-time workers demanding these changes?  I wonder.  

Because I want to read from a letter from Tracy Stadnyk who is 

indeed a part-time worker, a student no less, who is one of the 

many people who did write to us who are employees and are 

going to be affected by this legislation.  And it's to the Minister 

of Labour with a copy to myself: 

 

 I'm a part-time worker in a fast food chain here in Regina.  I'm 

writing to voice a concern about the recently introduced 

legislation on part 

_time employment in the province, and I understand that its intent is 

to help the part-time workers in Saskatchewan, but the effects 

of this legislation, if passed, would hurt many more than it 

would help. 

 

 If the Bill is passed and employers are forced to pay benefits to 

part-time staff as well, 30 to 40 per cent of staff will need to be 

laid off because of the cost to the employer.  Not only will this 

put many students out of a job, some of whom use the money 

they earn to put themselves through university, but it will put 

an excessive workload on the remaining staff, many of whom 

attend school.  Many of those who don't get laid off will be 

forced to quit because of this excessive workload.  I and, I'm 

sure, many others would prefer a job without benefits as 

opposed to no job at all. 

 

 As I write this letter, Mr. Minister, I do not only speak for 

myself, but for other staff here who have expressed the same 

concerns, and I am happy with my job the way it is and I don't 

want to lose it. 

 

 I and a large number of others who are affected by this will be 

voting in the next election and will most likely vote for a party 

who protects and creates jobs, not takes them away. 

 

 Please, for the sake of the part-time workers in this province, 

do not allow this legislation to pass. 

 

As much as the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, think that this is 

all about doing something to benefit some individuals, this very 

much can have an impact on the very people they are trying to 

protect.  When you take the fast food industry, they believe that 

these kinds of changes will result in 35 per cent fewer people 

working out of a workforce of 15,000; 35 per cent of 15,000 

employees is a fair chunk, Mr. Speaker.  That's a lot of people.  

And the students with whom I've spoken, they like the 

flexibility.  They want flexibility in their workplace so they can 

go and write exams or they can go to sporting events.  The single 

moms who work in the fast food industry have also told me that 

they very much like the flexibility of being able to 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

come and go on a much more irregular kind of pattern than what 

would be legislated by a government that people want to have to 

be in place. 

 

I find it rather ironic, Mr. Speaker, that people somehow, for 

some reason, on the government's side, have concluded that all 

of the people who work for urban municipalities, all of those 

who are affected and employed by rural municipalities, all of 

those people employed in school boards . . . and the school 

trustees points out perfectly how this legislation can have a 

serious impact on their substitute teachers. 

 

And everybody over there sits there and they applaud wildly, 

and they talk about us not caring about employees.  Well if that 

is indeed the case that they have such selective hearing, that they 

care so little to listen to the very people that this is going to have 

an impact upon, I find it very tragic.  For what?  Because their 

membership has dropped by 22,000?  Is that what this is all 

about -- that the New Democratic membership has dropped by 

22,000 so they have to go out and reshore up all of their 

memberships in their party?  That's what this legislation is for, 

so labour will come on side? 

 

Why don't you talk to the very people this is going to have an 

impact upon and think about what you're bringing forward?  It's 

astonishing to me that you've had such little interest to talk to the 

very people who are going to either employ people like this, are 

going to be impacted by legislation such as this as employees.  

You really have a very myopic view.  I don't know who's 

coming to you but it sounds as though there's a very select group 

of people.  And where we're talking about the hundreds of 

people across this province who want to be heard. 

 

You're supposed to be the government that listens to them.  

You're supposed to hear them.  And what do they say?  The 

Minister of Labour didn't hear a word in any of the meetings that 

he had with anybody.  So why do I stand here this evening and 

read letters like from Tracy Stadnyk?  Because obviously that 

letter addressed to the Minister of Labour wasn't read by the 

Minister of Labour.  If it was read, Mr. Speaker, it most 

definitely was not understood. 

 

Many employers are concerned that organized labour is behind 

these changes and they're questioning why they have not been 

fully successful at negotiating these changes for their employees, 

the employees that they represent in the collective bargaining 

process.  And I think that's a fair enough question. 

 

The people who sign the pay cheques, Mr. Speaker, they feel 

that if these benefits were affordable they would have been able 

to use the collective bargaining processes to achieve them.  

There's a body of opinion which says that perhaps unions who 

represent retail and other sectors have chosen over the years to 

negotiate agreements which put other benefits for full-time 

workers ahead of concerns about benefits for part-time workers. 

 

(1945) 

The other question we must ask is whether part-time employees 

really want or whether they really benefit from these proposed 

changes, or whether they would rather have improvements to 

their wages, where employers can reasonably afford increases as 

opposed to prorated benefits which they may never take 

advantage of.  These proposed costly changes will no doubt also 

have some influence in discouraging new businesses who rely 

heavily on part-time workers to locate in our province of 

Saskatchewan, or to have existing Saskatchewan small 

businesses choose not to expand their labour force to exceed the 

20 minimum employees, being the threshold for the imposition 

of these additional costs. 

 

At a time when Saskatchewan can ill afford to put up barriers to 

increased business and economic activities, it should not, 

through legislative provisions such as these, send the wrong 

signal to small and medium-sized businesses and put up barriers 

to competitiveness that business can ill afford. 

 

I always am rather baffled, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite, this particular government, tries to speak the speak.  

They're always talking about how government doesn't really 

create jobs; it's business that creates jobs; it's employers who 

take risks that create jobs.  But you know what, Mr. Speaker?  

They don't really believe it, because if they really believed it and 

they really knew it, they wouldn't do such a thing as what we've 

been seeing in the . . . especially the initial proposed changes in 

Bill 32. 

 

If they truly understood what it was like to have to risk their own 

money to try to be their own employer, to be able to use 

innovation and creativity to make for jobs, to create a special 

environment and see growth happen, if they really understood 

those things, they would understand what all of these business 

people have written about.  Like Rempel Bros Construction in 

Saskatoon where they say section 43, how it'll affect them: 

 

 . . . that being that the construction industry is mainly seasonal, 

this section will be impossible for us to follow (they say).  

Very few of our employees have been here under 10 years and 

our season is approximately 25 weeks long.  Under this section 

43 we would have to lay them off midway through the season.  

Now that makes real sense considering that we don't know 

how much work we're going to have from day to day never 

mind for 10 weeks. 

 

Has any person on the government side done any real business?  

I mean I question whether any of them have had any real jobs 

that have had to be involved in employing people with time lines 

like this.  If they have, why wouldn't they have anticipated this, 

Mr. Speaker?  Why would this have to be brought to this 

particular House and then we determine all of the amendments 

that have to be made because they messed up. 

 

Well here's another one for the Minister of Health 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

who obviously needs some help in understanding this issue or 

she wouldn't be making the side comments she is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I have listened very 

carefully and the member several times has referred to members' 

actions in the House.  I think the member should realize that that 

is simply an unaccepted procedure in the House.  She should not 

refer to individual members in the House and their particular 

behaviour. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Queen City Cleaners is also interested in this proposed 

legislation.  They're from Regina and they were writing to the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, expressing concerns regarding the 

proposed revisions to The Labour Standards Act.  And I will 

directly quote: 

 

 In a province where doing business is at best difficult, it is 

often well nigh impossible.  Changes to labour standards 

legislation, notwithstanding your government's good 

intentions, are both unproductive and inappropriate. 

 

 You and members of your government may not appreciate just 

how difficult the business environment actually is.  In the 

service sector we are struggling with diminishing margins as a 

consequence of increased input costs that we are unable to 

pass along to consumers.  Further, consumers' discretionary 

spending has been severely constrained by governments at all 

levels who are punitively taxing away their ability to spend.  

Your attempts to redress non-existent problems makes my 

ability to do business even more problematic.  You are 

increasing costs significantly.  And perhaps you don't realize it 

that it is small-business employers like myself who employ the 

vast majority of workers in this province.  This legislation is 

no more and no less than another cross to bear for those who 

employ the folk, pay the salaries, and take the risks. 

 

 The signals you are sending to the business community 

through actions such as this proposed legislation are precisely 

the wrong ones.  Please focus your attention on ways and 

means of developing a sound economy in our province.  

Concern yourself with infrastructure renewal, diversification, 

and regulatory reform.  Those of us who have been in business 

for some time are pretty decent men and women.  We aren't 

running sweatshops.  We care about our employees, our 

communities, and our shareholders.  Please respect us. 

 

I think that that's a very reasonable request, Mr. Speaker.  And 

all of the people who were business people who came to see us, 

including public sector employers, all they wanted was to be 

heard and understood.  They wanted their concerns about this 

proposed legislation to be known to the people in 

charge of governing the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are many, many others, Mr. Speaker.  A steel fabricator in 

Regina says that it is apparent that government has not asked, or 

if they had asked they did not listen to the people concerned.  

There's a boiler company in Saskatoon who's written to the 

Premier, indicating just exactly the disastrous effects that this 

would have on their company.  And it says: 

 

 Make no mistake about it; these amendments will have a 

catastrophic effect on our firm and on every other firm in 

Saskatchewan." 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on.  It's not just people from 

these kinds of businesses.  Someone who owns a hairdressing 

firm in Saskatoon who has written and indicated that scheduling 

employees a week in advance means that they will probably not 

be able to employ any part-time workers as they would normally 

phone in the day before to see if they are booked with clients.  

This affects everyone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think my point has been made.  I'm not convinced that it's 

understood either.  But the proposed changes received front page 

coverage in the Toronto Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, these 

proposed changes to this piece of legislation.  They made the 

front page of The Globe and Mail on the March 12 issue under 

the subheading, quote, "Employees dismayed by Bill extending 

benefits to all workers", end of quote. 

 

In short -- and I shall end here this evening -- Mr. Speaker, while 

the idea has merit and the idea and principle is good, the timing 

is bad.  It's bad for business, it's bad for employees, and it's bad 

for Saskatchewan.  Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I do 

not wish to obstruct the process by dragging out the debate, but I 

do want to put forward the Liberal position on record in second 

reading as to how we feel about the government's approach to 

this Bill 32, the Act to amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a doomed process from the outset.  

First the government set out to craft legislation which would suit 

the demands of the people who requested it regardless of what 

impact that might have on either employees or employers.  Next 

the minister proceeded to travel around the province staging 

meetings with people who had no idea what might or might not 

be in the Bill so that he could claim to have consulted broadly on 

the proposed amendments.  We understand that.  Everywhere he 

went, the minister made long speeches, gave little opportunity 

for questions, and rarely listened.  That is not what consultation 

should consist of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One has to wonder what kind of government would propose to 

alter the viability of Saskatchewan business, to put 

Saskatchewan firms on unequal footing with the rest of the 

world in terms of our competitiveness.  What kind of a 

government would do this without allowing those affected every 

opportunity to analyse and evaluate the impact of the 



April 11, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

legislation beforehand? 

 

Mr. Speaker, whatever chance the government ever had to bring 

business and labour to the table to achieve a consensus, a 

compromise between what is desirable and what is affordable, 

whatever chance the government had to do that in a positive 

spirit of cooperation has been destroyed because of the clumsy 

way in which this was handled.  This seems to be a trade mark 

of the government, taking serious and important issues and 

stepping all over the people in the process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has tried everything to cover its 

tracks but nothing is working.  The members opposite shout and 

catcall misleading statements about the Liberals not being 

concerned about women and students and part-time workers.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a height of hypocrisy. 

 

The government introduces legislation without taking the time to 

assess its impact, builds up people's hopes that it is going to do 

something for them without undertaking proper consultation 

with their employers who will be handed the bill, and then backs 

out on its own commitment to the people it's promised the 

changes to. 

 

I simply fail to see the strategic planning ability of this 

government showing through on anything it has done since 

taking office.  Health care, agriculture, taxation, Crown 

corporations, environmental review, gaming, the holes are 

everywhere in this government's plans for the province.  Every 

time we turn around another government decision is being 

reversed, or overturned, or legislated out of sight. 

 

We have the Minister of Justice making comments like, it 

seemed to be a good idea at the time, then passing laws to undo 

his errors.  It would appear that this legislation is another one of 

those Bills which seemed like a good idea at the time, Mr. 

Speaker, at least until they showed it to those affected and then 

all hell broke loose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since this Bill has been introduced, we have been 

hearing absolute horror stories, not just about staff cuts and 

lay-offs being considered, not just about what adjustments will 

have to be made by employers to cut back on benefits and staff 

levels to avoid being affected by the amendments -- we have 

heard about those things, Mr. Speaker -- but what has been even 

more frightening is the fact that business people, SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), SUMA, SARM, 

chambers of commerce, have all been scrambling around 

convening emergency meetings trying to get an audience with 

the Minister of Labour. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan would be appalled to think that 

major decisions are thrust upon people with the expectation that 

they will simply trust the government to do what is in the best 

interests of the province, exempt from any scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition parties, the employers 

and indeed the part-time workers as well, deserve to see the 

proposed legislation, to review it, and to take part in an open 

consultation once it is on the table.  The fact is, Mr. Speaker, this 

government had no intention of doing so, and has only been 

forced to revisit the legislation as the result of eleventh hour 

pressure from employers and other levels of government. 

 

The representatives of the labour movement have an equal right 

to be upset.  This legislation was presented to them as a done 

deal, masterfully crafted to gain the support of the SFL 

(Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), the RWDSU (Retail, 

Wholesale and Department Store Union), and other unions.  

Many of those union leaders had input into the Bill but are now 

bitterly disappointed at the changes. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what happens to a government that tries to 

play politics with people and gets caught in the middle of that -- 

once again is what has happened to the Minister of Labour 

because ultimately the government always gets caught in its own 

trap.  Mr. Speaker, there is a basic correlation between the 

number of people working in Saskatchewan and the number of 

jobs available.  If you take actions that result in a reduced 

number of jobs and employment opportunities for workers, then 

you are not doing anyone any favours. 

 

The problem that this government has is that it is afraid of 

people.  It is afraid to put its full intentions on the table and let 

people have a say about how they will be affected.  What would 

be so wrong with the government putting together a draft Bill 

and sending it into the public domain for consideration and 

consultation?  What does the government fear from that? 

 

(2000) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government is afraid to let people in the 

process in case they disagree with the government's position.  

But you see, that is the whole problem.  The process is not about 

doing what is best for Saskatchewan New Democrats; it is about 

doing what is best for Saskatchewan.  If the process is left to 

unfold to allow for full debate -- debate outside this Assembly, 

in the communities, dialogue between employers and employees 

and taxpayers -- then we as elected representatives can become 

the conduits for that information.  We can bring the opinions of 

the taxpayers and the employers and the part-time workers back 

to the legislature.  That, Mr. Speaker, is how the process is 

supposed to work. 

 

It is interesting to hear the Minister of Labour talk about how he 

is developing a new process.  Let me quote the minister.  He 

says: increasingly, we find people are comfortable with the 

process.  Well, Mr. Minister, the only thing that people are 

getting comfortable with is that they finally can see the 

legislation and they can finally voice their disapproval about 

what it is compared to what they were led to believe would be in 

it. 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1994 

Finally, after being kept in the dark for months while the 

legislation was being drafted, people have been able to hold this 

Bill up to the light, and guess what?  It's full of holes.  As one 

business person told me, it's as if they didn't talk to anyone who 

would be affected by this legislation.  They just slapped it 

together and indicated that it was ready to go, hoping we 

wouldn't mind that it might just ruin their business. 

 

I find it impossible to understand how the government 

commissioned Price Waterhouse to evaluate the costs of this Bill 

when the regulations have not been prepared and the content of 

the Bill keeps changing.  I would be very interested in knowing 

just how the questions on the survey were prepared because if 

everyone was asked the same questions, regardless of the 

industry they're in, the results would be meaningless. 

 

Obviously someone in the construction or mining industry, for 

instance, is going to be far more affected by the cost of group 

terminations than is a fast food operator.  Interestingly, none of 

the 12 major fast food operators from southern Saskatchewan 

have been surveyed or consulted on any part of this legislation.  

It is interesting . . . it is frustrating to note that the Minister of 

Labour hints at changing the process.  He said in an interview 

the other day, I admit the process is new. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing new about talking to people, 

giving them time to absorb information and then going back to 

them to get their point of view.  It may be new to this New 

Democrat government, but it has been around since Socrates.  

Somehow it seems as though the government is afraid that its 

policies will be disputed, or challenged, and that it wants to do 

everything behind closed doors -- in the back rooms, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the public is way ahead of that.  They can 

tell the difference between politics and government, and they 

recognize that the motivation behind this Bill was strictly 

political.  I refer to the New Democrat election platform where it 

says, as financial resources are available, Roy Romanow and the 

New Democrats will introduce fair labour laws, developed in 

consultation with working people and employers to promote 

harmony in the workplace. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it occurs to me that the financial resources 

being referred to are government resources -- not NDP (New 

Democratic Party) resources or resources from employers.  If 

they are government resources, then it seems to me that 

employers should not be getting the bill for the cost of these 

amendments.  And if employers are expected to pay, then I 

believe there should have been far more intensive study with 

respect to whether the financial resources are indeed available to 

the employers' perspective -- not just business people, but school 

boards, and municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the government has put the cart 

before the horse where labour standards amendments are 

concerned.  If Saskatchewan's 

economic community, business and labour, employers and 

employees both public and private sector, part time, full time, 

union and non-union, are to pull together we need to set the 

process straight, Mr. Speaker.  The reality is that there have been 

a great many changes to this legislation at different stages since 

its inception.  Drafts were prepared and a study was done by 

Price Waterhouse.  Then the legislation was introduced and 

passed around.  As the result of genuine concern by employers, 

what we understand to be the House amendments have been 

circulated outside the House but not to the opposition parties. 

 

Effectively the legislation which was studied by Price 

Waterhouse is not the legislation being discussed as of today.  

The position of the Liberal caucus  is that the legislation should 

not proceed until a further costing estimate is done and an 

impact survey conducted, a survey designed with input from 

employers and labour to ensure that questions are directed to the 

sectors impacted by specific parts of the legislation.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is a process which should have been established at 

the outset.  It is unfortunate that this had to unfold and develop 

piecemeal as a result of applied pressure.  But, Mr. Speaker, that 

is what we have and we have to work with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Minister of Labour to do the right 

thing -- pull the Bill until there has been adequate, unpressured 

time for input, discussion, and evaluation.  This is an issue that 

will affect the competitiveness of Saskatchewan for generations.  

Surely the government will agree that it deserves more than two 

weeks consideration at second reading stage without forcing the 

opposition to filibuster and try to buy time which should be 

readily available from any government who is at all concerned 

with consultation and proper process. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 8:07 p.m. 

 


