




















































Hansard: May 03, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2003 

 May 3, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Due to a power failure a portion of the Legislative 

Assembly proceedings were not able to be recorded and 

transcribed. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm told that we are ready to proceed 

so I will return to the item on the agenda that we were not able 

to do before.  We will revert to statements by members. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Meadow Lake Northwest Trade Fair 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Last 

weekend the town of Meadow Lake was the site of the fourth 

annual Northwest Trade Fair.  This event is sponsored by the 

Meadow Lake winter festival committee and the Meadow Lake 

and District Chamber of Commerce, under the very capable 

leadership of President Heather Heddon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were over 120 booths with exhibits by local 

businesses and by exhibitors from across Saskatchewan, 

Alberta, and Manitoba.  Business people from across western 

Canada are quickly discovering that our little corner in 

north-west Saskatchewan is rapidly becoming the economic 

centre of the region. 

 

Over 6,000 people came through the doors during the three 

days.  There were exhibits on everything from tractor-trailers to 

candied apples.  A new event was the futurity heifer show 

which acknowledges the important role that ranching plays in 

the local and provincial economy. 

 

There were some interesting booths given to fund-raising by 

local charities including, Mr. Speaker, a pig kissing contest 

sponsored by the local 4-H.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was a live 

pig, Stella was her name I believe, and I was right in the very 

middle of the whole thing.  Rumour had it the pig was asking to 

be blindfolded.  Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, I did not win; that 

honour went to Ken Schiller of the CJNS radio station. 

 

The Northwest Trade Fair is another example of the vitality of 

Saskatchewan people and of our economy.  I congratulate all 

involved, especially key organizers, Elaine Yaychuk, Oral 

Zacharias, Bev Lamon and Sandra Green, and I look forward to 

next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Big Valley Jamboree 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, today I'd 

like to take this time to update the Assembly on the Big Valley 

Jamboree, slated for July 13 to 17, held in Craven. 

This year's country music event promises to be the biggest and 

the best and the most successful and profitable yet. 

 

This year's jamboree is catering to some of the needs of the 

families.  These changes include sections of reserved seating, 

reserved camping, and an area set aside for children. 

 

This year's Big Valley Jamboree will surely please both the 

tourists and music lovers with a line-up of talented entertainers.  

It includes established stars and up-and-comers as well as 

Canadian and American.  The tentative line-up includes Mark 

Chesnutt, Holly Dunn, Martina McBride, Confederate 

Railroad, Joe Diffie, Tracy Lawrence, and Merle Haggard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Big Valley has become one of Saskatchewan's 

primary tourist attractions and a major employer and 

contributor to the economy. And I wanted to take this 

opportunity to wish the family in charge all the best at Big 

Valley this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Creation of Small-business Development Program 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

advise the Assembly of an announcement we made yesterday in 

Prince Albert that helps build on our Partnership for 

Renewal.  Yesterday the Prince Albert Regional Economic 

Development Authority and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology) jointly announced the 

creation of a small-business development program. 

 

This program will give business people and entrepreneurs 

access to SIAST facilities and instructors at the Woodland 

campus in Prince Albert.  Through this program business 

people will be able to develop new programs, produce products 

in a cost-effective manner.  It will make use of the existing 

SIAST professionals in building business skills and strategy. 

 

This program will assist inventors and entrepreneurs, especially 

farmers, to construct prototypes of this product.  It will do so 

by giving these people access on cost-recovery basis to the 

world-class facilities at the Woodland campus of SIAST.  

These people will be given access to shop instructors, 

technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have good ideas.  Often 

what they need is the business expertise and a facility to 

develop this concept.  This program brings together the 

enterprises of REDA (regional economic development 

authority) with the facility of SIAST, to create a strong 

small-business development plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskTel on Enterprise 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker and MLAs (Member of 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

the Legislative Assembly) and guests, I invite each of you to 

watch a very special television program that will be airing 

across the province of Saskatchewan on Saskatchewan 

Television Network tomorrow evening. 

 

The program is an episode of the series Enterprise which 

profiles successful Saskatchewan businesses and their efforts to 

create new business and employment throughout the province. 

 

I'm proud to say that tomorrow night's show deals with one of 

Saskatchewan most outstanding companies, SaskTel.  Most of 

the members will know of SaskTel's world leadership in 

technologies such as the use of fibre optics and digital 

switching.  The program will show how SaskTel parlayed that 

experience into a contract to install the data communication 

system inside the Channel Tunnel -- the biggest construction 

project of the 20th century. 

 

The show also profiles SaskTel's successful investment in LCL 

(Leicester Communications Limited) cable communications, a 

company supplying cable television and telephone service in 

the area of Leicester, England. 

 

I had the opportunity to preview this show on Monday night 

and I can tell you it's both educational and entertainment.  So if 

you are near a TV set, tune into Enterprise at 8:30 p.m. 

Wednesday evening on one of the stations of the Saskatchewan 

Television Network -- CKCK in Regina, CFQC in Saskatoon . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Opposition Reform Bills 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, today is private 

members' day, and once again we are hopeful that we will be 

given the opportunity to debate one of the seven private 

members' Bills that we have brought forward in this session. 

 

This is the 60th day, Mr. Premier, of this legislative sitting, and 

to date not one of our Bills has been allowed to progress past 

first reading.  Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan people are 

demanding real reform of this legislature -- reform that goes 

well beyond watching the Minister of Labour play with his 

laptop computer and listening to speeches about Smokey the 

Bear's birthday. 

 

Mr. Premier, we are ready to debate any one of our reform 

initiatives.  You can even pick which one you would like, sir.  

Mr. Premier, will you and your government give leave to move 

to one of our reform Bills today, right after question period? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the premiss of the 

Leader of the Opposition's question is one that I do not accept.  

The premiss is that there has not been substantive and 

substantial reform in the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan.  And I think there has been over the last couple 

of years. 

 

I will spare the member and members in this House the 

recitation of the very many reforms which we have 

implemented, ranging all the way from the mandatory calling 

of a by-election within six months of the vacancy, to the 

various tabling of documents, freedom of information Acts, and 

a variety of other reforms -- Board of Internal Economy 

reforms. 

 

These are all ongoing, they're progressive.  We want to 

continue to reform and to make this Assembly as responsive as 

possible. 

 

Now the hon. member asks the question about debating his 

proposals -- that's exactly what private members' day is all 

about.  I welcome the debate in the legislature whenever the 

legislature's agenda permits for this and other ideas.  And the 

House will dispose of the recommendations as it sees fit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, your unwillingness to even consider ideas that come 

from other parties is one of the reasons that so many voters in 

this province are cynical about our process, sir.  Another 

reason, Mr. Premier, is the rampant political patronage that 

we've seen from your government.  It's already been established 

in the last two and one half years that you have institutionalized 

patronage in government in this province. 

 

Mr. Premier, we now see the Liberal leader jumping on the 

patronage bandwagon, Mr. Speaker.  In an article in the North 

Battleford News-Optimist, the Liberal leader condemned the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) record, and I quote, for 

incompetent patronage appointments.  However, she then went 

on to say that if she became premier, she said -- and I quote -- 

that doesn't mean that Liberals won't get jobs, they're as 

competent. 

 

Now the point being, Mr. Premier, this is exactly why we need 

an all-party committee of this House -- New Democrats, 

Liberals, and Conservatives -- to make appointments to boards 

and commissions in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, will your government give leave to go 

immediately to Bill 31 right after question period so that this 

issue can be debated in the House and the issue of patronage be 

taken to a better way?  Mr. Premier, would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I will answer the 

question most specifically and directly put to me in the only 

way that I can.  This is private 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

members' day and members of this House are on this day 

dedicated to the discussion of issues which are of importance to 

them.  And they'll put them on the order paper and they'll be 

discussed, and whether leave is or isn't granted, it depends upon 

the members who deal with the business.  That's one of the 

reforms that the hon. member himself tells us that he advocates. 

 

As to the first aspect of his question, I of course am not going 

to be here to defend the Liberal approach on patronage.  There 

are many examples of it already.  I have a quotation from the 

Prince Albert Daily Herald here involving the former mayor, 

a recently elected Liberal MP (Member of Parliament), where 

the headline, under a story written by Mr. Greg Urbanoski says: 

"Kirkby job creation shows old-style politics in action."  But 

that's not for me to defend; that's for the Leader of the Liberal 

Party to defend. 

 

I guess what I want to say before I take my place, with respect 

to the first aspect of your question, is that the quotation that you 

so readily attach to the Leader of the Liberal Party, I should 

caution you, sir, comes also from the mouths of members of 

your party. 

 

Because I have here the March 28, 1994, third-page 

Star-Phoenix report.  I don't read the Star-Phoenix very often, 

if at all, but someone brought this to my attention.  And would 

it be surprising to you if I read this quotation, from Senator 

Tkachuk:  "Patronage to me is negative only when you put 

someone incompetent in that position." 

 

Which strikes me strikingly similar to exactly what the Leader 

of the Liberal Party said with respect to her approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 

another one of the Bills that we've introduced addresses the 

inadequacies of the current Board of Internal Economy and the 

guidelines attached to it.  For weeks now your government has 

been dragging its feet, claiming to be waiting for information 

from other jurisdictions.  Mr. Premier, we started calling 

around yesterday, and by the end of the afternoon legislation 

dealing with this matter from both the B.C. (British Columbia) 

and Alberta legislatures have been faxed to our office.  I'm 

sure, Mr. Premier, that we will have the information from all of 

the other provinces and the federal parliament in our office by 

the end of the week. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you stop making excuses and start solving the 

situation?  Will you and your government give leave to move to 

Bill 51 immediately after question period so that we can deal 

with this very important issue in the minds of Saskatchewan 

voters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I find it a bit 

contradictory and confusing, to put it mildly, to hear the Leader 

of the Opposition on the one hand talk about democratic reform 

-- one aspect of which I 

would have thought would be on private members' day for 

private members to have a say about what is given leave and 

what isn't given leave -- on the other side of the coin, the 

assumption behind his question is that somehow I am going to 

give leave, or somebody in the front benches is going to give 

leave and not give leave. 

 

On the substance of the preliminaries to the question, namely 

the issue of the Board of Internal Economy, I want to say to the 

Leader of the Opposition that it is not very much conducive to 

supporting democratic reform to drag in to the debate the Board 

of Internal Economy chaired by Mr. Speaker, who I believe 

maintains the confidence of this House as the Chair of this 

House, but also as the chair of the Board of Internal Economy, 

and the officers of the Board of Internal Economy whose job it 

is to prepare the necessary information in comparison of the 

legislation to determine what, if anything, we should do on this 

outstanding issue which you present. 

 

That something needs to be done I think is quite obvious.  

You're doing your research -- good for you.  Give the research 

to the Board of Internal Economy in due course; it will be 

debated and determined by the Board of Internal Economy.  

But don't bypass the process which I think is now well enjoined 

in trying to resolve this and other issues.  Let it play itself out 

as is the proper and democratic way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance).  Mr. Minister, yesterday I raised some concerns 

about the issue of compensation for impaired drivers under 

your no-fault insurance scheme.  The vice-president for SGI 

later confirmed that these are very valid concerns and 

something that SGI needs to consider.  In fact this problem has 

been identified by at least two internal SGI studies. 

 

Mr. Minister, impaired driving is a criminal activity, a criminal 

activity which sometimes results in serious injuries or even 

death, and it's hardly proper and fair that we should be 

introducing legislation that provides greater rewards for people 

who engage in a criminal activity. 

 

Mr. Minister, what specific actions are you going to take to 

address this fact, that no-fault insurance will actually improve 

compensation packages for drinking and driving? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in regards to the question, it 

is indeed a very valid concern, and I looked at the issue and a 

lot of the people do not realize that there is no coverage in 

regards to the payment of the car when a person, you know, 

that has been impaired.  And that's the way it was before and 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

that's the way it will be in the future. 

 

As well as in regards to the rise in premium rates, a person will 

also be nabbed in regards to the premium rates.  I think that is 

very clear in regards to the plan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the aspect of issues, some of 

the public have been raising issues, you know, to me in this 

regard.  I might state this: if there is a tremendous, tremendous 

concern on this area, it is possible, you know, to look at the 

legislation, whether it could be looked at this year or next year, 

and see what the public response is. 

 

I know that The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is not the 

only place to look at this, Mr. Speaker.  We can look at it under 

the highways and Vehicle Administration Act and we would be 

able to analyse the situation further.  But I don't know that it is 

indeed a concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

you obviously don't have a very firm grasp on what the no-fault 

insurance is about because I didn't ask you a question about 

vehicle repairs and I didn't ask you anything about premiums, 

but about personal injuries.  And before you introduce 

legislation, you should at least find out what all the problems 

are going to be and address it as the legislation is introduced, 

not wait for a year after the problems have developed even 

greater. 

 

Your vice-president of SGI said yesterday that the government 

will have to consider amending the legislation or introducing 

companion legislation to deal with this problem.  Are you 

going to do that or are you going to withdraw the Bill and 

correct it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm very surprised at the 

member.  I mean his party has been governing, you know, had 

been governing the province for many years and for him to say 

that we have no grasp of issues . . . I mean, in many years a lot 

of people suffered, you know, under their governance. 

 

I know that when we look at the issue of impaired driving, you 

have to consider certain things, Mr. Speaker.  You ought to 

consider the fact that the person may have children and a 

spouse at home.  When you cut those to zero, then the children 

are left without the food and the basics for life in this province.  

Those are the type of issues that we have to consider before 

rushing into a decision in having absolutely no coverage on 

impaired drivers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I have considered, you know, this 

issue and will be considering it further in the future, depending 

on the input and consultation that the people bring forward to 

us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

find it surprising that you're defending 

drinking and driving or drunken driving because of children.  

What of the children of victims of drinking and driving, Mr. 

Minister?  Mr. Minister, what are you going to do about the 

concerns of drunk drivers and no-fault insurance? 

 

Are you going to pull the legislation and correct it and other 

areas in this piece of legislation that will not work, Mr. 

Minister?  What are you going to do about it?  Will you pull 

this legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to drinking and driving, we are 

continuing the process of consultation.  If we have a certain and 

qualitative degree of input by people where there is a 

tremendous number, it is possible that legislation may be 

amended this time or next year.  It depends on the degree. 

 

I mean when you say that the person looks at only the drunk 

driving, maybe you don't care about the family.  Maybe you 

don't care that the children may go hungry in that situation.  

Those are the type of things that you have to consider when 

you're looking at legislation.  On the one hand you say, don't 

rush into things; now you're telling me to rush into things.  

Make up your mind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of Casinos 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

for the Premier this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government did not campaign on casino 

expansion.  Nor did it campaign on gambling as a source of 

economic development.  You've said that you don't support 

gambling.  In fact in an article in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald 

in 1990 as leader of the opposition, you said, and I quote: 

 

 The spin-off benefits from a casino would be outweighed by 

the difficulties in control, policing, and the socio-economic 

benefits.  There have to be some ethical questions asked 

about how casino activities would affect families going after 

the quick fix. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Premier, if you don't support casino expansion, why are 

you expanding them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, let me 

answer the member from Greystone in this fashion. 

 

I recall in the last session of the legislature the member from 

Greystone encouraging the government to hurry up and 

introduce the VLT (video lottery terminal) program because we 

were losing 50 to $60 million.  And, Madam Member, you 

know that.  You're quoted in Hansard.  It's there. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

This session of the legislature she says to members of the 

government side, slow down and don't expand so quickly.  She 

needs a little more time to have a look at it. 

 

Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have spent an awful lot of 

time consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, putting 

together a partnership with the aboriginal people of this 

province to try and create some job opportunities for those who 

have never had jobs. 

 

Now it's fine for the member from Greystone, who took a 37 

per cent increase in her own personal salary, to attack job 

opportunities for aboriginal people.  At the same time her chief 

executive officer, Emmet Reidy, was the proponent of gaming 

in Moose Jaw in 1988.  At the same time her campaign 

manager, her constituency assistant, had been involved in 

gaming for 10 long years, making private profits from 

gambling, and it's fine for her to be personally involved in 

gambling but still on the other hand to attack this government's 

position with respect to controlled expansion of gaming. 

 

So I say to the member from Greystone, maybe it's time you 

stood up and explained where you come from on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I used to own the 

back end of a cheap horse, Mr. Minister, and you remind me of 

him very often, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, listen very carefully: I do oppose your 

government's gambling policy.  Listen again, Mr. Minister: I do 

oppose your government's gambling policy.  And for weeks I 

have been trying to bring this issue to debate in this legislature, 

which is on the blues, including today. 

 

The NDP gambling policy in this province is destructive, it is 

divisive, and even more poorly planned than the rest of your 

initiatives.  And your policy, Mr. Minister, is greedy and it is 

unfair to local people and it is unfair to non 

_profit organizations. 

 

The people of Assiniboia -- and the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg should be standing up talking about 

this, Mr. Minister -- we'll see $720,000 leave their community 

in one year from VLT machines; that is $2,579 for every man, 

woman, and child.  And what have you done to measure what 

your Premier, when he was leader of the opposition, calls the 

socio-economic problems?  What have you done to measure 

how much damage this is going to do in a town like Assiniboia 

and hundreds of other communities that when you suck that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say this:  the 

member from Greystone surrounds her political staff . . . herself 

with  political staff who have a history of involvement in 

gambling.  In the 1980s these private 

operators of bingos expanded from $4 million to over $120 

million -- a hundred million dollars in profits.  And that was 

fine then.  And that was fine for her political staff. 

 

Emmet Reidy, her chief executive officer, was the proponent of 

a casino established in Moose Jaw for private gain.  He was the 

one who proposed that he would install electronic bingo games 

in this province, I say to the member from Greystone, for 

private gain.  And I say to the member, she was involved in the 

horse-racing industry and it must have been for some reason.  

Because I know that people all over this province gamble on 

horses. 

 

Now if gambling is good enough for her for private gain and if 

it's good enough for Emmet Reidy for private gain, and if it's 

good enough for Elaine Hughston for private gain, it should be 

good enough for the province of Saskatchewan to take revenues 

from gaming and put it back into the people's hands through 

health care and education and the reduction of the deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You know, your 

gutter tactics only prove the point that you don't have a 

strategy. 

 

In the same article from which I quoted earlier, Mr. Minister, 

your Leader of the New Democratic Party, the Premier of this 

province, said, and I quote:  that the provincial government had 

forgotten about the Main Streets of Saskatchewan in its 

preoccupation with megaprojects. 

 

Somehow you and the government have come full circle so that 

you can build mega-casinos as your megaprojects in Saskatoon 

and Regina, and you can suck three-quarters of a million 

dollars a year out of small communities like Assiniboia, and 

that somehow this is going to serve to revive the Main Streets 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Just where is your economic evidence, your economic 

evidence, Mr. Minister, to support your gambling policy?  And 

how do you expect people to make good decisions about what 

needs to be done, without the facts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member from Greystone that this is the most phoney 

performance that I've ever seen in this legislature. 

 

I ask you, member, were you involved in horse-racing or 

weren't you?  Was your chief executive officer the proponent of 

gambling in Moose Jaw in 1998 or wasn't he?  Was Elaine 

Hughston involved in gambling for 10 years or wasn't she? 

 

And I say to you this, Madam, you should answer this House.  

Do you support jobs for aboriginal people in the gaming 

industry or don't you?  Do you support low income people, 

people in this province who have 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

never been employed, who have the opportunity to be involved 

in meaningful jobs in the gaming industry or this province or 

don't you?  Where do you stand, Madam Member?  I tell you 

what you stand for, you stand for every side of this issue -- 

personal involvement, opposition to gambling -- and I say to 

you, you've sat on the fence on the issue more than once.  Why 

don't you just stand up and enunciate what your position is, so 

the people of this province don't believe and consider to believe 

that you're acting in a hypocritical fashion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will members please come to 

order. 

 

French Language Training in Justice System 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, it has come 

to our attention that your government has signed an agreement 

with the federal government to provide French language 

development for Provincial Court judges and Crown 

prosecutors.  Mr. Minister, this may seem like an insignificant 

amount of funds.  However, Mr. Minister, I'm wondering if you 

could let the Assembly know today the number of Provincial 

Court cases that have been tried in French in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the past year. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is correct that 

we recently signed an agreement with the federal government 

covering this subject.  It was not the first such agreement of 

course; it is one of a line of such agreements that have been 

entered into between the federal government and the 

governments of Saskatchewan.  It provides a French language 

training for judges, for prosecutors, and for court officials. 

 

I can't answer the member's question as to how many trials we 

had in French in the last period.  I know there were at least two 

in the last year; and it is a service that we must provide as the 

members opposite well know.  We have no alternative but to 

provide that capability in Saskatchewan and we do. 

 

My understanding is that under the agreement the matter . . . 

the costing of this program will be borne by the federal 

government.  And obviously it's a worthwhile program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I think when the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, in fact all taxpayers, take a look at this, they 

begin to ask themselves, we have governments all across this 

country -- this government in Saskatchewan -- talking about 

deficit reduction, yet we continue to spend money on classes 

and in this case classes where we're going to send Provincial 

Court judges and Crown prosecutors, maybe take a couple of 

lessons, be tutored for . . . through a couple of lessons, and I'm 

not exactly sure that that is going to be money well spent; that 

in fact the judges or the Crown prosecutors will have a grasp 

of the language in order to conduct a trial properly. 

 

Mr. Minister, I understand that you do have obligations under 

the Criminal Code, but to quote the top legal officer in this 

province, there is law and there is justice.  Mr. Minister, could 

you use your powers of arbitrary justice to cancel this 

expenditure and, on behalf of taxpayers, spend this money 

more wisely and perhaps put it toward the provincial debt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I want to say to the member again 

that this is a long-standing, ongoing program for the training of 

a certain number of judges and court officials.  It was begun 

under your government, if not previously, and is simply a 

matter of carrying forward. 

 

We have to be able to provide a bilingual capacity in our 

courts.  It's a constitutional matter and we have no choice.  So 

the member is asking me to do something which I simply can't 

do.  

 

Besides, the members will also well know that some of the 

judges who have been attending these programs have become 

very proficient in French, to the point where they can conduct 

French trials. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce some guests? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, sitting in your gallery are four 

gentlemen from the National Transportation Agency, and I 

want to introduce them.  They are Ken Ritter, Tom Maville, 

Seymour Isenberg, and Don Rees.  And they met with our 

caucus this morning and I understand they are going to meet 

with the Liberal caucus this afternoon and the NDP caucus 

tomorrow. 

 

And we met with them earlier and they presented a very good 

bird's-eye view of the aspect of transportation in western 

Canada and throughout Canada.  And I would like the members 

of the Assembly to join me in welcoming these people here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I would like to join with the member 

from Morse in welcoming the people from the National 

Transportation Agency, and look forward to meeting with them 

soon.  And welcome them here to Regina and hope that your 

stay and your meetings are very rewarding. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that we 

convert the question to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Question 58, motion for return (debate). 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 79 -- No Smoking Policy for the Legislative 

Building 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will 

be moving the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly, in consideration of the serious hazards to 

health that smoking poses, the detrimental effect of 

second-hand smoke in the workplace, the increasing concern 

about environmental contamination and the government's 

stated position on the health hazards of smoking, adopt for 

implementation on January 1, 1995, a no smoking policy for 

the Legislative Assembly building; except that designated 

areas be provided for smoking within the Legislative 

Assembly building; and further that this policy extend to all 

personnel within the Legislative Assembly building, 

including MLAs and visitors. 

 

This motion, I believe, has the support of my government 

colleagues, and as chair of the health, social policy and justice 

committee . . . 

 

The Speaker: --  Why is the Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize for 

interrupting, but I wonder if I couldn't revert to written 

questions, and by leave, table the answer to question 58. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Written question 58, the answer is tabled. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS' MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 79 -- No Smoking Policy for the Legislative 

Building 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you.  Returning to my remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, as chair of the health, social policy and justice 

committee, there's many groups that have met with us who are 

concerned on this matter -- the Cancer Society, the Lung 

Association, and Heart Health, which is coalition of about 20 

health organizations -- who have been hoping and urging 

the government to take action on this life-threatening issue. 

 

This is some of the information that they have presented to us.  

Not only is tobacco use branded as the chief single avoidable 

cause of premature death, disease, and disability in our time, 

but smoke from other people's cigarettes endangers the health 

of non-smokers.  I think we've all had the experience of a large 

increase of people who have allergies towards cigarette smoke. 

 

Tobacco smoke contains at least 50 cancer-causing compounds.  

Involuntary smoking is the third leading cause of lung cancer 

deaths.  And the U.S. (United States) Surgeon General has 

stated that tobacco smoke is the single greatest workplace 

pollutant.  It is a greater threat than all other industrial 

contaminants combined. 

 

An average smoke-filled office contains concentrations of 

tobacco smoke and cancer-causing particulates which are 270 

times higher than levels that are considered safe. 

 

In a typical workplace situation where smoking is allowed, a 

non-smoker can inhale a level of nicotine and other toxic 

substances equivalent to two or three cigarettes every single 

working day. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while I admit it's a bit cheaper to smoke 

that way, it doesn't give you the same amount of control or 

choice over whether you actually smoke.  And conventional 

ventilation systems that exist in our buildings are inadequate 

because of their relatively low air-exchange rates. 

 

In a report of the U.S. general surgeon in 1990 some of the 

major conclusions highlighting the benefits of smoking 

cessation include that it has major and immediate health 

benefits for men and women of all ages.  Former smokers live 

longer than continuing smokers.  I've been trying to convince 

my father of this for years but I haven't quite managed yet. 

 

(1430) 

 

For example, persons who quit smoking before age 50 have 

half the risk of dying in the next 15 years compared with 

continuing smokers.  And smoking cessation also decreases the 

risk of lung cancer, other cancers, heart attack, stroke and 

chronic lung disease.  And again I think how it affects this 

particular package of diseases suggests why so many 

organizations have joined in a coalition to try to reduce the 

amount of smoke in our environment. 

 

In terms of other people who have smoking policies, a 1990 

Health and Welfare Canada survey of Canada's school and 

school board smoking policies found that 97 per cent of schools 

have smoking policies and 58 per cent ban smoking entirely.  

In 1988, a hospital survey found that 90 per cent of hospitals 

have a formal, written smoking policy, 7 per cent have no 

formal policy but do restrict smoking, and only 3 per cent of 

hospitals had no policy. 



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

Now I know people have raised concerns about enforcement in 

this area because are we going to institute smoking police or 

have fines and what not?  And the answer is of course not; this 

is a positive policy intended to take leadership in the health 

area as a positive goal that we set for ourselves, not as a 

punitive measure.  Both the City Hall and the university, for 

example, have these policies and largely people have complied 

out of goodwill rather than any punitive approach to the 

situation. 

 

I think as employers MLAs have a responsibility to look after 

the employees in our workplace as we expect other employers 

to.  And more importantly, as public figures we have a 

responsibility to set an example about smoking, to take 

leadership on the issue.  It is the leading preventable cause of 

illness and death, and it produces more addicts, disability, and 

premature death than all illegal drugs combined. 

 

Now where I have some difficulty with this is, over my life I 

have worked quite a bit in the field of drug addiction and in the 

area of alcohol addiction, and I do understand cigarette 

smoking to be an addiction.  I don't think all people smoke 

because they enjoy the amount of money it costs them, or that 

they necessarily enjoy being chained to the cigarette.  But it is 

an addiction. 

 

If you look on a scale of addictive substances, if my memory 

serves me right, I believe that cigarettes topped the scale even 

above heroin as an addictive substance.  It's the kind of 

substance that if we were to bring it in front of the federal drug 

board would never be approved as a legal substance for sale at 

this particular time in our society. 

 

And unfortunately it's not only smokers who are affected but 

non-smokers as well.  Second-hand smoke is the third leading 

cause of lung cancer deaths.  So I think it's incumbent upon as 

as community leaders to have compassion for those who do 

smoke, but at the same time recognize that this is a problem 

that we have to deal with and have to move ahead on trying to 

reduce the level of smoke-contaminated air in our community. 

 

Because it is such a problem for people, the new policy will 

include assistance for people who wish to stop smoking and 

employees will be eligible for a one-time reimbursement of 50 

per cent of the cost of a quit smoking program to a maximum 

of $100.  And employees may claim the costs of a quit smoking 

program that they or their spouse has completed.  This is in 

keeping with ways that this is handled in other areas.  So while 

there be some short-term costs, it's expected to save taxpayers 

money in the long run in terms of improved health and 

improved air quality. 

 

This may not have been as big of an issue when there was 

fewer pollutants in the air many years ago, but now that there is 

such a competition in our air space with the variety of 

pollutants that we have, everything we can do to reduce another 

pollutant is a positive act for all the people who suffer from 

allergies and are not 

able to tolerate a smoke environment. 

 

So as people realize the dangers and costs in both economic 

and health terms, it's become less acceptable in society.  And I 

know it will be difficult and will take a great deal of 

determination, even on the part of our own workers in the 

building and our own members here in the caucus and in the 

legislature, but it's an effort that we are committing ourselves 

to, I hope today, to proceed in this direction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser: 

 

 That this Assembly, in consideration of the serious hazards to 

health that smoking poses, the detrimental effect second-hand 

smoke has in the workplace, the increasing concern about 

environmental contamination and the government's stated 

position on the health hazards of smoking, adopt for 

implementation on January 1, 1995, a no smoking policy for 

the Legislative Assembly building; except that designated 

areas be provided for smoking within the Legislative 

Assembly building; and further, that this policy extend to all 

personnel within the Legislative Assembly building, 

including MLAs and visitors. 

 

Seconded by the member for Moose Jaw Palliser. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I will have to ask the member, who is this 

seconded by? 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- The member for Moose Jaw Palliser. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And at the 

conclusion of my remarks, I would like to amend the motion 

that's been put forward by my colleague from Regina Lake 

Centre.  An amendment that I would move at the conclusion of 

my remarks would state: 

 

 That the words "January 1, 1995" be deleted and the 

following be substituted therefor: "July 1, 1994"; 

 

 And further that the words "except that designated areas be 

provided for smoking within the Legislative Assembly 

building" be deleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm supporting the motion put forward and I think 

it's time that we've provided the leadership as members of 

government and our colleagues in the opposition benches to tell 

people about the severe dangers of second-hand smoke in all 

workplaces.  And when we're going forward with a policy that 

will impact upon all government workers and all government 

workplaces, it's important for us to make that statement and 

then live by our word in looking at our workplaces as 

somewhere where we can -- although in some instances it will 

be very difficult -- provide the leadership to show others that 

we care about the workplace environment and the dangers of 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

second-hand smoke in that environment. 

 

Earlier this year I was asked to be a part of a committee that 

drew together representatives from all government employees 

and from the department officials and sit there on behalf of 

government caucus and look at some of the ways that we could, 

as members of this building and of government, provide 

leadership in this area.  And with that I wanted to make sure 

that this motion that is before us is consistent with the policy 

that's been developed by a very hard-working committee. 

 

And in that way I'm putting forward the idea that to be 

consistent we would take out the words, January 1, and replace 

them with July 1 which will be consistent with the policy 

across government. 

 

And in the second part of the amendment, that when we're 

talking about special designated areas in the workplace, we 

recognize that it takes much more than conventional ventilation 

systems to remove all of the particles from the air, or indeed to 

be able to consider our workplace a safe place if we don't have 

the proper ventilation systems. 

 

And when you look at the building that we're located in today, 

it's a very difficult process to, number one, find an area that we 

can very easily ventilate, and the process of ventilation in a 

single room, to use the special equipment and the conditioning 

that's necessary, would, at the very least, cost about $45,000. 

 

We're not suggesting that we do that right across the 

government workplaces.  I know in some areas it would be a 

cost of in excess of a hundred thousand dollars to provide a 

room that would meet the occupational health and safety 

standards.  And because we're not going to ask for any 

dispensation or special handling of this issue for this workplace 

than we would suggest for all other workplaces of government 

employees, that I think it's very appropriate that we take out the 

specially designated area for this workplace as well and not 

proceed with that. 

 

There has been much said about the dangers of second-hand 

smoke in the environment and I know as one person who 

suffers from allergies, I cannot choose an option to get up and 

leave my workplace if someone's sitting next to me and 

choosing to have a cigarette.  I know that there are many other 

people in the same position. 

 

Smoke knows no boundaries and really has no way to be 

properly contained if you have two of three people in a 

workplace who are choosing to smoke there and harm the third 

person.  They do not have the ability to get up and leave 

because someone is being harmful to their health. 

 

It's also a very difficult habit to quit I know, Mr. Speaker, and I 

sympathize for those people who have the habit and would be 

looking at, in this policy, sensation programs or to say that I 

know it's going to 

be a very difficult way to provide leadership because there are 

times during your work day where you're going to have to 

remove yourself from the building to have a cigarette. 

 

But we've asked that of all other people, and I know in the 

school systems, in the hospital systems, this is in place, so 

we're far from providing the leadership on this issue to our 

entire community.  In this way, we're following far behind 

many other areas and workplaces such as city halls and 

municipal governments who have already done this for their 

workplace. 

 

And I think some of the statistics have to be restated.  Not only 

is tobacco use branded as the chief, single most avoidable cause 

of premature death, disease, and disability in our time, but 

smoke from other people's cigarettes endangers the health of 

non-smokers.  We now have that as a proven fact, Mr. Speaker.  

And it does endanger the lives of others who are not willing 

participants in the process or are enjoying the smoking from 

someone else who is enjoying the . . . so-called enjoying the 

cigarette, although I know that there are many who say that 

they are going to now have to look at a change in their lifestyle 

to be able to adjust to this policy. 

 

My daughter did a report at school and we looked at some of 

the agents that are present in a cigarette and in second-hand 

smoke, and it was interesting to see some of those are arsenic, 

road tar, formaldehyde.  And as the member from Lake Centre 

said, we're adding that to many other pollutants that are already 

in the environment.  But these we know are some of the 

cancer-causing agents that are found within the second-hand 

smoke. 

 

Involuntary smoking is the third leading cause of lung cancer 

today.  And I feel that anyone who is a non-smoker looks at 

that and has a fear of those statistics, because I think that as we 

know more and more about the effects of second-hand smoke, 

we're in as much danger from the health hazards as the person 

who's having the primary smoking problem. 

 

The U.S. Surgeon General has stated that tobacco smoke is the 

single greatest workplace pollutant.  It is a greater threat than 

all other industrial contaminants combined.  So when you look 

at an average smoke-filled office, it contains concentrations of 

tobacco smoke and cancer-causing particulates which are 270 

times higher than levels that are considered safe. 

 

So in a typical workplace situation where smoking is allowed, a 

non-smoker can inhale a level of nicotine and other toxic 

substances equivalent to two or three cigarettes every single 

working day -- not through their choice but being present in a 

workplace where there is no policy in place. 

 

And I'd suggest that in this building many of the workers now 

are in a position where they know that occupational health and 

safety guidelines will be coming forward and they'll be wanting 

to lay formal 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

complaints against people who are smoking because of these 

statistics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I mentioned, the conventional ventilation systems are totally 

inadequate if you're to say, we'll find us a room and put a bit of 

a fan in there and it'll take care of somehow the second-hand 

smoke.  It's not the case. 

 

I think the kind of fan system that you're talking about would 

probably suck the hair off of a head of an average member of 

the Assembly, and we don't want to see that happen.  And I'm 

sure that the member from Moose Jaw Palliser doesn't want to 

lose any more for assisting a smoker to be able to ventilate a 

workplace in a room that would try and address to the 

ventilation system necessary. 

 

It therefore leaves me, with the amendment that is before us, to 

state that I'm strongly supporting the motion that is before us.  I 

would like to think that as a member of a health committee 

during my time on city council we played a strong role in 

developing a policy for that workplace.  It took the leadership 

of a council of the day, and I know one or two people on that 

council who went to cessation programs and respected the 

policy that was put forward; that I think it will be incumbent 

upon all of us to try and live within the policy and provide the 

leadership for others. 

 

(1445) 

 

It's hard for some who are smokers and been smokers for a long 

time, but I think it's also hard on those who are now having to 

contend with the second-hand smoke and know what that does 

to their health.  And I know that we're going to take a time to 

be able to adjust to the policy.  So I'm encouraging everyone -- 

all members on all sides of the House -- to provide the 

leadership for not only this workplace, but for all government 

offices so that we can put forward a policy that will be 

respected by everyone. 

 

I know the committee in doing their work felt that was very 

important and it was why a committee was drawn together of 

representatives from all workplaces and the employees to be 

able to do this in a cooperative spirit and a cooperative way.  

And the amendments that I'm going to put forward right now, 

Mr. Speaker, are consistent with the policy that's been 

developed in that cooperative manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to move the amendment 

that states: 

 

 That the words "January 1, 1995" be deleted and the 

following be substituted therefore: "July 1, 1994"; 

 

 And further, that the words "except that designated areas be 

provided for smoking within the Legislative Assembly 

building" be deleted. 

 

Seconded by the member from Saskatoon Wildwood.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Members of this House 

may or may not be familiar with my long-stated, almost 

quasi-militant position with respect to smoking.  But I will, just 

for the record, repeat it again.  I think it is extremely sad and 

unfortunate that some people have become addicted to a drug 

called nicotine.  I think it is unfortunate.  And I would hope that 

they can all stop smoking.  And I have been working for 

several years to ensure that we can create the necessary public 

climate so that the drug addicts called cigarette, pipe, and cigar 

smokers, will feel that it is now time for them to stop smoking. 

 

Having stated that, Mr. Speaker, I will say that initially when I 

reviewed the private members' motion put forward by the 

member from Regina Lake Centre, I was somewhat vexed and I 

was not at all certain that I even wanted to support it.  Because 

I thought, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that it was a bit of a 

watered-down compromise.  We have known for years and 

years that mainstream smoke and second-hand smoke are 

definitely deleterious to personal health. 

 

We have known that there is no logical health reason for people 

to continue engaging in a dangerous addiction.  And so I saw 

no reason for us to wait until January 1, 1995 to finally do the 

responsible thing and stop smoking in this Legislative 

Building. 

 

Further, I saw no reason, given that this is a relatively old 

building by Saskatchewan architectural standards, I saw no 

reason for us to designate an area in the building to be set aside 

for our unfortunate drug addicts.  It did seem to me that what 

we ought to be doing is moving forward boldly in 1994 and 

outright banning smoking in this building and doing it 

immediately. 

 

So when the member from Regina Wascana Plains moved her 

amendment, I was very pleased to second it. Because it 

contains within it the essential elements of what I would like to 

see in a no smoking designation in the Legislative Assembly, 

and that is immediacy and totality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have known for many, many years that 

smoking is deleterious to the health.  Initially when it affected 

mostly men, I think that people tended to look at it and say, oh 

well, that's one of the prices you pay for being tough and 

macho and manly.  So we'll just kind of ignore it and maybe 

eventually they'll see the light and they'll decide to quit 

smoking all on and of their own because they care about their 

loved ones. 

 

Unfortunately that doesn't happen.  While they may care about 

their loved ones, unfortunately it seems that the attraction 

towards the addiction that is inherent in inhaling nicotine 

seemed to be a little bit more important. 

 

Now what we're seeing though, Mr. Speaker, as a 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

result of strong societal pressure, we are seeing that more and 

more men are coming to see the light.  They are recognizing the 

dangerous health consequences of their addictive behaviour.  

And so we have seen the percentage of people smoking, and 

particularly of men smoking, decreasing rapidly over the last 

10 to 15 years.  For that, Mr. Speaker, I applaud them.  It is 

wonderful to see the men showing that kind of leadership with 

respect to addictive behaviour. 

 

I have to say though, as I look at recent trends, I am extremely 

saddened to realize that young women have become the target 

of the latest propaganda campaign by the nicotine 

manufacturers.  And I think that we need to move much more 

aggressively to help young women understand that smoking is 

not a sexy thing, smoking is not a glamorous thing, smoking is 

not a wonderful thing. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it's dirty, it's filthy, 

it's dangerous.  And it is time that all people, no matter what 

their age is, no matter what their sex is -- all people butted out 

and stopped smoking tobacco products. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, because there are numerous studies that 

have indicated for several years the dangerous health 

consequences of smoking.  And they are not simply cancers, 

though we tend when we talk about smoking to focus only on 

cancer of the lung.  I would point out to members of the 

Assembly that other cancers that they are at risk of because 

they engage in smoking or because they are exposed to 

second-hand smoke because someone close to them smokes, 

other cancers are cancer of the bladder, cancer of the testicles, 

cancer of the kidneys, and cancer of the skin. 

 

Now I don't think anyone in this Assembly would willingly 

want to gamble on the fact that they might, because of their 

addictive behaviour, get one of those particular cancers.  Nor 

do I think people want to end up with heart disease or 

emphysema, also logical consequences of smoking behaviour. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, and I guess I'm rather strong on it 

because for almost 20 years I lived with a man who did smoke, 

and he smoked very heavily.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I myself 

smoked.  I decided to quit smoking, so many years ago I can't 

even remember -- I believe it was in 1978 or '79 that I quit 

smoking.  My husband did not quit smoking and unfortunately 

three days ago would have been his 59th birthday, but because 

he decided to continue with his smoking behaviour, seven years 

ago he died of cancer of the kidneys. 

 

It was a terrible consequence to have to pay for engaging in an 

addictive behaviour, and I would hope that people all around 

this province could look at that kind of an example and resolve, 

personally, to quit smoking themselves.  It is not a pleasant 

thing to die of any kind of cancer and it is not pleasant for the 

people who loved that person to watch them dying of cancer. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason that I wanted to speak to the 

amendment put forward by the member from Regina Wascana 

Plains is because I wanted to direct the Assembly's attention to 

the importance of this 

being a broad-reaching smoking prohibition within the total 

building and it occurring as quickly as possible. 

 

The reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is because since 1981 we 

have very clear evidence of the dangerous effects of 

second-hand smoke.  Now smokers can go on and can talk 

about their rights to engage in risk behaviour all they want.  

Personally I take some issue with it but if adults decide that 

they want to engage in risky behaviour, I suppose I can't really 

stop them.  But I have to say that their rights stop where my 

rights start, and it is very clear that second-hand smoke is 

dangerous to people in the immediate surroundings of a 

smoker. 

 

In 1981, as a matter of fact January 17, 1981, there was a study 

published in the British Medical Journal entitled 

"Non-smoking wives of heavy smokers have a higher risk of 

lung cancer".  That publication was put out by Dr. Hirayama of 

Japan and that publication basically galvanized the world into 

recognizing the dangerous effects of side-stream or 

second-hand smoke. 

 

It was curious, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Hirayama did not even set out 

originally in his study to link the causal effects of second-hand 

smoke and cancer deaths.  He was more interested in what was 

happening in the lives of smokers, and so he was asking them 

what kinds of diet did they have, did they eat carrots, did they 

take vitamins, all these kinds of questions, and then just asked 

coincidentally, and does your spouse smoke?  And of course in 

Japanese society, at least at that time, there was very strong 

societal prohibition against women smoking. 

 

So he asked this sort of off-the-cuff question and then was 

absolutely dumbfounded and amazed when he analysed his 

data and found that the non-smoking wives of Japanese 

smokers had a very high risk of lung cancer.  Indeed their risk, 

as non-smokers, was as high as the very few smokers amongst 

Japanese women. 

 

Every study since Dr. Hirayama's study, every reputable study, 

has confirmed the risk factor.  It is important for us to 

recognize this as we contemplate the amendment put by the 

member from Regina Wascana Plains.  It is not simply a 

question of smokers' rights.  It is also a question of 

non-smokers' rights. 

 

Indeed, smokers, curiously enough, because they are smoking a 

filtered cigarette generally, tend not to inhale as many poisons, 

as many toxins, as much carbon monoxide as people in their 

immediate surroundings who have to inhale the second-hand 

smoke that is not filtered so that the toxins are not filtered out 

for them. 

 

Now not only do people who are in the area of smokers face a 

greater risk because of the second-hand smoke and the 

connection with lung cancer, they also face a greater risk with 

respect to asthmatic attacks.  If a person has severe allergies, 

has asthma, and is in a confined area where he or she 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

is compelled to breath in second-hand smoke, he or she is at far 

greater risk of having an asthma attack. 

 

Now no matter how much a smoker may proclaim his or her 

rights to do something dangerous and silly and stupid on the 

grounds that he or she is addicted, surely no smoker is going to 

say: and I have the right to create conditions that could cause 

asthma attacks for people. Indeed people with heart disease, 

who have angina, can have a heart attack precipitated by being 

in an enclosed area where they are compelled to breathe a lot of 

second-hand smoke. 

 

Luckily, we haven't had that happen in this Legislative 

Assembly building so far, Mr. Speaker, at least not so far as I'm 

aware.  But it does seem to me, as publicly elected officials, it 

behoves us to show some responsibility and to recognize that 

the second-hand smoke that our MLAs or staff who are 

frequently here in this building are breathing out could 

potentially cause asthma attacks or angina attacks for some 

people, as well as giving them a greater exposure to the toxins 

that research has clearly identified can cause cancer in smokers 

and non-smokers. 

 

(1500) 

 

I'm going to wrap up, Mr. Speaker, by saying that even though 

it is popular these days to bad-mouth politicians and to suggest 

that politicians are the scum of the earth, we're the bottom 

feeders, we're even lower than any other occupational group 

that people may wish to mention, still it does seem to me we 

were elected for some good and compelling reasons, to 

maintain democracy in this province. And all of us, I think, on 

all sides of the House, whether we're New Democratic, 

Conservative, or Liberal, it seems to me all of us are worth 

something to this country; all of us have some sort of a useful 

function in this country and most particularly in this building. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it does not seem to me out of line that we 

would wish to protect the MLAs who work in this building as 

well as the staff who work here.  On that grounds, Mr. Speaker, 

I would suggest that it is not only important, it is timely; and it 

is long past . . . it is long overdue for us to move this motion, 

this amended motion, and prohibit smoking in the Legislative 

Building of the province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

speak on the amended motion put forward by the member for 

Regina Wascana Plains, recommending a no smoking policy in 

the Legislative Building. 

 

We as legislators have many, many important issues to address.  

There are 81,000 people in this province on social assistance, 

34,000 people looking for work, and 7,500 young men and 

women leaving universities and technical schools looking for 

hope and opportunity where they don't seem to find any.  And 

one has to ask ourselves what we're doing today and how we're 

spending our time,  debating whether 

to make the Legislative Building a non-smoking facility. 

 

I ask this question: what is to debate?  As the current 

advertisement for sporting goods says: just do it. 

 

In that context, Mr. Speaker, my comments will be very brief 

so we can get on with major issues of concern to all facing the 

province besides the concern for health and well-being. 

 

I understand that this issue will be discussed in the near future 

by the Legislative Building space planning committee.  And 

given the irrefutable evidence about the harmful effects of 

smoking and second-hand smoke, and given the fact that 

almost all public buildings have smoking bans in effect, their 

decision should not be one of great controversy. 

 

I was going to caution when I first read the initial motion and 

now that the member from Wascana Plains has brought forward 

the amended motion, I guess this comment becomes rather 

redundant, so I'll simply support the amendment in saying that 

providing a ventilated smoking room at taxpayers' expense is 

not an expenditure that many would feel warranted, not only in 

these times of restraint but particularly given the seriousness of 

this issue. 

 

In reply to an April 12 letter that I received from a doctor in 

Humboldt urging us to support a no smoking policy in this 

building, I replied indicating that our caucus will support any 

ban on smoking in this building, whether that be a complete 

ban or a partial ban. 

 

I informed the writer, as I inform this House, that I am pleased 

to report that the offices of the Liberal caucus are completely 

smoke free and they have been since my arrival in 1991 

anyway.  This will continue to be the case regardless of the 

outcome of this motion and regardless of the decision of the 

Legislative Building space planning committee. 

 

The comment of course from my illustrious member from 

Rosthern stating that that must have been a very tough decision 

in my caucus, I want you to know that there was a high, high 

level of intellectual debate.  And the conclusion was 

unequivocal, Mr. Speaker, that there would be no smoking in 

the best interests of not only the caucus but the staff. 

 

I am very pleased to support the amended motion put forward 

by the member from Wascana Plains.  And I do think that it is 

more specific than the initial motion and therefore I shall return 

to my seat being pleased that we have discussed this issue 

today. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

to rise today to speak on this motion, particularly on a day 

when we were in the dark for a while.  A lot of people would 

suggest that perhaps it's time to shed a little light on this 

subject. 

 

Speaking of light on the subject, Mr. Speaker, while it was dark 

in here I can think of one useful purpose that 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

the people on the other side who smoke could have supplied us 

at that point in time.  They could have all lit up their lighters 

and held them up in the air so we could have had a little more 

light in here.  But unfortunately they didn't do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say the members on the other side, Mr. Speaker, because 

no one in this caucus smokes. 

 

So we have no problem at all supporting the motion being 

brought forward, especially that one amended by the member 

from Regina Wascana Plains.  And we didn't have any 

difficulty in coming to a decision that, in our own area, that we 

would not smoke.  Unlike the Liberal leader, who only had one 

caucus member to discuss it with, we have the 10 and we all 

agreed not to smoke, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health concerns are the major issue when talking 

about smoking.  It affects not only that person that is smoking 

but also those around them.  Mr. Speaker, while I myself do not 

smoke, my wife does.  And our children -- our three children -- 

are very concerned about that.  They're always commenting to 

their mother about her smoking and doing little things to 

encourage her to stop.  My wife knows my stand on her 

smoking also and we have come to the mutual agreement that 

we won't talk about it.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is a concern for all 

those around the area that have smokers within their families 

and in their workplaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one issue though with smoking that I 

think needs to be brought out.  A person who smokes and 

causes themselves physical harm is a burden on our health 

system.  And while it's a personal decision on their part to 

smoke, and also an environmental hazard to themselves, to 

their health, the government in its wisdom has decided that 

government funding will support that hazard or the rectification 

of that hazard through the health care system. 

 

And yet we see other areas where the government is not 

providing that support.  With cigarettes and tobacco in general, 

the government collects a very large amount of taxes and 

perhaps this is one of the reasons why governments are 

somewhat reluctant to discourage people from smoking; but in 

other areas the government also collects a large amount of 

taxes.  With smoking and health care, the government will 

provide the rectification of the problems caused by smoking; 

but in situations such as the underground tanks, where the 

government collects a large amount of taxes from fuel, it's not 

prepared to support the rectification of that environmental 

concern. 

 

And I believe there's a double standard at work here, Mr. 

Speaker.  Smokers pay to pollute themselves.  People with 

underground storage tanks, the government collects a large 

amount of tax on it and yet will not support the rectification of 

that environmental concern.  And I think that's an issue that 

needs to be strongly looked at, Mr. Speaker, because in both 

cases -- cigarettes and fuel -- the government is collecting the 

majority of the monies 

that are spent on it. 

 

Just a day or so ago in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, as you walked 

through you could smell cigarette smoke.  And if you looked 

around to see where that cigarette smoke was coming from, Mr. 

Speaker, it was coming from the government employees that 

were sitting behind the Assembly, waiting to come in for 

estimates.  And while we're not allowed to smoke within this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, within this Chamber, in the rest of the 

building people do smoke.  And it does create a problem and a 

concern for those who do not smoke and who are allergic to 

that smoke, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to eliminate smoking within this building would definitely 

be very beneficial.  But I believe that the manner in which to 

handle the situation, while this Assembly can make a 

recommendation, the thing to do with it is to refer it to the 

Rules Committee for a decision to eliminate smoking in this 

area.  And that cannot happen or is unlikely to happen, Mr. 

Speaker, today. 

 

And because it's unlikely to happen today, that's why I found 

this news release, that I just received from the New Democratic 

caucus services, to be very intriguing.  And perhaps because we 

had a time of darkness in this Assembly today, it's possible that 

I missed a vote.  I don't believe I missed it, but as I read this 

news release from the government opposite, I'm concerned I 

must have missed something.  Because the headline on this 

news release says: "Government MLAs vote for smoke-free 

Legislative Building." 

 

Well unless I'm mistaken, Mr. Speaker, we haven't voted on 

this yet, and the government members haven't voted on it and 

the opposition members haven't voted on it.  So this news 

release, Mr. Speaker, is very, very presumptuous. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They have deemed that we voted it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well perhaps, as my colleague says, 

they're deeming it to have been done.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

have not yet voted on this.  And when the vote comes down I 

would suggest that perhaps it will not just be the government 

members that have voted for a smoke-free Legislative Building. 

 

Now perhaps the government members are the only ones who 

want to take credit for this, but I'm sure that, Mr. Speaker, that 

if we review the Hansards afterwards, you will find that all 

members will have supported this.  There's also one other part 

of this news release that I find very objectionable and I will 

read a paragraph of this, and I quote: 

 

 The new policy will also include assistance for employees 

wishing to stop smoking.  Employees will be eligible for a 

one-time reimbursement of 50 per cent of the cost of a 

quit-smoking program to a maximum of $100.  Employees 

may claim for the cost of a quit-smoking program they or 

their spouse has 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

completed. (I'm assuming everybody only has one spouse.)  

Assistance for quit-smoking programs will be the 

responsibility of each government department affected. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it may be nice for the government 

employees within this building or throughout all of government 

to be able to receive funding to quit smoking, but what of the 

general public?  The general public is expected to pay for this 

through their taxes but they're not going to be given the 

opportunity to access that.  Just the government employees.  

And that's wrong, Mr. Speaker, totally wrong.  The government 

employees that do stop smoking are going to receive their 

bonus for not having to pay 6 or $7 a package for cigarettes.  

That's where they're going to make their saving. 

 

This is an irresponsible use of government money, Mr. 

Speaker, taxpayers' money, to provide this kind of assistance 

for government employees.  We're just passing estimates right 

now, Mr. Speaker, and it would be very interesting to see 

where in each department's budget they're allocating funds for 

stop smoking.  Perhaps they're going to take it out of the NDP 

caucus funds, and if they wish to spend their money that way, 

that'll be appropriate for their decision, but I think it's 

absolutely wrong that it comes out of government funding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Wascana Plains 

amendment moved that this motion, this recommendation, take 

place on July 1, 1994.  And perhaps the reason for that change, 

Mr. Speaker, is that once smokers are forced to quit smoking in 

this building -- if it's January 1, it's going to be a tad cold to go 

outside and stand on the doorstep -- this'll give them a break-in 

period I guess where they can stand outside for a little bit in the 

warm weather. 

 

And this reminds me of a story I heard on the radio, Mr. 

Speaker, on the Morningside Show with Peter Gzowski.  This 

happened a couple of years ago.  Mr. Gzowski was 

interviewing a person from Germany who had been visiting 

Canada and had visited up at Yellowknife in the North West 

Territories.  And this occurred during the winter months of the 

year. 

 

And this person from Germany asked Mr. Gzowski why there 

were so many prostitutes in Yellowknife. And he described this 

large building where they seemed to be housed because they 

were all standing out in front of this building.  And Mr. 

Gzowski stopped for a second and thought about it, and then he 

said, oh, those are federal employees; they can't smoke inside. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to be aware of the fact that we 

could end up with a large number of people standing outside of 

this building, smoking.  And when it comes to the MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it's more important that they should be in this 

building working, rather than standing on the doorstep 

smoking. 

 

(1515) 

So I would encourage all of them to simply quit smoking and 

save the money that they're spending currently on cigarettes.  

It's up to us, Mr. Speaker, as MLAs, to set an example for the 

public.  And this would be a good example to set, Mr. Speaker, 

to quit smoking. 

 

I will be supporting this amendment, Mr. Speaker.  But I found 

it surprising when the member from Saskatoon talked about 

gambling, that we shouldn't be gambling with our lives when it 

comes to smoking.  And yet that very same member supports 

the government which is trying to encourage gambling in this 

province.  Somewhat of a contradiction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, I will be supporting the elimination of 

smoking in this building.  I would also encourage that the 

general public, that each and every one of us seriously consider 

smoking and the quitting, the stopping of smoking in general.  

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'd like to get into 

this debate.  I'd like to speak in favour of the motion that's 

moved by the member from Regina Lake Centre, but I'm 

opposed to the amendment from the member from Wascana 

Plains. 

 

Smoking, when all is said and done, sir, is a legal addiction, 

and we in particular have not reduced our taxes on this 

particular sin, and I think that we should remember that.  If we 

are happy to take the money off the people for smoking, we 

should allow them somewhere to smoke until it's made illegal.  

When it's made illegal, it's going to be a different matter 

altogether. 

 

I'm a non-smoker myself, and I wish I could get my wife to 

stop smoking, but she won't, and that's that.  And after 35 years 

I guess I'm just going to have to live with it.  We're told that 

500 people in Canada die from other people's smoke.  

Unfortunately many more than 500 a year die from other 

people's motor cars.  So what are we going to do about that, 

Mr. Speaker, sir? 

 

Eighty-five per cent of cases of lung cancer are from smoking, 

and the other 15 are in people who don't smoke.  And this is 

because there are two kinds of lung cancer, Mr. Speaker, sir.  

There's the large cell variety and the small cell variety, and 

they're not related whatever.  And those who smoke can get the 

one kind, and anybody can get the other kind, whether they 

smoke or whether they don't. 

 

So simply banning smoking is not going to reduce the number 

of . . . (inaudible) . . . cell cancers in non-smokers because 

they're going to get them anyway.  So I think we're not going to 

have too much effect on the reduction of the number of people 

who die from lung cancer, who do not smoke. 

 

Nevertheless, second-hand smoke is certainly an annoyance 

and it is a hazard. And many people are allergic to tobacco 

smoke and the products and they should be protected.  The 

same goes for cosmetics for that matter.  I know a doctor in 

Regina who is a skin specialist and she insists, when she makes 

an 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

appointment for a patient, she says, please wear no make-up or 

perfume whatever, because this doctor is allergic to it. 

 

So are we going to now ban perfumes and cosmetics because 

some people are allergic to that?  Are we going to shave all our 

cats to prevent people developing allergies to cat hair?  You 

know, we could go to ridiculous lengths here, Mr. Speaker, and 

we're not going to get anywhere. 

 

I must say that my own experience with the lack of accuracy of 

the Department of Health's statistics and claims makes me look 

with a very jaundiced eye on the figure of $40,000 to convert a 

room into a smoking room.  Frankly, I just don't believe it.  For 

thousands of years, sir, we ventilated a room, believe it or not, 

simply by opening a window. 

 

I think there are still windows in this House, sir, and there are 

still rooms where windows can be opened.  And I know that in 

many hospitals there are window units where you simply put a 

small electric fan in the window and it will ventilate the air 

very adequately.  I think we're getting an excuse from some 

puritans, some people who've got a one-track mind and they 

won't listen to any reasoning whatever. 

 

I do know the problems of smoking at a personal level.  My 

own father smoked himself to death at the age of 68.  He didn't 

get cancer; he just coughed up his lungs, bit by bit, drop by 

drop.  Most of it went onto the dressing table mirror in the 

bedroom each morning, much to my mother's annoyance, until 

virtually he had no lungs left.  And if you looked at his chest 

X-ray, sir, it was almost as clear as a window.  And it was no 

pleasure to sit by his bedside while he went purple in the face 

and literally asphyxiated because he couldn't get enough 

oxygen into him to keep him alive. 

 

And 30 years ago when I was doing thoracic surgery in 

London, we used to spend a couple of hours cutting out a lung 

cancer.  And it's a messy job is cutting out lung cancer, sir.  

They stick to everywhere and they spread to everything.  It's 

not like taking out an appendix, which is quick and easy; you 

can do it in a few minutes. 

 

And as soon as the operation was over, we'd all troop out of the 

operating room -- the surgeons, the assistants, the anesthetists -- 

and we're going to the changing room, and the first thing we'd 

do is say, we've got to have a cigarette.  And if it didn't impress 

the people who actually cut out the lungs, now we're not going 

to impress the people who never have the horror of seeing that. 

 

I think we have to be a little more moderate, a little less puritan.  

Why do we always say -- and it's not just with smoking -- I'm 

surprised it's not incised above every door, "thou shalt not."  It 

reminds me of the mother's admonition from the kitchen when 

she's standing there washing the dishes and she yells over her 

shoulder, whatever you kids are doing, stop it this minute.  She 

doesn't go to find out to see if it's suitable or not, just stop it.  

And we're being the same way here. 

Personally I believe in moderation in all things, sir.  Don't eat 

too much, don't drink too much, don't smoke too much, and I 

make sure I don't chase too many women.  My wife and I have 

a slight argument as to how many is too many, but we have 

more or less resolved that for the moment. 

 

And in Gravelbourg we are blessed with a born-again 

non-smoker at the hospital -- a man who used to smoke 40 and 

50 cigarettes a day, and all of a sudden he saw the light and 

now nobody can smoke anywhere in the damn town, if you ask 

me.  And patients can be seen standing on the front doorsteps in 

their pyjamas and a housecoat in the depth of winter, with a 

drip in one hand and a catheter bag in the other, trying to 

smoke a cigarette.  I mean, how stupid can we get.  These 

people are going to get pneumonia or something, and they're 

going to be a lot worse off than if we gave them a little room in 

a corner where they wouldn't annoy anybody and they could go 

and smoke. 

 

And somebody said this afternoon, you know, in some of these 

smoking rooms the air is so thick you can cut it with a knife.  

And smokers go in there and take one sniff and come out green 

around the gills.  And if that's going to stop them smoking, let's 

do it. 

 

And what happens with the nurses at the hospital?  I often 

wonder -- and I'm not going to give any secrets away -- but is it 

possible that they sneak into the linen closet a couple at a time 

while a third one stands guard outside watching for the 

administrator or the nurse in charge, to tip them a wink so that 

they can stub their cigarette out somewhere where it's 

dangerous and they can cause a fire.  You know we're really 

not doing ourselves any good with this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway, here we are thinking we're being very moral when in 

fact I think we are really making ourselves and everybody else 

very uncomfortable.  Let us temper our zeal with a little 

humanity, sir, defeat this amendment, and pass the substantive 

motion; but please, please, please don't make martyrs out of the 

smokers.  It's not going to do us any good. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I hadn't 

originally planned to get into the debate on this issue, however 

I felt it imperative that a few other members take a moment to 

give second reflection to the motion before us. 

 

As far as smoking in this Assembly, I can honestly stand before 

you, as I was just approached in the hall by the media whether 

or not I smoked, and certainly I don't, and smoking offends me 

sometimes.  In fact sometimes, physically it gives me a major 

problem if I end up in a room where people are actively 

smoking.  And it can create some problems as far as some sinus 

problems that I may run into, Mr. Speaker. 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

And the fact that we're trying to work or educate the public to 

discontinue smoking, and I was more than disturbed when I 

saw the papers and saw on the news the other night about the 

number of young people that are now taking up the habit.  And 

it would seem that we've got, amongst young ladies especially, 

there's a growing number of young women taking up the habit 

of smoking, Mr. Speaker.  And I think that appals us most, 

when generally speaking the public in general are quite well 

aware of the problems associated with smoking. 

 

And there has been . . . a lot has transpired.  There's been 

educational programs; individuals who have been smokers 

themselves who have stood up and strongly spoke out against 

the habit that they once took part or participated in.  And one 

has to wonder why individuals, young people in general, would 

continue to pick up a habit which is no good for their health -- 

which isn't any good for their health nor is it good for the 

health of people around them. 

 

So I would support the motion on the basis that we speak out 

and we work towards creating a healthier environment in this 

Legislative Assembly and in all public buildings across the 

province of Saskatchewan by creating a smoke-free 

environment. 

 

I will, Mr. Speaker, however qualify that by suggesting I do not 

believe the government or anyone in general should be paying 

to help somebody else quit the habit.  And I suggest that for the 

government to suggest that they would be willing to put up to a 

hundred dollars per person towards a program to help them 

combat their addiction to tobacco, is ludicrous. 

 

Why should public employees, who are the best paid 

employees in the province of Saskatchewan, now receive 

another benefit?  Now if the government members and the 

government itself and its own caucus want to set up, design a 

program and take their own caucus funds and put it towards a 

program to help combat the problems of addiction to nicotine, 

then I would give them the go-ahead.  And they're more than 

welcome to do that. 

 

But to take taxpayers' money -- my dollar and the dollars of 

people right across this province -- and to give it to individuals 

to quit a habit which they know is wrong, and to give it to them 

when the government on one hand says that we don't have the 

money . . . The minister just told us today that when it comes to 

providing French language education that no, that's fine.  And 

of course he indicated, as I indicated as well, that it's mostly 

federal money.  But whether it's federal money or provincial 

money, it's all taxpayers' money; we're all taxpayers and we 

pay Saskatchewan taxes, we pay federal taxes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this government has talked so much 

about debt reduction and deficit reduction, one has to wonder 

why, on one hand, we have the need for such stringent 

restrictions on the debt and deficit reduction.  We're pulling 

money out of health care, we're pulling money out of health 

services, we're pulling money out of educational services, but 

all of a sudden maybe we should put some money into a 

program to help public sector employees kick the habit of 

smoking. 

 

Well what about all the other residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan?  And I would suppose that the government 

would argue, well if we can get people to get off of tobacco 

products, then it's going to create a healthier environment for 

us.  True.  It's going to become a cost saving to the Health 

department.  No doubt there would be a substantial cost saving 

because of the health problems associated with smoking. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, in general it's fine for us to stand here 

and indicate that it would be appropriate that we speak out on 

the issue of smoking and we try to encourage the young people 

across this nation, and encourage them by us, as adults, taking 

and setting the initiative and setting the example.  And maybe 

many of the members of this Legislative Assembly maybe need 

to take the bull by the horns and set the example for the young 

people out there by just discontinuing that habit on their own 

without the aid of a publicly funded program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to close by saying I would 

encourage anyone if they need some help to seek some help.  I 

think there are a lot of options.  There are a lot of groups and 

individuals out there who would like to be more than willing to 

work with people in helping them to overcome this habit.  I 

think we must continue the educational process, but I am 

opposed to any funding that would come out of the taxpayers, 

specifically when it's directly related just to a certain sector of 

employees in the province . . . and smokers in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take a 

few moments, Mr. Speaker, to make a few remarks on this 

motion.  Perhaps my first remark would be in answer to a 

comment made by the member from Souris-Cannington, who 

asked the government members if they would illuminate the 

legislature here with some lighters.  And I say to the member 

from Souris-Cannington, in order to keep the members opposite 

from being in the dark, we would oblige him at any time to 

shed some light on the situation -- not only in this legislature 

physically, but particularly politically, Mr. Speaker.  And it 

would help them perhaps in seeing things a little clearer. 

 

(1530) 

 

My second comment, Mr. Speaker, is in response to comments 

just made by the member from Moosomin who has indicated 

that he supports this particular motion, and I'm glad to see that.  

But he also objects to the government at any time putting any 

money forward to help people kick the habit.  In doing so he 

says that the government should not be paying for something 

that's self-inflicted. 

 

And in doing so, I would wonder if the member would take it 

just one step further and consider the obvious contradiction to 

his comment.  Because if he's talking 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

about cost, there is definitely a cost two ways to society from 

people who smoke.  First of course is the health costs, and that 

doesn't matter whether you're working for government or for 

anybody else, there's a health cost to the government and to the 

people of Saskatchewan because of the amount of smoking. 

 

And secondly is the amount of time that is used up by smokers 

and the decrease in efficiency lost to smoking time.  This is 

often evidenced when you're watching people who have quit 

smoking or if you hear testimony from people who have been 

smokers and then quit smoking and suddenly you find that they 

tell you that they are able to do work in a much more efficient 

fashion and they are not constantly thinking of when they are 

going to have to go out and have that cigarette. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that we are dealing with has been 

amended.  Originally the concept of this motion was to ban 

smoking in the legislature effective January 1 and to have 

designated smoking areas.  This was based on the concept that 

perhaps we should be doing it in a realistic fashion knowing 

that the minute smoking is banned in this legislature, that not 

everybody is automatically going to become a non-smoker.  

We all know that.  I mean we have plenty of experience 

knowing that you can make any kind of rules in a home or a 

public place or in a workplace, but if there's somebody that 

definitely wants to smoke, they will find a way of smoking. 

 

So the whole concept was to designate a smoking area.  There 

is a problem with that, Mr. Speaker, and that is the cost 

associated with the banning, and that is the cost associated with 

the ventilation of a designated space.  Because currently, by 

law, if we are to designate spaces for smoking it would imply 

that there would be a cost and it could go up to 30,000. I 

suppose some rooms may be ventilated for costs less than that.  

But in view of the restraint measures, we are going to be taking 

this measure instead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members, as we get into this vote, the vote 

will likely go through and it'll be passed because the majority 

of people are for the motion.  But that is not going to make it 

something that's going to be easy to live with for those who are 

smokers or for those who will feel that this is imposed on them.  

And we're going to have to work out some kind of systems in 

this building to live alongside those people. 

 

Now there may be some that what you could tell them is look, 

just kick them out, let them go outside -- force them to do so.  

That's easy to say and it's easy to give somebody else the 

authority to do it.  But it's a little more difficult when you've 

got somebody that you've worked with for years and years, 

worked in the same office, have developed a tremendous 

working relationship with over the years, and all of a sudden 

you are left in the position to kick this particular person out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, society doesn't work that way.  It's taken years for 

all of society and all of Canada and all of North America and 

the world to adopt the smoking 

habit, and it's going to take years for this habit to be done away 

with.  And it's got to be done slowly. 

 

Each one of us won't quit smoking until we make that personal 

decision to quit smoking.  Perhaps with some coaxing and with 

some goodwill we hope that the members of the legislature and 

the people who work in this building will take it upon 

themselves to find a smoking area.  In the summertime it will 

be easy -- outside the building.  Perhaps sometime during the 

winter or in other months, I would hope that we find a way of 

dealing with this right amongst ourselves and specifying an 

area, not a legally designated area, but specifying an area where 

those people who are addicted and feel that they have to go and 

have that cigarette will feel comfortable going. 

 

I will still be voting for the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and for 

the motion, because I think not to pass the amendment or to 

pass the motion would give us more difficulty financially.  And 

I just don't think we want to set up a series of ventilated rooms 

at a cost of hundreds of thousands of dollars in the legislature if 

we're not prepared to do it in other public buildings, and I don't 

think we can afford to do it in other public buildings. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we are going to ask those who are 

smokers to resolve to try to limit their smoking and restrict 

their smoking, we will also at the same time have to ask those 

who are non-smokers to be tolerant and to help out and to be 

positive any time somebody says that they're going to try to 

quit smoking.  And a motion like this will help, will help some 

people who perhaps need just that one more thing to help them 

quit smoking. 

 

I think almost every one of us as a youngster or at some stage 

had some experience with cigarettes.  I'm one of those people 

that was fortunate in that my tolerance for tobacco is fairly 

great -- I can tolerate a lot of cigarettes and smoke -- and I can 

also get along without it.  Now most people are not quite that 

fortunate.  But when I think about my own smoking history, it's 

easy to understand and project it to anybody else and 

understand what the difficulties are.  Because as a youngster, of 

course my parents told me that I shouldn't smoke.  First of all 

they told me it was a bad habit; secondly, they told me it was 

very expensive; and thirdly, I guess my dad told me that if I 

ever started smoking he'd probably whale the tar out of me. 

 

So it wasn't till I was 14 years old, Mr. Speaker, on a train on 

the way to Comox, B.C. as a young navy cadet that I had my 

first opportunity to try that weed.  And it made me feel like a 

big guy.  And I guess that's . . . it was sort of like a passing into 

adolescence.  And that is . . . we recognize that that's one of the 

biggest motivators of young women and young men smoking 

today.  It's sort of their several rights of passage that we have in 

our society.  It's a cultural thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It wasn't because I was addicted or because I felt that I had to 

have that cigarette -- heaven's no; the thing didn't even taste 

good; made me cough and sputter -- it was because of the 

cultural pressure.  And it was that 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

sort of age of transition; perhaps a little bit of rebellion that 

every youngster goes through, and every parent who's got a 

youngster knows it.  They watch their youngsters go through 

that. 

 

See, there were other contradictory examples, because in my 

youth when you went to a movie the models of the day, the 

model actors always were shown with a cigarette in their 

fingers; the people that had made it, they had cigarettes.  The 

television advertising, the early television advertising in those 

days also always had showed cigarettes, and it was associated 

with glamour.  Cigarettes were used as a method of promoting 

sports events, are still used as a method of promoting sports 

events. 

 

Now things are slowly starting to change around.  And people 

in society . . . and some people eventually decided we need to 

make that change, have taken several steps to start to move 

around in a different direction on this. 

 

See, Mr. Speaker, as a youngster I can remember also my 

grandfather who smoked a pipe and who was much of a model 

to me.  He lived till he was 100 years old.  So if anybody would 

tell me that smoking was going to be hard on your health, all I 

had to do was point to my grandfather who was the model of 

health and the argument ended there.  And a person . . . As an 

individual, I felt invincible as a youngster. 

 

But I'll tell you how I quit smoking, Mr. Speaker.  There was a 

time in my early teaching career when I was teaching in the 

small town of Quill Lake, Saskatchewan, and I think there were 

about eight or nine teachers in the staff.  And we had a thing 

called a recess in those days. 

 

So what would happen is after being in the classroom, cooped 

up for an hour and a half, you went into the staff room for a 

little break.  And it got so that the minute you got into the staff 

room, everybody pulled out a package of cigarettes, and if you 

didn't have one you certainly got one from your neighbour. 

 

And the staff room, I think, was about 8 feet wide and maybe 

12 feet long, and we were lined up four along one wall and four 

along the other wall.  And it took about four or five minutes for 

the air in that staff room to turn perfectly blue.  So by the time I 

walked out of the staff room and back to my classroom, my 

mind was completely fogged, and you realize the total inability 

to function properly in the classroom. 

 

And at some stage, at some time or other, something hit me all 

of a sudden and said: hey, who's in control -- you or the 

cigarette?  And I made a personal decision. 

 

And from then on I still enjoy the occasional cigarette for social 

purposes -- maybe once a month, maybe less than that -- but 

I'm one of the fortunate ones, Mr. Speaker.  Some people are 

not that lucky; they are not able to get along without a cigarette 

and just quit cold turkey. 

Mr. Speaker, I can recall as a student at university working on . 

. . we were assigned essays and I did one . . . one of the things 

that I studied was the study on prenatal effects of drugs and 

tobacco usage, did a survey of literature.  And even at that time, 

the literature at that time pointed very directly that women who 

smoked or used drugs of any kind had a much higher incidence 

of children with deformities or children who ended up with 

some kind of physical problems after. 

 

That impressed me very much, Mr. Speaker, and that still 

happens to this day.  And when I see now in our schools how 

many youngsters there are that are either hyperactive or have 

learning problems or have problems which we hadn't identified, 

I ask myself the question: how much of this is due to either the 

men or the women who conceived these children?  How much 

of it is due to substance abuse that they may have taken 

themselves? 

 

So I think it's incumbent upon us here in the legislature, to . . . 

it's incumbent upon us in the legislature here to get on with this 

and show the example.  That is why, Mr. Speaker, I'm asking 

every member to vote for the amendment, to vote for the 

motion.  Let's get on with it.  Let's show the example, and once 

we do it ourselves here in the legislature we will be able to then 

carry on and do it further, adding to this right throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(1545) 

 

Resolution No. 80 -- Health District Board Elections 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today on a 

matter I believe of major concern to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan, and I want to identify it by reading into the 

record a motion that I will making at the end of my remarks, 

and that is this: 

 

 That this Assembly demand the government take the advice 

of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the general public of our 

province and other organizations to hold health district board 

elections this fall in conjunction with the municipal elections 

and in doing so, save 500,000 in additional elections costs, 

200,000 from the Provincial Health Council, approximately 

200,000 allocated for an independent study of health board 

elections and instead use this money toward funding health 

care services. 

 

And at the conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving that 

motion. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is time that the Government of 

Saskatchewan listen to the people of Saskatchewan and that's 

why I brought this motion forward today.  People in this 

province have been saying to us, have been saying to us over 

and over again, it's time to hold an election for these health 

boards that would significantly give an input into the local 

control of the health districts. 

 

And I want to raise some points that I believe are very, very 

significant in relation to this.  In dealing with bringing this to a 

point where the public confidence needs to be re-established in 

these health boards, I think would happen if they had an 

election.  I see this happening over and over again in various 

parts of the community that I live in and also in the 

communities surrounding my constituency. 

 

In dealing with this I want to point out a number of areas that 

are our concern.  The community of Ponteix, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, had to initiate a special resolution from the hospital 

board there in order to protect some of the funds that they had 

established through their years of service in providing to the 

people of that community access to funds that were supplied by 

various agencies, groups, and taxpayers.  This money was put 

into a fund that supported the Ponteix Union Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what happened there also was that when the 

health boards were told that they had to . . . or the people in the 

province were told that they had to establish health boards, the 

people then said, what of these funds can we protect?  And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was a matter of very, very serious concern that 

certain portions of this money they got to keep but, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they had to give up to the health district boards 

thousands and hundreds of thousands of dollars. 

 

That didn't only happen in the community of Ponteix, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that happened in the community of Mankota; 

that happened in the community of Vanguard; that happened in 

the community of Hodgeville; that happened in the community 

of Morse; that happened in the community of Herbert; that 

happened in the community of Cabri; in Gull Lake -- all of 

those areas, Mr. Speaker.  The people in the communities had 

raised money through various methods, and they had to supply 

that money back to the health district boards.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a fact. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, if the people would have gone to the 

community of Ponteix they would have found out that the 

community got to keep about $100,000 and the people in that 

health district board had to give back to the health district . . . 

or the union hospital district had to give to the health district 

board $250,000.  They did, Mr. Speaker.  And if they'd go back 

to those communities they'd find that out.  Every one of those 

communities I mentioned gave a significant amount of money 

back to the health district board. 

 

Some of that money was collected in taxes, some of 

that money was collected in bequests, some of that money was 

donated.  And, Mr. Speaker, the money that these people 

collected in taxes had to be given back to the health district 

board.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  And if any one of the 

government members want to dispute that, then they should go 

back to those health district boards and tell them that they have 

the right to have all of that money designated back to that 

community for health care services that they would say were at 

their discretion. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what happened.  And I see 

over there that people are saying, no, it isn't, no, it isn't.  Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they just need to go back to those 

communities and find out what's really going on. 

 

Now I want to point some other things out to them.  These 

health district boards are now building buildings, they're adding 

to their executive boardrooms, chairs, tables, not in thousands 

of dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in tens of thousands of dollars 

they're adding to the cost of health care in those communities. 

 

In the community that I live in, in the health district that I live 

in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Swift Current Health District, 

there is significant a volume of dollars used in renovating the 

nurses' residence.  There is significant volumes of dollars used 

in providing tables, and I have heard as high as $15,000 to put a 

table in that health district boardroom.  Chairs in the 

neighbourhood of 10 to . . . 1,000 to $1,500 a chair, for each 

one of the board members -- 12 board members, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister, and associate minister, and 

executive members of this government, the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan want to have the right and an 

opportunity to deliver their verdict on that kind of wellness, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And they don't believe in it and the 

people in the province need to have that opportunity. 

 

And that is the reason why we are saying to you, as executive 

members of this government, it's time to go out and listen to the 

people.  The people in urban Saskatchewan, the people in rural 

Saskatchewan want to have a voice in how these boards are 

going to be elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last edition of the Swift Current Sun there 

was a bid opportunity to build the office building, establish a 

location for the Rolling Hills Health District Board.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, people in those communities, when there are 

restrictions placed on funding in various ways, shapes, and 

forms by this government, and then you see a helter-skelter 

spending by individuals in each of these communities, people 

are saying it doesn't wash.  We want an opportunity to elect 

these people so that they have accountability and responsibility 

for what they're doing.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is not 

happening -- that is not happening. 

 

And I'm going to go one step further.  That is also not 



2022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

happening as it relates to accountability.  The health care 

districts are going to be audited, 6 of the 30 are going to be 

audited by the Provincial Auditor.  And Mr. Speaker, who are 

the others going to be audited by?  Independent auditors who 

are going to provide an audit function to those people that is 

not in the same standard that is going to be delivered by the 

Provincial Auditor.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a fact. 

 

That is a concern, not only to this member of this Assembly but 

is also a concern to the auditor, and he has said that in Public 

Accounts Committee meetings and he will probably have 

reason to say that again after the next audit that he does. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason why we say to this 

government that it's time to take a serious look at elections for 

health care boards.  We aren't the only ones that are saying it.  

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) is 

saying the same thing; SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) is saying exactly the same thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker -- rural municipalities, urban municipalities. In 

fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is 

also saying that very same thing -- call an election, call an 

election for health district boards. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, allow the people to have a voice in 

determining who's going to run those boards.  And I've heard 

this over and over again from members opposite when we've 

asked the questions:  well, we can't do it now because they 

aren't organized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

SARM had a very interesting observation coming from Sinclair 

Harrison, their president: Elected health district boards were 

promised to the people of this province when health reforms 

began nearly two years ago.  The provincial government 

promised local authority and accountability in health care 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's time for the provincial government to live up 

to those commitments and keep its promise.  And that is, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the reason why we are raising this and we 

believe that it is an important function of the kinds of things 

that we need to do in this Assembly. 

 

The annual conventions of SARM and SUMA, the delegates 

passed resolutions demanding that elections be held this year.  

Both associations have repeatedly asked the minister to 

announce that elections will be held in October with other local 

government elections.  And to date, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their 

requests have been ignored. 

 

And what did this government do to counteract that?  Oh, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we're going to have a study.  We're going to 

have a study to see where we put the divisions in the wards of 

the health districts; and we have to do an investigation. 

 

And who did they get to do this investigation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  Well a long-time NDP supporter, Mr. Garf 

Stevenson, a one-man commission to 

investigate whether the elections will be held this fall.  They 

know they're not going to be held this fall because they haven't 

got the courage to see those people that they appointed defeated 

in the polls.  That's what they haven't got the courage for. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do you know what the argument is going to 

be next year?  I can see it happening.  I can see it happening by 

these members opposite.  They're going to say, oh we're going 

to not hold elections in 1995.  Why?  Why?  Because it costs 

too much, Mr. Speaker.  It costs too much.  So then we'll hold 

them in the next series of municipal elections.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what these people are likely going to come to us 

with -- oh it's going to cost too much.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what's going to happen next year. 

 

What's interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when 

the government gets back into a corner they'll set up a kind of a 

one-man commission to investigate an area of concern that the 

people have brought up, and then he will make a commitment 

to put in on paper some of the ideas that they had anyway.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what I expect from Mr. Garf 

Stevenson in the next report that he's going to give out about 

awards and the responsibility of holding elections. 

 

This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will say to the people in this 

Assembly also, that this commission was probably set up when 

we began to pressure this Assembly and the government 

executive members about whether they should hold elections.  

And then they said, okay, we'll put up a commission and we'll 

defer the decision.  And that's exactly the reason why they're 

having Mr. Stevenson do that today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don't have any idea about what the 

people are talking about.  People want to have an election and 

so the questions that are being asked by those people are such 

like this: why doesn't the government want democratically 

elected people to hold positions on district health boards?  Why 

do the government not want to have those people elected?  

Why does the Minister of Health think her appointed NDP 

friends can do a better job than elected people? 

 

Are elections being held off so that the government won't be 

criticized by the health boards?  Now there's an interesting 

question, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Will they be held off because 

they don't want criticism coming from the health boards? 

 

(1600) 

 

Yesterday we find out that there's a thousand more people 

added to the cost of the health district boards.  A thousand more 

people are going to be delivering services through the health 

district boards.  And that, Mr. Speaker, we just discovered 

yesterday.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why these people need to 

be allowed to seek election in the province of Saskatchewan in 

their own local communities and deliver the opportunity to be 

accountable and deliver the health care system in a way that is 

legitimate. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2023 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the decisions being made by these health 

boards will change the delivery of health care in this province 

for ever.  And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  The 

people opposite will not trust that to elected officials.  They 

don't believe that the people there who aren't appointed by them 

have any imagination, creativity on how to manage health care 

boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would gather that there are some that 

weren't even born in 1946, sitting on that other side that could 

have been around when the first health region in the province 

was put together by the people of Swift Current.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is where health care really began; it began in earnest. 

 

And how did it begin, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  It became by 

having elected officials be part of a group of people to sit and 

debate whether the health care should be doing A, whether it 

should be B or C, or any of the above.  And they were, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, elected individuals from the people in that 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the decisions being made by 

individuals in health districts should be elected; they should 

have an accountability process to the people in that community.  

And I believe that they need to have that done, and the sooner 

the better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the appointed members of those boards will only 

carry out the will of the government.  That's why they're 

appointed -- to carry out the will of the government.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people have no faith in this government.  That's 

what they need to be told, and that's what we're telling them 

today. 

 

If health board elections were integrated this fall into the 

election process, the cost would be minimal.  In fact, in order to 

put it on the ballot in Regina, Mr. Speaker, we were told by 

SUMA people that it would cost $2,000 to put it on the ballot.  

That's what it would cost. 

 

And what will it cost to put that ballot together in a new 

election next year or the next year or the next year when it's 

independent of the municipal elections?  Hundreds of 

thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker -- hundreds of thousands of 

dollars, when it could have been done at the same time the 

other municipal elections are taking place. 

 

If elections were held on their own in a year or so, it will cost 

the people of the province thousands and thousands of dollars.  

SUMA has stated that, and I believe that they are accurate in 

their assessment because of the cost of just doing the work and 

getting the election process started. 

 

If the health boards are not added to the ballot this fall, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, expect the costs to be high for the first time 

that they call that election.  The people in the province have 

estimated $500,000 to hold that election; $200,000 to pay for 

Mr. Stevenson; $200,000 to pay for this health council that 

they're sending across this province. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the estimate that is put together not 

by us; that estimate was put together by SUMA and SARM.  

And if you wanted to say that they're political in what they're 

doing, then you go ahead and do that.  They are, I believe, of 

every political stripe, realizing that there is an opportunity to 

save money.  And to save money they will, and they are 

required to do that because they're far closer to the people than 

you are, and that's the reason why we're encouraging them to 

do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been told over and over again that this 

whole exercise of wellness was there to save money.  To save 

money, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I want to point out to the 

public that there is 10 million more in the budget this year for 

those same wellness model programs that they've got out there; 

money that has to be spent because people get sick and you 

have to pay for it. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that next year there's going 

to be another $10 million put into there because the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan are going to demand health care 

services.  And that is legitimate.  The people in this province 

believe that they deserve it.  They've earned it.  They've paid 

for it, and they expect to get it.  We on this side of the House 

believe that the people in the province should be given an 

opportunity to vote. 

 

There's a letter from Edgeley that is in the Leader-Post.  The 

heading: 

 

 Health boards:  time to vote.  The decision by the Health 

minister to postpone elections for district health boards is 

outrageous. 

 

This woman writing in is Christine Whitaker. 

 

 One of the reasons for my resignation from the Pipestone 

District Health Board was what I perceived to be an 

inappropriate use of health funds at both district and 

provincial levels.  My position continues to be vindicated. 

 

From Edgeley in the Pipestone Health District. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people all over are saying the same 

things.  In the community that I . . . in the health district board 

that I live in, the whole board resigned, Mr. Speaker, because 

of political influence by this minister on the way that the 

opportunities were going to be allowed to be handled by that 

hospital or health care district. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those people resigned because of political 

influence and they . . . all of them resigned.  Not one of them 

stayed in as a part of that opportunity. 

 

Another, from the Star-Phoenix, April 15: 

 

 Wrong head picked for study. 

 

 How sad!  Not only do we have a health board that is 

demolishing our system, we now have an appointed retired 

gentleman receiving a 



2024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

 pension that exceeds the combined income of five families 

with children who has been offered ($500,000) . . . a day of 

taxpayers' money to do a study. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's important that we tell the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan that this is important.  In order . . . 

 

 Would you call this "job creation", "fiscal restraint", or a 

platform for privatization? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this letter goes on: 

 

 In order to do an unbiased study of the health board election 

issue, we have intellectual graduates from our universities 

(some with master's and honors degrees) that are struggling to 

find employment.  It would make more sense to hire 

graduates from three different colleges (your choice) and pay 

each $100 a day.  The result could be rewarding and take less 

time. 

 

 An important factor: you would be showing compassion 

towards our "leaders" of tomorrow. 

 

 To err is human, to make an adjustment would be the right 

thing to do. 

 

Coming from Saskatoon.  And that is a letter that was written 

to the Star-Phoenix. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, March 16: 

 

 On Dec. 17, the Saskatoon District Health Board announced 

its latest realignment of services for Saskatoon's three 

hospitals. 

 

And there they go through and talk about the role that the 

health board is.  And the conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in 

the headline:  "Time to elect health board". 

 

And there's another letter from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  Over 

and over again the people of Saskatchewan are saying: it's time 

to elect, it's time to elect. 

 

"Some free advice: hold board elections this fall".  The 

Leader-Post, April 12.  And I quote: 

 

 Health Minister Louise Simard's decision to spend $200,000 

on determining when and how district health boards should 

be elected is a waste of time and money. 

 

 Rather, Simard could have simply listened to the free advice 

being offered by such grassroots organizations as (SUMA, 

SARM).  They have repeatedly said that elections should be 

held this fall . . . 

 

The editorial from the Regina Leader-Post, asking the people 

of this executive branch of government, the Minister of Health, 

the Associate Minister of Health, to 

say okay, we will call an election; we will have an election; go 

set your platforms out; run on it on that basis. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, April 13.  The title is: why the stalling? 

 

 It would be interesting to know why the Government of 

Saskatchewan is going to such pains to stall on the election of 

members of district health boards.  Both urban and rural 

municipal associations want the elections held this fall.  That 

is a logical and common-sense position for the very obvious 

reason that this is a municipal election year. 

 

Now they go on to talk about why they think the minister is 

stalling.  That's a headline, Star-Phoenix. 

 

Another one, The Village Press in Rosthern.  Elections should 

precede decisions, Mr. Speaker.  Let the people decide what 

they want to have for a platform.  Let the people decide what 

platform they want to accept.  Let the people decide. 

 

The Leader-Post, February 26, "Delay in electing health 

boards not acceptable."  It goes on and on, over and over again 

as we talk about these issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  People in 

this province want to have a say in how the health care reform 

should continue.  They want a say.  They want to know what's 

going on; they want a say in what's going on. 

 

If the people in government today would go out into those 

communities and find out what it is they were saying, what the 

people were saying, they would find out that SARM and 

SUMA are responding to their own people.  They're responding 

to their electorate.  They're responding to the people in their 

communities in a way that is honourable. 

 

Our office has been receiving letters from health boards that 

want to disassociate themselves also from SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), and those 

people want to discontinue their association.  Why, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  Why do they want to disassociate themselves from 

that organization? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that association is made up of health district 

board managers, chief executive officers, and board members.  

Now they said they came out -- and the government has said 

this to us often -- they said, we don't want to hold elections this 

year because we don't think that people are aware enough of 

the situation so that they can make a rational decision on it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when they see and hear stories about how 

these health boards are spending money on self-gratification, 

dealing with what I believe are public funds, they need to be 

held accountable.  The people in my community are going to be 

saying to someone in the future: will you support me?  And 

they will say: no I won't because of A, B, and C, and they will 

throw the whole works out. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2025 

My best guess is, Mr. Speaker, and I've been in politics a long 

time, both in municipal politics and in provincial politics, that 

80 per cent of the people who are appointed to those boards 

will not get re-elected.  And they know that, Mr. Speaker.  

Why?  Because they don't have the voice of the people 

themselves.  They don't understand what it is and they don't 

understand the issues. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we on this side have 

raised this motion.  And I believe it is timely and is of 

significance.  And that's why I, seconded by the member from 

Moosomin, believe that this is an important motion: 

 

 That this Assembly demand the government take the advice 

of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, the general public of our 

province and other organizations to hold health district board 

elections this fall in conjunction with the municipal elections, 

and in doing so save $500,000 in additional election costs, 

$200,000 from the Provincial Health Council, approximately 

$200,000 allocated for an independent study of health board 

elections and instead use this money toward funding health 

care services. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Moosomin. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I just have a few comments that I would like to make 

in support of the motion brought forward by my colleague, the 

member from Morse. 

 

Certainly the debate over health board elections is something 

that we have been hearing for quite a while.  In fact, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the question of whether or not health boards 

should be elected goes even further back than the recent 

regional boards that have been created. 

 

It's been a question that has been brought to my attention on 

numerous occasions in my constituency, where individuals felt 

that rather than local governments appointing members to 

represent them on the different boards in the area -- be it health 

boards; be it hospital or care home or ambulance board -- it 

would be appropriate to elect members to these boards so that 

the electorate themselves, the local electorate and taxpayer, 

property owner, would have an ability to feel that they had 

some input and involvement in the funding of their local 

hospital and their care home and ambulance board.  So as I've 

indicated, the issue of health board elections is not new to the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP government was informed 

several months ago that, if health board elections were not held 

this fall in conjunction with municipal elections, that it would 

cost taxpayers more 

than an additional $500,000.  And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in light of the debt problems that we're talking about in this 

province and the deficit -- and not just the province of 

Saskatchewan but all the provinces of Canada and certainly the 

federal government -- $500,000 may not sound like a lot of 

money, but the reality is that $500,000 here and $100,000 there 

and $1 million over here and it doesn't take long before there is 

a substantial shortfall.  In fact a shortfall that far outweighs and 

exceeds the revenue that is being generated.  So it is something 

that we must take note of. 

 

Certainly this is not a number that was picked out of the sky, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This is the estimate provided by the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, $500,000 or 

half a million dollars, to be exact.  And that kind of money, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, could keep many rural hospitals in the 

province of Saskatchewan open for another year. 

 

But it seems this money would rather be thrown away by this 

government, rather than be put into effective care and 

providing services to the health users and the taxpayers of this 

province.  Thrown away to protect their hand-picked board 

members. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government would argue no, that 

we asked for submissions.  The reality is the government made 

the appointments at the end of the day; whether or not they 

asked for submissions or received submissions, the 

appointments were all made by the Department of Health and 

by the government through Executive Council. 

 

Add that half million to the $200,000 being spent on Mr. 

Stevenson's study, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we 

have now in front of us is almost three-quarters of a million 

dollars that is being . . . that is going to be lost or wasted or not 

taken advantage of.  Three-quarters of a million dollars that is 

just another addition to the deficit and to the budget of this 

province, to the health budget, which isn't necessary and it 

doesn't do one thing for the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It doesn't provide one more bed in a hospital.  It doesn't provide 

even a day less on the waiting-list for elective surgery.  Mr. 

Speaker, it does nothing other than put more money into an 

area where the government tries to promote its own objectives. 

 

As SARM president Sinclair Harrison put it, and I quote, local 

people are quite capable of determining ward boundaries by 

themselves.  And his quote came out after the government 

appointed Mr. Stevenson to look into ways of setting up wards 

or designing wards in our local health districts. 

 

And I quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agree with Mr. 

Harrison that most local boards or local health or regional 

health districts, the boards and even the local governments 

involved in those areas would find very simple and very 

economical ways of deciding how the board members should 

be elected, how they should represent the different areas of that 

district so 



2026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

that the district is well represented and there is representation 

from across the district.  I don't think . . . we don't need to be 

handing Mr. Stevenson money for anything.  It certainly is a 

waste of taxpayers' dollars. 

 

So we tack on the additional 200,000 for a provincial health 

council to travel around the province to listen to people.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the different costs that are 

associated with this health council, with Mr. Stevenson's 

commission, and with the $500,000 cost that is going to be 

incurred because the government will not have this election this 

fall, it's no wonder that people, even though they may not be 

protesting loudly out in front of this Legislative Assembly, in 

general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what you find, people are 

becoming very disgruntled and dissatisfied with what the NDP 

government of the day has done for health care in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The government continues to talk of how they must save 

money and how they must spend their money more efficiently 

and a lot more wisely, and yet every time we turn around they 

find ways and means of squandering the money rather than 

providing services and covering the debt or trying to reduce the 

deficit of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As I indicated earlier, where will this money go?  Will this 

money go into respite beds?  The other day in the House, a 

question was brought forward by my colleague, the member 

from Rosthern, that came in from one of the people of this 

province asking the Premier when he was going to look at 

providing more care home beds in the province of 

Saskatchewan, or provide some additional funding for low 

income housing to meet the needs of our seniors across this 

province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we ask the question that must be asked -- 

what needs to be studied?  What is so complicated about 

splitting areas up for elections?  One would think the NDP 

government would have taken care of that long ago when they 

forced many areas into districts in the first place.  And I think 

that at the time the government should have been looking at 

this process.  And if that's what they wanted to do, they should 

have basically had that process of wards already set up when 

they asked the districts to form these local districts. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the government had no 

forethought, no plan, and that's why we find ourselves in this 

predicament today.  In fact they had no intention of holding 

early board elections.  Most of the health district boards don't 

even have their books in place, and there is good reason for 

this.  That is because the Health minister wouldn't allow 

democratically elected boards to begin with, and instead she 

hand-picked mostly NDP partisans to fill the positions. 

 

And although the government argue, well I think if we looked 

at the politics of everyone on these health district boards there 

probably are some . . . or no doubt are some, maybe 

Conservatives and some Liberals, 

but I think in general the fact that it was politically appointed, 

or appointments by the government, is what has people feeling 

that, like they haven't had the opportunity to have their voice 

and they are not being listened to in fact, especially when the 

Minister of Health indicated that these district boards would be 

elected.  And that's the biggest concern out there right now, is 

when?  Why not this coming fall along with municipal 

elections? 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of Health 

was more concerned with paying back election favours to NDP 

campaign workers than appointing individuals who are 

qualified and capable.  I think when we look at a lot of these 

boards, most of the people had absolutely no experience 

whatsoever. 

 

And we can go back to debates that took place in this Assembly 

prior to October of 1991.  We'll find that the opposition of the 

day, the present government, continued to bring out the fact of 

political appointees and partisanship and partisan 

appointmentship of the former government and continually 

argued that this does nothing to build the province of 

Saskatchewan.  It does nothing to provide services for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we have heard from people all 

across this province.  And I think if the government has the . . . 

and ministers opposite continually argue on a day-to-day basis 

that they are listening to the people.  If they are indeed listening 

to the people of Saskatchewan; if they are indeed listening to 

the general public; if they are listening to the representatives of 

the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association or the 

Saskatchewan Rural Municipalities Association, Mr. Speaker, 

or the health boards across this province; if they are really 

listening -- and even as some of the health districts have 

already called for -- they would be putting a plan in place or in 

motion that would allow for district elections this fall along 

with municipal elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say if the government was listening, that's what 

they would be doing instead of spending $200,000 on Mr. 

Stevenson and his fact-finding mission.  And I think there are 

enough organizations and enough people, enough services 

already available across this province that could quite easily 

prepare the province, prepare the district boards for health 

elections this fall. 

 

The president of SARM, Mr. Harrison, says, and I quote: 

 

 The Health minister assured SARM members that the 

election process would be one of the priorities established 

early in the health care reform process.  We feel that the 

establishment of the independent commission is just another 

stalling tactic which local people feel is inequitable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, holding health board elections is not only what 

the people of Saskatchewan want; it is what 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2027 

the NDP government promised.  SUMA, SARM, SUN 

(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), and pretty well every other 

organization except for the one which represents the health 

boards, wants elections this fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend quite a while just talking about the 

different groups that have written to our caucus, the different 

organizations that have called us and asked for the 

Conservative opposition or the opposition in this Assembly to 

continue to raise this question and to continue to call on the 

Minister of Health and call on the Premier of this province and 

call on the government of this province to take the time to look 

very closely at holding elections this fall, in view of the fact 

that the electorate are calling for it, in view of the fact that so 

many people across this province are calling for it. 

 

And if the government, as they say, have nothing to worry 

about, have nothing to fear, that it's fine, let's get on with the 

process, then let's get on with the process.  Let's not stall any 

longer. 

 

The fact that if you held the election this fall in conjunction 

with municipal elections, it would ensure a very high voter 

turnout, it would save money, it would provide the local 

autonomy that the minister has promised.  The municipal 

election model was first proposed by Saskatchewan Health 

officials, so they're ready to roll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that appointed health boards 

answer to the minister, not the people of their districts.  And 

that, I believe, is where the problem lies.  The fact that the 

appointed health boards right now are listening to the tune 

played by the department, by the minister, and by this 

government regarding how health expenditures will be 

expended or passed on to the people of Saskatchewan, they are 

not really listening to the electorate out there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I've found out in my area, the electorate 

want the ability to vote for local health board directors, and 

they want that ability because they feel that it gives them the 

only real opportunity to question the decisions that are being 

made by the health district boards. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that most, if not all the 

individuals, are doing their best to represent their areas, 

thinking of the areas, and trying to provide the most adequate 

health care available to them in view of the circumstances that 

they face and the fact that they are making decisions that are 

going to affect local representatives and the local ratepayers 

with money that they have really no control over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are sent a lump sum of money.  They say 

okay, you administer this funding; you provide the best care 

possible.  And the problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 

that local people are getting blamed for the cut-backs in health 

care.  The onus is being put on the local health boards -- health 

boards who were appointed by this government, rather than 

elected. 

And the Minister of Health and the Premier of this province 

like to refer to the neighbouring province of Alberta and the 

problems that are being raised and have put upon Mr. Klein for 

the actions he has taken. 

 

But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Klein has been upfront 

and his government has been upfront in telling the people of 

Alberta, this is what we must do.  And they have taken the 

initiative, they have made the decisions rather than putting it on 

the shoulders of someone else out at the local area and then 

backing away and saying . . . at the end of the day the Minister 

of Health is going to say, we didn't close the hospital in 

Wawota or we didn't close the hospital in another community 

across the province of Saskatchewan.  We didn't close those 

hospitals; it was the local health boards.  We didn't cut back on 

the beds; it was the local health boards, the health district 

boards that made that decision. 

 

And that's why many health district board members would 

prefer to have elections this fall themselves, and go out to the 

people and get their support and be elected.  And then, Mr. 

Speaker, they feel that if they were duly elected they would 

have the real ability to look at the funding and the decisions 

that are being made.  They would then take the onus for it, but 

they would also, I believe, Mr. Speaker, they would speak out 

and represent the people that they are working for. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we go through the list.  We have communities 

like the town of Carlyle and the village of Benson and the 

village of Rush Lake raising their concerns, the town of 

Moosomin in my constituency.  And I just want to read this 

into the record: 

 

 Dear Minister:  The Moosomin town council supports the 

proposed election of local district health boards in 

conjunction with the local government elections in October.  

Your decision is urgently required in order to start 

formulating the election process.  Inaction on this matter can 

only cause more frustration. 

 

And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that this town council is just feeling 

more frustration as well, as they sent the letter and only a few 

days later we see another commission established, and the fact 

that what they were asking the minister to do, the minister 

didn't even listen or take the time to listen.  Let me just bring to 

the Assembly the comments made by the town of Carlyle: 

 

 Our council maintains that the provincial government must 

honour its commitment to provide for local control and 

accountability in the delivery of health services.  Elected 

district health boards are an integral component of health 

reforms.  It is our review that appointed boards cannot 

continue to make decisions on local service delivery without 

the authority provided by local elections. 

 

And that's what I was just talking about a few minutes 



2028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

ago.  Urban government leaders have been lobbying 

aggressively for an October election that would be integrated 

with local government elections.  We believe that through 

integration urban governments, school boards, and health 

boards will realize cost efficiencies.  We also believe that 

integrated election benefits local voters and will encourage a 

higher turnout for the first district health board election. 

 

For nearly six months, urban government leaders have been 

pressing for elected health boards.  The call for elections also 

was a major policy issue at SUMA's recent annual convention.  

We agree with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association that the government's decision not to prepare in no 

way absolves the government of its obligation to deliver district 

health board elections in October of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the minister to stand in this Assembly and say, 

we don't have the time or the ability to put in motion the 

election process for district health boards, I think is ludicrous in 

view of the fact that the government promised when they 

established district health boards some year and a half or two 

years ago that there would be elections within a year following 

the implementation of health district boards across this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on quoting from villages and 

towns and RM (rural municipality) councils across this 

province that have come out in support of health district health 

board elections, such as the town of Wadena and the town of 

Redvers, the town of Kindersley.  Mr. Speaker, there isn't an 

organization or group that's concerned about health care in the 

province of Saskatchewan that is not willing to work with the 

government and work with local governments to establish the 

process that would allow elections of district health board 

members this fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the process is in place.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, it is an uncomplicated process.  I believe it could 

happen this fall and all it would take is for the Minister of 

Health and the Premier of this province and the Executive 

Council to just stand up, stand in their place and say: we've 

listened to the people; the people of Saskatchewan have said, 

yes, Mr. Premier, you promised us elections within a year of 

setting up the district health care boards.  We're ready to roll.  

Give us those elections that the Premier said; we've been 

listening.  We hear; we're ready to roll, and give the go-ahead, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It wouldn't be a problem whatsoever for the people of 

Saskatchewan to not only go to the polls this fall to elect their 

municipal governments but to be able to cast their ballot in 

favour of district health board members.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, the motion brought to this Assembly by my colleague, 

the member from Morse, is more than appropriate and it's time 

the government put actions to their words. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

conclusion of my remarks I will be moving an amendment to 

the motion to: 

 

 Remove all of the words after the word "Assembly" and to 

replace them with the following: 

 

 commend the government for establishing the process 

whereby district health boards will be democratically elected 

locally, and by acknowledging and responding to the 

concerns raised by SAHO, ensuring that this historic election 

process is established fairly and properly from the outset. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have never had elected 

health boards in the province of Saskatchewan; they have been 

appointed.  Now they're going to be elected because of the 

provisions of The Health Districts Act, which this government 

has legislated over the opposition of the Conservatives and the 

Liberals.  But unlike the previous administration, before that 

process goes into place, we want it to be properly planned. 

 

I find it somewhat ironic that members of the Conservative 

Party would get up in this Assembly and say that we should 

rush into these health board elections when they were members 

of a government, Mr. Speaker, that did not call an election 

within the five-year period within which an election should be 

held.  And I'm referring to the fact that the election in 1991 

took place more than five years after the Conservative Party 

was re-elected in 1986.  So it's . . . you have to take it with a 

grain of salt, Mr. Speaker, when these new-found democrats 

come into the legislative Chamber and tell us that we have to 

rush into these health board elections. 

 

But there's another very strange aspect to this, when you think 

about it, and that is that here we have the member from Morse 

and the member from Moosomin saying that we've got to rush 

ahead with these health board elections and get these health 

districts working with elected boards.  But the fact of the matter 

is that these members and their colleagues in the legislature and 

their colleagues in the Liberal Party have fought the creation of 

health districts in the province of Saskatchewan, tooth and nail 

from day one.  They have opposed health care reform from day 

one.  They are opposed to the replacement of over 400 health 

boards, which the province of Saskatchewan had, with 29 

health boards while we're trying to reform the system. 

 

And when these members get up in this House and say that 

these health boards need to be elected and we get . . . and we 

need to get on with the job, we have to remember that these 

Conservatives and these Liberals have one objective, and one 

objective only.  And that is to ensure that the process of health 

care reform fails.  That is their objective.  And let nobody in 

this House or who may be listening to this debate be mistaken 

about that at all.  They have had one objective from day one, 

and that is to stop health care reform in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2029 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- They opposed The Health Districts Act; they 

opposed replacing 400 boards with 29 district boards; they 

opposed provisions in The Health Districts Act that provide for 

the very first time in Saskatchewan history with the election of 

health boards.  They opposed that, both of the opposition 

parties.  And now they come in and they say, oh no, not only 

are we in favour of elections, we want them to happen very 

quickly. 

 

Now what is their motive?  Their motive is to play politics with 

health care reform.  That is their motive.  Their motive is not to 

bring about a better model of health care for the people of the 

province. 

 

Now the members for Morse and Moosomin of course took the 

opportunity -- and this really belies their motives, Mr. Speaker 

-- while speaking to the motion, which supposedly is intended 

to speed up elections for health boards, they really took the 

opportunity to question the very nature of health care reform 

that's occurring in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I guess what I would have to say to those members, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there is no reason why the province of 

Saskatchewan needs to have the highest number of hospital 

beds per capita probably in the world.  There is just no reason 

for it. 

 

And when the members play politics and try to stop the 

reorganization and the reform that is going on, I would suggest 

that what the members are doing is also failing to take part in 

improving health care for people in Saskatchewan, including 

rural Saskatchewan, areas those members represent. 

 

And I think of the example of a lady who was in the 

Star-Phoenix some weeks ago who had to have a kidney 

removed, and she was from rural Saskatchewan.  It used to be 

that if you had a kidney removed, you would have a lengthy 

stay in hospital and then a lengthy period of convalescence. 

 

But because of the advent of laparoscopic surgery, this lady 

went into a hospital in Saskatoon and had her surgery through 

the laparoscopic surgery, which just involves the insertion of a 

few very small instruments into her body, and the kidney was 

removed that way.  And that woman was out of the hospital in 

a few days and had a very short period of convalescence and 

then was on her feet within a week.  Whereas before, she might 

have been laid up for several weeks or even several months. 

 

And the fact of the matter is that the world has changed and the 

medical world has changed.  Technology has changed and 

things can be done in hospitals for people that could not be 

done before.  And they cannot be done in over 100 hospitals in 

Saskatchewan; they can only be done in a few of the larger 

centres, if not only one. 

 

And when the members try to have the government 

spend resources unnecessarily keeping operating rooms open in 

some hospitals that are never used, really the members are 

depriving people in those areas of access to the technology and 

treatment that they should have in urban centres. 

 

And I really think, Mr. Speaker, that the creation of the health 

districts will lead to improved health care for people all over 

the province, not just in the city but in the rural areas too.  

Because although the members opposite talk about hospital 

closures, there have not be closures of hospitals in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  There have been conversions, and those 

facilities will be used to provide services to people in a very 

practical way that people have not had before. 

 

And I support that.  It's too bad that the opposition parties, the 

Liberals and Conservatives, have so steadfastly opposed this in 

this House, because the reality is that people from across the 

world are actually studying what people in Saskatchewan are 

doing.  They consider us to be leaders in health care reform 

once again. 

 

And I think it's very sad that when something good is 

happening in Saskatchewan again and we're providing some 

leadership in terms of health care reform, that the other parties 

in the legislature simply want to make a political issue of it and 

play politics. 

 

I said a few minutes ago that I found it ironic that the 

Conservative Party would be in such a rush to have elections to 

these boards when they both opposed the creation of the boards 

in the first place; they're vehemently opposed to them and also 

opposed provisions in the Health Districts Act that calls for 

elections of boards.  So one minute, they're opposed to the 

boards, they're opposed to elected boards, the next minute, 

they're saying but the election should be held more quickly. 

 

(1645) 

 

It's a little bit inconsistent, and of course the Leader of the 

Liberal Party is fond of saying, when she makes her occasional 

contributions to health care debate, when she isn't totally 

preoccupied with her interest in gambling, she always makes 

the point, along with her cousins in the Conservative Party, that 

we've moving too quickly with health care reform.  She says 

well of course we're in favour of health care reform.  It's 

necessary, but it shouldn't happen right now.  You're moving 

too quickly. 

 

But now, today, we find the members of the opposition saying 

we're moving too slowly in terms of getting around to elections 

of these health care . . . health district boards, which they 

opposed the creation of, and the election of which they opposed 

when they voted against The Health Districts Act.  So I find 

that a little bit inconsistent too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you listen to these inconsistencies and you see 

people trying to talk out of both sides of their mouths, you 

realize that they have one real objective 



2030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 1994 

and that objective is to play politics. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the health of the people of the 

province is much too important an issue simply to play partisan 

political games in the legislature, which leads me to this:  the 

government has said in The Health Districts Act that it is 

committed to elected health boards.  I say again that that 

provision was opposed by the Conservatives and the Liberals 

who now say that the elections should take place more quickly. 

 

But I want to say that when you're planning something, I think, 

Mr. Speaker, you should plan it properly, and there are some 

unanswered questions when it comes to health board elections.  

It is unknown how those elections should be conducted 

precisely, how they should be conducted most economically 

and conveniently, what are the guidelines, what are the 

boundaries, what are the wards that people will be elected on, 

and who will be eligible to vote, whether it will be people that 

live in the district or whether it will also involve a ratepayer 

vote. 

 

The district boards themselves are asking the government not to 

have elections this year.  And I believe that at the annual 

meeting of the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations, which has thousands of members across the 

province, a resolution was unanimously passed saying to the 

government that this was not an appropriate time to hold 

elections because the boards have only been in place for six 

months and they're in the process of making some very major 

changes to the health care system. 

 

And I would say that we ought to listen to the people that are 

involved in the health care system, to the thousands of people 

who dedicate themselves in a very community-spirited way, 

Mr. Speaker, to making this system work.  And I'm not just 

talking about people on district health boards; I'm talking about 

people that volunteer in the hospitals and hold a variety of other 

positions in health care organizations.  Those people I think 

deserve better than what we've heard in the legislature from 

time to time, including today, which is a suggestion that 

somehow they are politically motivated, that they are tools of 

the provincial government.  That simply is not true. 

 

And I noticed that the chairperson of the North-East Health 

District was moved some time ago, a number of weeks ago, to 

write a letter about how these boards are created, at least in so 

far as the North-East Health District goes, because there were 

some suggestions made, encouraged by the opposition, that 

these were political boards.  These are not political boards; 

they're community-minded people. 

 

And Mr. Don Scott, the chairperson of the North-East Health 

District, wrote and said that the local municipalities had 

suggested people to serve on the health board.  It wasn't the 

provincial government; it was the local municipalities.  And out 

of 12 persons, 11 persons on that board were people that were 

suggested by the local municipalities, the local elected 

councillors, not people that were hand-picked by the Minister 

of Health or the provincial government. 

 

And he makes the point that it's impossible to say with any 

credibility that a health board can be stacked by the provincial 

government for political reasons when the government is 

getting nominations from people at the local level, unless you 

assume there's some giant conspiracy to stack the health board 

elections. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these people that serve on 

these boards are community-minded people and what they do is 

a labour of love on behalf of the people of their district.  And 

I've met with the health board members in Saskatoon on several 

occasions, and the work that they put into this process of trying 

to change our system so that we can preserve the medicare 

system in a changing world is not something that they get paid 

large sums of money for.  It's something that they do because 

they believe in our health care system and they believe in their 

communities. 

 

And that's true in Saskatoon.  I think it's true in north-east 

Saskatchewan.  I think it's true throughout the province.  And 

to get up in this House and say that these people have some 

kind of political agenda, I don't think is proper. 

 

Now I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that these district boards, 

the creation of which was opposed by the opposition, the 

election of which was opposed by the opposition, were not 

established until the latter part of last year, quite late in 1993.  

And they're doing a lot of interim work and they're doing an 

assessment of what is needed in their community. 

 

But these districts have not been in for a long time.  They've 

been in less than a year.  They certainly haven't been in the 

over five years it took for the previous administration to call an 

election in this province.  And I might add that the Mulroney 

Conservatives weren't too far behind in that regard. 

 

And I want to say too that Garf Stevenson was appointed by the 

province to look into how these elections could best be held.  

And I support that, because I think if we're going to have these 

elections it should be done properly. 

 

And I want to say too that I disagree with the members 

opposite when they get up in this House and attack the 

reputation and integrity of Mr. Stevenson.  I think Mr. 

Stevenson is a person who has served the membership of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool well, who has served his province 

well, and will continue to serve his province well. 

 

But getting back to questions about how these elections are to 

be done, the boundaries of wards need to be established.  It 

took a year to establish boundaries for the provincial 

constituencies.  But with respect to the district health boards, 

for some reason after they're in place for a small number of 

months, 



May 3, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2031 

we're supposed to have ward boundaries in place, and those 

people trying to get those districts established are supposed to 

get elections organized. 

 

And I don't think it's very realistic.  But I think the purpose of 

it, Mr. Speaker, is to play politics, not to address in a practical 

way the health care needs of the people of the province. 

 

There are certainly mixed views in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

about when these elections should be held; and there are mixed 

views about how they should be held and whether they should 

in fact be coordinated with local municipal and school board 

elections. 

 

The health boards are really reinventing how health services are 

coordinated, managed, and provided in our province.  And it's 

important that we do it right.  I think it's very important that we 

do it right, Mr. Speaker.  And as I said before, what needs to be 

stated here is that in the history of our province we've never 

had health board elections.  This legislation is the first 

legislation that will enable people to elect health boards.  We've 

never had health boards required to go out and hold public 

meetings with people in their communities. 

 

And what the provincial government is in fact doing is not only 

reshaping the health care system to meet the needs of the 

people today, but it is moving forward in terms of making that 

a more democratic and accountable system; notwithstanding 

the vehement opposition of the members opposite in both the 

Conservative and Liberal parties, who have done nothing to 

cooperate with this process.  I'm talking about members of 

those parties in the legislature, not members of those parties in 

the public at large.  Because I think in the public, there are 

people from all political persuasions who are working to 

improve our health care system and working to make the health 

district boards work. 

 

I noted before, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Association 

of Health Organizations met on this issue on January 27 of this 

year in Saskatoon, and they were unanimous -- there wasn't a 

dissenting vote -- in calling for a delay to health board 

elections.  There was very strong consensus in that community 

that it was too soon for elections.  And I guess I would suggest 

that the people who took five years to call a provincial election 

when they were in office, ought not to expect the district health 

boards to have elections after five months.  It's not consistent 

and it's not fair.  And the reason for this motion is simply to 

play politics. 

 

I want to say also, the member for Moosomin I believe was 

referring to some editorial comment.  Well there's been 

editorial comment that it is perfectly logical and consistent with 

health care reform to delay these elections.  And in the Nipawin 

Journal of March 16 of this year, the Nipawin Journal said: 

 

 Considerable progress and initial momentum will be lost if 

elections are ordered this fall.  It's true that those currently 

serving on the boards can run, but the system could go into a 

holding 

pattern until voters have spoken. 

 

And they point out that we don't need that.  We need to reform 

the health care system and we don't need the people who have 

never supported reform and who want it to fail, trying to play 

politics and stop the reform from proceeding. 

 

And with that . . . there are other editorial comments in The 

Southwest Booster and The Four-Town Journal along said 

line. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment, 

seconded by the member from Regina Lake Centre: 

 

 That the words after "Assembly" be deleted and replaced 

with the following: 

 

 commend the government for establishing the process 

whereby district health boards will be democratically 

elected locally and by acknowledging and responding to 

the concerns raised by SAHO ensuring that this historic 

election process is established fairly and properly from the 

outset. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- I move now, Mr. Speaker, that debate 

adjourn on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 


