




















































Hansard: March 21, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1045 

 March 21, 1994 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Assistance Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, we 

started going through this a little bit before the break. 

 

I have a few what you might call general kind of questions that 

maybe we'll go through until we get into the . . .  We were 

talking about the five northern bands and I think you agreed 

with me that it was the northern -- Lac la Ronge, Peter 

Ballantyne -- it was northern bands anyway . . . Did I 

understand you to say, sir, that you didn't have an agreement 

with those bands yet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, you're right.  Although the current 

contracts are between the federal government and the bands -- 

which is the way they've been historically -- and until we can 

get this amendment passed, by agreement we're extending that 

arrangement.  But we do require this amendment in order to 

have the authority under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan to 

enter contracts ourselves with those bands in order to allow 

them to continue providing assistance to their members.  So 

you're right, yes. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

understand that they are getting the assistance on a almost ad 

hoc, I guess you'd call it, until this Bill is through.  Could you 

tell me how those programs have worked up until this point? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Historically these arrangements have 

existed for many years and we're not aware that there were any 

concerns raised; that things were going well.  As far as we 

know the bands want to continue with that arrangement 

because that's been the historical arrangement, and they're 

providing the financial services and related services to their 

members in a way that is consistent with the objectives of the 

assistance program.  So we would see no reason not to continue 

since it's worked well and we're satisfied at this point. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then essentially 

they're the same as they were.  They're using . . . the way I 

understand it, okay.  Could you tell me then, did the 

government consult with any other provinces, your 

government, when you were putting this together? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes.  As you likely know, Saskatchewan 

has been the last province to assume full financial 

responsibility for treaty families at the moment they come off 

the reserve, treaty, and so other provinces have been picking up 

this additional cost for a number of years.  We're the last 

province to do that, so in terms of consulting with other 

provinces,  

there really was nobody we could consult with for this kind of 

issue.  But as far as we know things are working very well. 

 

The arrangement's been handled satisfactorily.  The aboriginal 

people want to continue, the bands want to continue, to provide 

the services to their people.  And they will of course, under this 

Act, be accountable in the same way through a contract that our 

own staff are in terms of administering the rules and trying to 

comply with the objectives of the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  That 

answers my next question.  So we are to take from that that we 

have -- we being Saskatchewan -- had a bit of a blueprint to 

follow when we went to put this together. 

 

What is the government's goal actually, Mr. Minister?  Is it to 

have all reserves administering their own social services?  Is 

that our goal for in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, our goal is, of course, to have the 

federal government continue as they are now to administer 

assistance for people on reserves.  What we're concerned about 

provincially is restricted to providing the financial services to 

off-reserve treaty families. 

 

So the northern bands in question here have been providing the 

off-reserve assistance historically to their members, and we 

want that arrangement to continue.  But our goal for treaty 

families on reserves would be, of course, for the federal 

government to continue with their responsibility. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then I take it from 

that you won't get any help from the federal government at all 

on this program for any of the Indians that are not on reserves.  

Do I understand that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, we are talking here about us 

assuming responsibility for the direct service ourselves, that is, 

our provincial department.  But we will continue, as we always 

have, under the Canada Assistance Plan to get 50 cents back on 

every dollar we spend on assistance.  So it's cost-shared as you 

are aware, and that arrangement will continue where we will 

get the 50 per cent back through that agreement. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I was going to 

ask you how the system works, and I think you answered that 

question.  You get 50 cents back on each dollar you spend in 

Social Services to the aboriginals that are off reserve.  Does 

that work on the ones that are on the reserve also?  Is that the 

same formula? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- No, you're right about the first part, and 

that is the cost-sharing for families off reserve or for the 

general public who are eligible for assistance, yes.  But for 

on-reserve families, this will continue to be a full federal 

responsibility. 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Mr. Britton: -- Are the bands administrating their own funds?  

Do they administrate their own funds under this system?  And 

under whose authority would they be doing that?  Would that 

be under your authority or under a fed-provincial authority? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to make it clear here, the federal 

government will continue, as they always have, which is their 

obligation, to provide financial assistance to treaty families on 

reserve for financial assistance.  They also -- that is, the federal 

government -- provide the financial support on reserves for 

treaty child and family services although, because that's a 

provincial responsibility legally, we sign agreements with the 

bands.  We've signed three now; we're looking at signing some 

additional agreements for child and family services, but that 

money will still come from the federal government for 

on-reserve services.  So any service on the reserve will always 

be provided 100 per cent by the federal government. 

 

It's only for off-reserve treaty families where we will now have 

to pick up the service, except we want to continue this 

arrangement that's been historical for the five northern bands 

where they continue to provide financial services to treaty 

families even though they may be off the reserve. 

 

I hope that clarifies your question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well yes, I think it does.  How many 

individuals does this whole legislation affect?  How many 

clients would you have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Now with regard to the northern bands, 

we're talking about 800 clients.  By clients -- that could be an 

individual client or a client with a family -- but about 800 

clients would be involved I guess. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well do you intend to use this model for future 

agreements?  As you've mentioned, you're trying to get 

agreement with some other bands.  Will you use this same 

model for those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well the legislation -- which I said earlier 

-- is permissive legislation.  In other words it would allow us to 

do that if we felt that was appropriate and possible.  But we 

would still have to negotiate individual contracts with 

individual bands to provide off-reserve financial services.  And 

it is possible that at some future date we may negotiate another 

agreement which would likely, to answer your question 

directly, would be similar to this model because we see it as 

working well at this point. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I was noticing in your second reading speech 

you make reference to holistic approach to this program.  

Would this work if you negotiated different programs with 

different municipalities or bands?  Wouldn't this kind of make 

it into a patchwork thing if you didn't use the same formula for 

all? 

 

(1915) 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I appreciate your question there.  I guess 

we have no alternative of course but to maintain the provincial 

standards because this is a provincial Act.  The objectives of 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan would have to be met.  The 

standards would have to be set evenly across the province no 

matter which contracts we might enter.  So I think that that's 

the key point, that the standards would have to be met and we 

would have to be satisfied that they were. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister.  

That's what I was kind of wondering when I asked the question, 

if you were going to use the same formula, because I agree with 

you that you pretty near have to do it otherwise you might run 

into some criticism and you'd end up maybe with a patchwork, 

as I said, which probably wouldn't be as workable. 

 

In your second reading speech also, Mr. Minister, you referred 

to this as a reform.  And I would like to ask you: are there other 

reforms being considered in the Department of Social Services 

to deal with the bigger assistance load that you're 

encountering?  Are you doing anything?  Have you got any 

program to encourage people to get off the welfare list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I think what you're referring to there, if 

I'm correct, is I was talking about the potential for the federal 

income security reform and sort of what direction that might 

take and the implications for the evolvement of provincial 

income security -- training, education, employment, support 

programs and so on.  And that these amendments would allow 

us some flexibility to enter contracts if appropriate and so on.  

We're not quite sure where that federal plan is going to and 

maybe it isn't fully determined yet.  So I think I was . . . like 

that was the context that I was talking about, the reform. 

 

I would say that obviously the number one priority has got to 

be job creation in terms of ensuring that people aren't on 

assistance.  We can talk about that but we think that we've got a 

plan to deal with that.  And we think there are some very 

positive signs around that. 

 

As well when people are required to come on assistance 

because of the lack of a job or the lack of UIC (Unemployment 

Insurance Commission) benefits and so on, then we try as best 

we can obviously to provide the basic shelter, clothing, and 

housing needs for people, and other support kinds of services.  

As well we explore with people their interest, and potential, 

and quite frankly, an expectation that people pursue 

employment, education, or training options.  And the vast 

majority of people of course want to do that as well.  They need 

opportunities. 

 

And so as you know we utilize the New Careers program as 

one model -- as a matter of fact some other provinces are trying 

to model now.  And we've moved New Careers over from 

Social Services to Education, Training and Employment to try 

and sort of develop the concept of education, training, and 

employment all being tied together in lifelong 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

learning and so on. 

 

So the New Careers workforce, if you will, comes from people 

on assistance.  And there are different aspects to that program 

but there are some 3 or 4,000 social assistance clients were at 

some phase in New Careers.  So that's the approach we're 

trying to take in terms of supporting people to become 

financially independent, as you say. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for that answer.  I was going to ask you to develop 

your plan with us, but maybe we'll go into that a little later.  

And I guess I should apologize for jumping around a little.  I 

was trying to get the two tied.  I was jumping from the 

aboriginal side to the whole structure of welfare. 

 

And I guess what I'd like to say to you, sir, is that -- and I know 

you're aware of this -- that the number of people on welfare is 

up around 78,406 is my numbers in December of '93, and that's 

an increase of over 1,600 a month from one month earlier -- 

21,000 since your government took over in the province. 

 

Now what I'd like to ask you, sir, is:  can you give us a number 

as to what you think can be credited to, or charged against, the 

federal offloading of this responsibility of the Indians to you, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I have the figures here.  There are 

really two aspects to this.  The changes to the unemployment 

insurance program in October of '92, April of . . . October of 

'91, I guess, April of . . . no, October of '92, April of '93, have 

resulted in about a 4,400 new cases or 9,000 people using your 

78,000 model.  But those UIC changes have resulted in 4,400 

new cases.  The off-reserve status Indian case-load since July 1 

of the last year, are directly responsible for another 4,000.  So 

at 9,400 -- 9,400 of the new cases you are referring to, are 

directly a result of federal decisions which we had no control 

over. 

 

Not only did Saskatchewan have no control over the UIC 

changes, but the increase of assistance cases across Canada in 

the last two years has averaged a 51 per cent increase.  In 

Saskatchewan it's been a 32 per cent increase and we still have, 

even with that federal offloading as one way of putting it, those 

9,400 cases, we still have . . . it's not great and we need to do 

better, but we still have the lowest dependency rate of any 

province in Canada.  And we need to continue to work at that 

to make the situation even better. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Could you just elaborate a little bit on that?  I 

was under the understanding that the downloading had some 

effect, but we thought it accounted for less than half of the 

increase.  Would you care to elaborate?  Are you talking out of 

your case-load per capita or in numbers is the lowest? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes the percentage I'm referring to is per 

capita.  In other words, if you take our total population as a 

province and then you take the 39,000 cases, we have the 

lowest per capita rate of people on assistance than anybody else 

in Canada.  It 

was 6.9 per cent.  But with new families coming on each month 

in terms of the treaty families -- because there's a few every 

month, and this will level off at some point -- it might be up to 

7 or 7.1 or 2 per cent.  But it's still by far the lowest.  I think the 

average is about 11 per cent.  The average per capita on 

assistance across Canada is about 11 per cent of the population 

in that province. 

 

Now I might just mention while I'm on my feet that this is 

where we need the help from the member from Regina North 

West, the new member, because what the federal budget has 

done, the federal budget is going to make a big difference to us 

again because the recent cuts of the recent federal budget to 

UIC payments coming into the province would take $40 

million a year out of the economy, first of all, by reduced 

benefits.  So Saskatoon north, for example, where the average 

benefit reduction will be 6 or 7 weeks, that means that those 

people will be back on assistance earlier.  So that's a big 

concern of ours because that's going to cost us additional 

money next year because of the reduction to UIC benefits for 

Saskatchewan people on UIC. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

the third party would like to commend you and your 

government for taking a very positive step in drafting this 

amendment to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. 

 

As you have said yourself, the time has come for services to 

Indian bands to be administered by the bands themselves. 

 

I got a little confused with the directions we were taking in the 

questioning, but as I understand it, this is permissive legislation 

and it basically applies to on-reserve Indians and not to 

off-reserve. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Sorry it's just . . . No, it's the flip side of 

that.  Yes.  This applies just to . . . As you know, we're now 

responsible as of July of '93, July 1, to provide immediately, 

assistance to treaty families who leave the reserves.  So 

off-reserve treaty families are now our responsibility.  Yes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- But does this legislation address off-reserve 

bands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to go back a step here.  You're of 

course aware that for up until July 1, 1993, when treaty families 

would leave a reserve, come to the city or off the reserve 

anywhere, that for the first year they would still be the federal 

government's responsibility in terms of financial assistance.  

That changed July 1 where we are now responsible for 

financial services for all treaty families off reserve.  That's the 

45 new . . . 4,500 new families we're talking about that have 

now come onto the provincial roles, right. 

 

Now what has been historically happening in northern 

Saskatchewan in the five bands we're talking about here, is 

historically these five bands have been providing off-reserve 

assistance, they've been 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

administering off-reserve assistance to their band members who 

are off reserve. 

 

Now with that change -- where we're required to do that 

provincially -- with the change in the federal decision, we do 

not have the legal framework to allow them to continue doing 

that.  We require this amendment change here to give us the 

authority under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan to allow 

them to continue doing that.  And they want to continue doing 

that and we think that things are working well so we'd like to 

facilitate that.  And that's the major reason we're doing some 

house cleaning here and some updating and what not.  But 

that's the major reason why we need this piece of legislation at 

this point. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for clarifying that.  It gets a little 

twisty and windy at times.  With the federal devolution of 

responsibility to the provinces for the off-reserve assistance, 

you were explaining about the funding but how does it affect 

the administration of the funds and policy and the 

determination of who is eligible for assistance? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- In terms of the actual administration of 

the program and the benefit levels, nothing really changes 

because the federal government, province to province, always 

basically followed what the provinces did.  So their rates were 

always similar to ours.  If we gave an increase, they gave an 

increase.  Their accountability measures were always the same 

as ours and so on.  So nothing actually changes except we 

would have the legal authority with this amendment to enter the 

contract with the five other bands to continue what they've been 

doing in practice.  So nothing will really change because the 

program -- no matter who it was delivered by: provincially, the 

Department of Social Services or federally, Indian Affairs -- 

the same rules, the same benefit levels and so on were 

followed. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You've been very 

helpful in clarifying it. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have one or two more questions that I believe we should maybe 

go over.  And I've got a cold coming on too, I might add.  

We've done the . . . You are negotiating with other bands; I 

think we clarified that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we're talking primarily about this 

amendment for the five northern bands.  But I wouldn't say 

we're negotiating with any bands or tribal councils other than 

some preliminary discussions that we've had, and it's really 

limited to that at this point. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- One of the things I note, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, I noticed that this legislation omits any reference to a 

municipality.  Is there anything else that this legislation will 

do? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well what we have done is we've taken 

out the references to municipalities that didn't sort of fit any 

more, as I tried to say.  And basically . . . but if you look at 

section 2(h) -- a unit, we've sort of made a generic term calling 

it a unit -- a unit could include, section 2(h)(ii) could include a 

municipality as well, or Indian bands, but it still could include a 

municipality.  But we've taken out a lot of the irrelevant 

information about accreditation and so on, but a unit still could 

be defined as a municipality.  And again, with the flexibility 

required potentially, we wanted to make sure, with the federal 

reform, that we have the legislation in order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, could 

you tell me what was the last municipality that administrated its 

own assistance program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Up until 1989 both the city of Moose Jaw 

and the city of P.A. (Prince Albert) had provided their 

assistance under the city administrations.  Since '89 that has not 

been done by any municipality. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay, one more question on the local or native 

control.  How committed are you in the long term towards the 

native or local control of the program?  In your speech you said 

you were supporting a law . . . a lawsuit, I should say, against 

the federal government for offloading its programs.  If you 

should win that, will the programs . . . If you should win that 

lawsuit, and I know it's . . . will the programs or the agreements 

or the legislation be revoked or reworked in any way? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well basically this legislation, which is 

really only permissive . . . We can do this if we need to.  In 

other words, the contracts with the northern bands or other 

bands, potentially in the future.  If the first nations people are 

successful in the reference case, then things would revert back 

to the way they were before and nothing would really change 

except the legislation has been upgraded in other areas that 

would still be relevant.  But we wouldn't need this legislation to 

pursue the contracts with the five northern bands, but there 

would be other parts of it that still would be permissive and 

allow us to enter, you know, arrangements in the future if 

desirable. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, in what way in your mind do 

these changes benefit the municipalities, or for that matter, the 

provincial government? 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the hon. member for Regina North West 

on her feet? 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

this Assembly the Boy Scout troop sitting up here in the 

Speaker's gallery.  Their leaders are Dale Carter, Glen Russell, 

Howard Thornton, and Dennis Wilson, and I will be meeting 

with them to answer questions and discuss their experience at 

the legislature in just a few minutes.  But I'd like all of the 

Assembly to welcome them here this evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 13 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I 

would like to join with my hon. member in welcoming the 

guests to the Assembly and I hope you find it informative and 

enjoyable.  Thanks for coming. 

 

If I can remember your question, we're really talking here not 

so much about a benefit for municipalities but I think we're 

talking more about a benefit for the clients.  Why we would 

like the federal government to be involved is so that if people 

are on reserve, or leave the reserve for a short period of time, or 

come back, we don't want them to have to change who's 

administering their assistance for them.  So there would be 

more efficient, I guess effective, administration of a program 

point of view and, probably more importantly, families 

wouldn't have to be changing whether they're getting assistance 

from provincial back to federal, and so on.  And so that, we 

think, is the primary benefit here. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move that 

we: 

 

 Amend section 16 of the printed Bill by striking out "assent" 

and substituting "proclamation". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

(1945) 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Assistance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I move that the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that Bill No. 13 be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Social Services to 

introduce his officials to the members of the committee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

With me, to my right, the deputy minister of the department, 

Con Hnatiuk; and behind Con, Neil Yeates, associate deputy 

minister; and Bob Wihlidal, the budget director, behind me.  

Thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, before we go into these, I neglected to thank you and 

your ministers for your help and your work through the other 

Bill, so I'll do that now.  Thank you very much for the help you 

gave us. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm going to start with a few questions that came 

to us through what we call viewer mail, I think you're familiar 

with them, and they're Social Services questions and I thought 

that it might be a good time to ask them here when you have 

your officials with you and maybe could help with the answers. 

 

This first question, Mr. Minister, comes from an M. Kamar 

from Saskatoon, and Mr. Kamar asks: 

 

 I want to know why the government doesn't issue coupons for 

welfare so that we don't have hungry children and money 

would be spent on food only and not on liquor and bingo? 

 

 I also want to know why the Gaming Commission is not 

responsible for ambulance fees for hauling drunks and also 

for people's addiction to gambling since the taxpayer cannot 

afford to pay for these services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, 

before I deal with your question, thank you for 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

your -- on the last two Bills -- for your questions, comments, 

suggestions, and your support for the Bills.  I appreciate that 

very much. 

 

With regard to your question about why not food stamps, I 

guess historically in Canada under The Canada Assistance Plan 

each province has entered their own arrangement with the 

federal government, in our case The Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan, an agreement signed in 1966 -- some amendments we've 

just made a few minutes ago -- where basically by right of 

citizenship, people who are unemployed or unemployable have 

the right to receive financial assistance to an adequate level to 

meet their needs, and also in a way that is enhancing to their 

dignity.  And in many ways of course the safety net in Canada 

has been the envy of many other countries.  So we believe, as 

your predecessor ministers believed, I think, that you have to 

provide adequate levels of assistance and adequate supports to 

families.  But you do it in a way that ensures that there's an 

accountability to the public, and that you're spending public 

money wisely, and that balance between the accountability and 

the benefit levels is something that you always struggle with. 

 

Certainly in my experience many of those years in Social 

Services, I think that in many ways people on assistance -- 

likely in more ways than most -- manage their limited money 

better than most of us could do.  And so I'm satisfied that we're 

on the right track here in terms of providing assistance in a way 

that allows people to preserve their dignity. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for that.  I guess I should have mentioned to you that 

we will be sending your . . . a transcript of your answers to the 

questioner as we do in the other, so that you know that they'll 

be going directly to the questioner. 

 

Deana Gurski, a 53-year-old widow from Pennant, asks this 

question, Mr. Minister.  She says: 

 

 My two granddaughters, age 12 and 9, have come to live with 

me.  I have tried to get social assistance and medical cards for 

them, but Swift Current Social Services say I can't get any 

help because I'm working.  This doesn't make sense to me.  

My income is hardly 10,000 per year.  Can you advise me 

about this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well certainly anybody in the province 

has a right to make an application for assistance in terms of the 

numbers of members in the family, looking at their needs in 

relation to their income.  That's a right that people have. 

 

Now I don't know the circumstances of the case you're talking 

about.  There are many occasions where we enter into special 

arrangements with families who might be caring for the 

children of relatives, and require some support and some 

assistance, and we try and be as flexible as we can because 

obviously you want children to be with extended family 

members. 

Without knowing the circumstances I can't respond any more 

than that, except to invite the individual involved there to 

contact our regional director in Swift Current, who would be 

happy to try and provide the best advice as possible.  I think 

that that might be the best way to pursue with the specific case 

example. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, as I 

say, these questions are from other people.  Deana Gurski is the 

woman in this particular case, and she said in the question, "I 

tried to get some social assistance and medical cards for them 

but Swift Current Social Services say I can't get any help."  So 

it would appear that she has probably contacted them. 

 

There's a Kevin G. Miller from Moosomin and he writes this to 

you, Mr. Minister. 

 

 Why has there not been an investigation into serious 

unemployment insurance and welfare abuses in our province.  

It seems everyone but the government knows about this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say, first of all, that we . . . 

the focus, as I said earlier, has got to be adequate benefits for 

people administered in a way that's not cumbersome and 

inefficient, but in a way that is accountable and let me say, first 

of all, that in my experience the vast majority of people on 

assistance, the vast majority, are very honest.  And I think that's 

the principle that I start in this position from. 

 

Now having said that, of course, we're always open to 

recommendations from the Provincial Auditor in terms of 

standardizing our practices, making sure we're accountable.  

You might want to look at the last report done by the auditor 

with regard to our control measures.  We require every 

applicant to sign a sworn declaration.  We have pamphlets 

available to people.  In many cases, a lot of cases, rental 

cheques are made out to the clients and to the landlord. And so, 

in addition to that, we've added some additional audit staff, and 

I think that we're managing the income security program with 

those controls in a very efficient manner. 

 

Now if Kevin, I believe, has a specific client who he believes is 

involved in some abuse, then I would urge him to contact the 

Moose Jaw office and we would be glad to look at that.  In fact 

I would say that he has a responsibility to do that.  But to make 

the general statement that this is occurring . . . well it might be 

a popular thing to do, I think that there are sufficient and 

numerous accountability mechanisms in place that pick up the 

vast majority of these concerns you're talking about. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, I 

might have inadvertently said Moose Jaw, but Mr. Miller is 

from Moosomin, on that question.  The next question, if I'd 

have read it, I might have just put them two together for you, 

sir, but seeing as how I didn't . . . There's another. This is from 

Moosomin also, and it's a Don McLeod, and he asks the same 

question.  He says: 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

We must control people who are cheating on our 

unemployment and welfare systems.  Let's do something 

for people who are working full time and are at minimum 

wage.  Why not give them some bonus or tax breaks? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I certainly agree with him that it's 

important to give people increases in their income who are 

working.  We have, as you know, raised the minimum wage 

recently in Saskatchewan.  We raised the income exemptions to 

some degree since we've formed government.  And we had a 

long way to go there because they were cut back so badly in the 

'80s where it was very difficult for people to get off assistance 

because for every nickel that they earned, it was deducted from 

their cheque. 

 

We're starting to restore the principle of being allowed to keep 

a little more money that you earn, which gives you a greater 

incentive, and makes it worth it to get off assistance and 

provide better for your family where opportunities exist.  So I 

agree with what the Moosomin constituent is saying and I think 

we're on that track. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  The 

next question I think I would like to ask you . . . and these 

questions will probably overlap a little to the other Bill but I 

think we should maybe use this Bill as its own.  The first 

question, again, I'd like to ask you: what are the number of 

people on social assistance in January of 1994, January of 

1993, January of 1992, January of 1991?  And then while you 

are doing that, Mr. Minister, would you also tell me how many 

are on social assistance today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, we have the figures.  We can send 

those over to you from the January periods but I have with me 

the figures at the end of March in those years.  Is that okay?  So 

it's March to March comparison rather than January to January 

just because it's a fiscal year end. 

 

March of '91 there were 26,008 cases; March of '92, 28,167; 

March of '93, 32,904; March of '94 . . . pardon me. 

 

Okay, I was giving you the averages.  The way we've got it is 

the average per year, so the average per year of those years.  So 

the numbers I gave you are still accurate except those are not 

the end of March figures but the average in each of the years.  

In the '93-94 fiscal year it was 38,481.  In January 1, '94 

because those stats are out, it dropped to 37,150 -- 37,150.  Or 

actually that is the, pardon me, that is the estimate for '94-95.  

The current year is 37,150.  So those are all the averages.  I 

don't have them for the end of January of each year.  But those 

are the averages in each of the years for the last five years and 

including the estimated average for this year. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, do I 

understand you that you can't get those numbers for the January 

dates? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We do not have them with us, hon. 

member, but we can get them to you by tomorrow morning if 

that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  

I think I would like to have those on the January date.  Then I 

understand the 37,150 is not the actual number of people on 

social services today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The total case-load at the end of January 

'94 was 39,929 which involved total numbers of family 

members, 78,993 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 993. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate those numbers. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's 12,000 fewer jobs in Saskatchewan than in 

January of '91, and that's the last year of our administration.  

What are your projections for the ever-growing numbers that 

we see in the social assistance applicants at the end of this 

year?  Is that 78,000 . . . What do you see, what do you project 

for the end of 1994?  Have you any projections? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well during the '94-95 budget year we're 

projecting an average case-load throughout the course of the 

year of 37,150 based on our analysis of the economic trends 

and so on.  That's our projection. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, then I 

. . . the figure that you gave me, the 37,150 as an average, is 

what you think will be in 1994, but that will not be the total 

numbers, that'll be the clients.  Do I understand that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- For the 1994-95 fiscal year we're 

projecting that the average case-load by month will be 37,150 

which will involve about 74,300 people. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  That's the answer I wanted.  Thank 

you very much. 

 

Now I'd like to go into a couple of questions about the 

programs you may have in place to combat the increasing load.  

Since the numbers is growing so rapidly, can you tell us what 

measures have you taken to combat this problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well from our previous discussion 

tonight, where we talked about the October '92 . . . the April '93 

UIC changes, and of course the July 1, 1993 treaty offload 

where we're talking about 9,400 new clients directly from those 

two federal actions to our assistance case-load, when you add 

those 9,400 new cases on to the numbers and if you set those 

aside, the actual number of people who have come on 

assistance over the last two years have not been that significant.  

It's almost levelled off.  We had no control over those 9,400 

new cases. 

 

With regard to what we're doing to try and deal with the issue, 

obviously to impact on the social assistance 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

case-load there has got to be progress in the economic 

development, job creation field.  That's a challenge for all 

provincial governments.  We believe that the Partnership for 

Renewal, as a major cornerstone for our economic development 

policy, is progressing well, and there are very positive signs on 

the horizon and currently with regard to sustainable, small 

family businesses across Saskatchewan developing. 

 

I'm from Carnduff, in the south-east corner, where your seat 

mate is from.  Business is booming in that area.  I was in 

Meadow Lake last week; business is booming in that area.  

There's a lot of positive things going on in the province in 

terms of economic development. 

 

Our Agriculture 2000 strategy, which again is part of 

economic development approach to strengthen rural 

Saskatchewan, relates to economic agricultural diversification, 

to value added processing and so on.  That is part of the job 

creation strategy. 

 

Our budget talked about $700 million into capital projects, $24 

million into the Opportunities Corporation to support 

small-business development.  We, of course, with the economic 

development authorities in all regions of the province where 

they will priorize the potential and the opportunities for 

economic development in their communities at the grass roots 

level, where they look at their natural benefits and develop an 

economic development strategy -- that will contribute to . . . 

and I've got a list of a number of projects here with 10 jobs, 15 

jobs, 20 jobs, 80 jobs.  That's the kind of economic 

development we're talking about that will make a difference to 

the welfare case-loads across the province.  So I could mention 

more -- our northern economic development strategy and so on, 

the reforestation strategy, our new mining targets.  There are a 

lot of reasons to be hopeful on the economic development front 

in Saskatchewan, including, I believe, the fourth largest crop in 

the history of the province last year, some of the results of that 

which will be felt this year.  So I think there are many reasons 

why chambers of commerce and other groups are very 

optimistic about 1994 in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, my 

seat mate suggested that it's booming down in that country and 

it might be because you are from there.  Anyway, it took a little 

while but work on it; there was supposed to be some humour in 

there. 

 

Well you've partially answered my next question, Mr. Minister, 

so I wonder if you've been looking at my notes.  I was going to 

ask you what you were doing to replace the Sask Works 

program which your government dismantled, that we had in 

place when we were in government.  Could you tell us whether 

you have any other similar type of a plan in place? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say, first of all, that we didn't 

dismantle your program; we changed it to some degree.  We 

established the New Careers 

Corporation to in fact highlight the need for jobs and skills 

training and so on.  But social assistance clients who are 

capable of working by and large want to work.  Let's be clear 

about that.  And of course we require that clients who are 

capable of working pursue opportunities.  But the vast majority 

that want to, what they need are opportunities, which is where 

the economic development and jobs strategy kicks in. 

 

What we're committed to is long-term, grass roots, 

community-based, sustainable economic development and job 

creation.  We experimented -- not just your administration but 

other administrations in Canada -- during the '80s with 

megaprojects that take a lot of money and don't preserve 

long-term economic development across the province.  So that 

is our approach. 

 

Now basically we've also made some improvements in benefits 

for people on assistance, in making the delivery system more 

efficient and accountable, and to ensuring that there were 

proper accountability measures in place. 

 

Now we refer clients to the New Careers Corporation.  That 

pool of clients, that pool of people who are involved in the New 

Careers program, are drawn from people on assistance.  Just to 

give you an indication of the numbers we're talking about in 

terms of the New Careers Corporation, which gets its pool of 

resources from the department's case-load, in 1993-94 some 

9,000 people had benefited from that program -- work-prep 

centres, basic skills development training, and actual 

work-related jobs in terms of trying to keep the pool of people 

on assistance as trainable, as employable as possible.  So we in 

fact last year created over 9,000 jobs, but under the New 

Careers Corporation which is not dissimilar to the program 

you're talking about.  We didn't dismantle it. We replaced it 

with something different and highlighted it through the 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

believe you didn't create the New Careers. I think you just 

changed the name of the work program and maybe 

amalgamated them, but I don't think you created the New 

Careers program. 

 

The question I'd like to ask is, have you looked into what other 

jurisdictions are doing to try and help people get off the welfare 

rolls? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we will continue to build on the 

tools that we have available, in other words the potential 

through the New Careers Corporation, of course, the economic 

development strategies that I talked about to the general wave 

in terms of the Partnership for Renewal and diversification 

2000 and so on, and our family income program. 

 

And what other provinces are doing is actually developing our 

models.  We have analysed Newfoundland, New Brunswick, 

B.C. (British Columbia) all the other approaches, and we've got 

a history in Saskatchewan of the Family Income Plan of some 

twenty years.  That is an employment support 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

program for low income families with children and other 

provinces are looking at that.  And as a matter of fact, the 

federal government is very interested in that concept as a way 

to support working-poor families. 

 

So in many ways while we've got a lot of work to do, we are 

seeing other provinces show interest in the models that we're 

using and have been using, and we're trying to strengthen those 

as well and look for partnerships with the federal government 

to try and get them to show some leadership on the national 

stage in terms of an economic development strategy, and other 

support services that are required. 

 

The case-load mix has changed.  There are some 9,000 single 

parent . . . 12,000, about 12,000 single-parent families on social 

assistance, so not quite half, but a good, almost a third, of the 

clients on assistance are social . . . are single-parent families. 

 

So we need to then start looking at day care policy, 

transportation policy, adequate income exemption supports, 

and so on in order to provide and allow and facilitate 

opportunities for those people; and we need national leadership 

for example in the day care area, otherwise we can talk all we 

want.  If we don't provide those families with the supports they 

need, then the single-parent -- mothers primarily -- are just not 

going to be able to have the supports that they require in order 

to pursue their career interests and needs. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well let's follow up 

a little bit.  I guess what you said, that you hadn't checked with 

any other jurisdictions, and that they are looking at your 

program. 

 

Well our office, Mr. Minister, have been in contact with some 

of the states in the U.S. (United States), and they have tested 

many different concepts and I'll give you some examples.  

Wisconsin's learn fair program -- this program requires parents 

to keep their children in school or risk losing a portion of their 

welfare cheque. 

 

I'm sure you will agree that education is very important, and 

staying in school will help people become more self-sufficient.  

Is your department familiar with that concept? 

 

Another program requires teenage parents to live with their 

parents or guardians. And is your government aware of that 

concept? 

 

Another thing: have you looked into anything like this?  And if 

you have, please provide me with whatever details you can, and 

if not, could you tell me why you haven't looked into these 

things. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, let me say that we are very familiar 

with the projects, the models that have been used in Wisconsin 

or Michigan or California, or many other American states.  And 

we're also familiar with the approach that Alberta has taken. 

 

And basically these other approaches, in our view, are punitive 

approaches.  They are punitive approaches 

because they make assumptions that because people happen to 

be unemployed . . . I mean let's face it, there's economic 

recessions and depressions and downturns and restructuring, so 

let's be careful not to blame people for being unemployed. 

 

Those are punitive approaches. What we're trying to do in 

Saskatchewan and promote in Canada is a supportive approach. 

Of course we want people to pursue opportunities.  They want 

to pursue opportunities; they need opportunities. 

 

If you want to keep children in school, which we do, then you 

feed them.  You have to make sure they're fed.  If you want 

young teen moms to stay in school longer, which we do 

because of the previous drop-out rate, then you provide teen 

child care support in schools, which we're doing. 

 

So we have to be careful that when we think of the number of 

people on assistance, they're not all fully employable single 

people who just don't want to work.  As I said, about 30 per 

cent of the people on assistance are single-parent families, 

primarily mothers.  Fifty-seven per cent of people on 

assistance, 12,286 of our clients, are not fully employable.  So 

when you add those two percentages together, you're talking 

about, what? -- about 87 per cent of the clients on assistance 

who aren't in that category of single, fully employable people 

which is the perception at times. 

 

So we're taking a supportive model, and I think that is an 

approach that is consistent with the tradition and the values and 

the history of this province.  That is the tradition of the safety 

net in Canada.  It's not a punitive safety net.  You don't blame 

people for being unemployed due to circumstances beyond 

their control.  And those are the value bases of the programs 

you are talking about in southern states, and they assume that 

people don't want to work when what people need are 

opportunities to work.  So no, we're not looking at that model.  

We've rejected that model and will continue to do so. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I'm 

not aware that anything I said should have given you the 

impression that we were trying to lay the blame on anyone.  I 

think that what I was trying to suggest to you is, have you 

looked at ways and means of giving these people a chance to 

educate themselves and their parents, whether they're single or 

not . . . assistance so they could keep their children in school 

and indeed give them a chance to have a job and get off the 

welfare roll. 

 

I agree with you wholeheartedly that probably a very high 

percentage of those people that we're talking about would enjoy 

the chance.  And as you mentioned yourself, some of them are 

not 100 per cent employable.  Well I don't know if I would 

agree.  I don't know what you mean by unemployable.  I would 

suggest that most of them, a high percentage, with the proper 

education and the proper opportunities would be employable. 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Because I can say to you that according to our research, some 

of these programs that I outlined have incredible results.  My 

question to you is: are you interested in getting them off 

welfare and into jobs, or are you just interested in patting 

yourself on the back and telling us what a great and good 

program you have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Well we aren't going to argue with you on that.  But I'm 

suggesting that there could be a lot of people who are not 

interested in you having a good program.  They're interested in 

them having a job.  And that's why I brought these other things 

up to you.  You suggested you aren't even going to take a look 

at them or not even going to try them, when our research 

indicates that they've had good results in getting these people 

into jobs. 

 

So I take a . . . I didn't like your inference that we are trying to 

blame people.  We have never done that.  We've always been 

trying to help them.  That's why we started the work 

Saskatchewan program.  That's why we did that -- is to give 

people a chance to go to work and earn a pay cheque.  And they 

were very, very appreciative of that.  So I would wonder why 

you wouldn't maybe try some of the things that other people 

have found a great success in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say that I was not accusing 

you of taking the punitive position.  What I was trying to say . . 

. in fact I thank you for being supportive. 

 

What I was trying to say is that we have analysed the programs 

you mentioned, and in our research and the research by 

independent academics and so on, those programs do not 

measure up in terms of supporting people in a long-term, 

sustainable way. 

 

Now the Head Start program from P.A. and La Loche is a 

model based out of Michigan.  So we're not rejecting outright 

initiatives that are positive.  That's one example of a U.S. 

model that we think has some applicability. 

 

(2030) 

 

We're interested in reducing case-loads.  We're working very 

hard to try and do that.  The Saskatchewan skills development 

program has that thrust.  The New Careers Corporation.  The 

teen support program I mentioned, designed to keep young 

moms in school to get an education, is the best way that they 

can become independent financially.  The West Flats project in 

Prince Albert, where the community has basically, from a grass 

roots point of view, become empowered and is making their 

own decisions as a community is another example of 

empowering people -- low income people in many cases.  And 

the child nutrition and development program, making sure that 

families are fed decently.  The increase to the Family Income 

Plan are all designed to do the very thing you're talking about. 

 

So there are many initiatives.  And as I've indicated and I've 

talked to you, as I have to the member from 

Regina North West, about what position Saskatchewan has 

taken, although the position is developmental and evolves 

because that's the nature of this discussion, but what position 

we've taken with regard to the federal income support review.  

Obviously that will be geared significantly to employment 

opportunities and initiatives, and we will try and negotiate the 

best arrangement we can for people in Saskatchewan who 

require further education, training, or employment. 

 

And so I didn't mean to give you the wrong impression.  I 

appreciate your support for these many initiatives where we're 

trying to provide people -- as a government, as business people, 

as communities in Saskatchewan -- with employment 

opportunities.  And we will continue to do that.  And we will of 

course welcome any suggestion of any model that you might 

want us to look at.  But we have not rejected outright every one 

of the approaches, Head Start being one example. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As my 

colleague said, the minister is from my constituency.  And he 

mentioned that things are going quite well there economically 

and in one particular sector they are, in the oil patch.  I find that 

interesting, Mr. Minister, when you noted that most people who 

are on social services, clients, are interested in working. 

 

Well I saw a piece in last week's Carlyle paper that had the 

picture of a young man from Australia that had come over, and 

had got a job working on the rigs, and it hadn't taken him very 

much time.  I'm wondering how many people in -- I'm not sure 

what district that area would be in -- how many people that 

would be classified as employable are on welfare in that area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We have the numbers by RM (rural 

municipality) and so we could get that information to you in the 

next day or two.  We have that information by regional office -- 

by regional office.  The only thing is it wouldn't be parcelled 

out specifically, sort of, in your area.  It would be the 

Estevan-Weyburn office and so, you know, the boundaries of 

that region are quite large.  Just take the total region into 

consideration which you know the area better than I do.  The 

Estevan-Weyburn district is very large but that's in your area 

going up to Carlyle as well, right. 

 

The total case-load in that area, the total case-load on assistance 

of all clients, is 766.  That's the total.  If you take the provincial 

percentages -- I don't know if you can do that, but if you do that 

-- likely about 13 per cent or so would be . . . probably less in 

that area; 10 or 12 per cent would be considered fully 

employable, single people. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's what I 

was interested in, was the regional numbers.  I didn't want to 

pinpoint any particular locations.  I brought up the Carlyle one 

because there was a picture in the paper of a young man who 

did get a job there fairly easily, it would seem, according to the 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

write-up. 

 

What do you do within Social Services to encourage this 10 to 

13 per cent of the people who would be in that area, so roughly 

75 to 100 people who would be employable, to actually go out 

and seek employment?  Do you have any part of your 

department that does that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Just to review, that if people are 

employable -- take the people you're talking about in your area 

-- they are required to verify that they're searching for 

employment.  And it's a job search requirement that is part of 

determining your ongoing eligibility.  We also make referrals 

to New Careers; we make referrals to CEIC (Canada 

Employment and Immigration Commission) centres. 

 

But in terms of employable people you're talking about, they're 

on an average about two to three months maximum, then 

they're off.  There's a high turn-through of people who are fully 

employable.  And that's not where people get lodged on a 

longer-term basis.  The fully employable, by and large, turn 

over on a reasonably fast pace, which is a short-term assistance 

that they require to sort of bridge their employment . . . 

between employment opportunities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm sure that 

everyone here knows of someone who would fit the category of 

employable and yet has been receiving social assistance for a 

good number of years and doesn't seem to be particularly 

interested in going out and finding employment, even when 

that employment is offered to them.  I can name a few within 

my own area. 

 

What happens is they may go out and seek some temporary 

employment, wishing to receive cash only -- no receipts, no 

means of tracing that they've actually been employed.  When 

this happens, Mr. Minister, what can you do about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I missed your first comment.  If you're 

saying you know of people like that, then I wonder if you're 

aware that you have an obligation to report them to the local 

office. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'm aware of that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- You're aware of that, okay.  Well you 

actually do.  I'm being very serious.  I'm very serious.  You 

have a legal obligation to report that under the Act and we 

would take that very seriously. 

 

I want to make this point, though, that sometimes when people 

appear to be employable they're not necessarily employable.  

We don't know their mental health status.  I don't know the case 

you're talking about.  We don't necessarily know their mental 

health status; we don't know their ability to compete in today's 

market.  There are a lot of people who want to work very badly 

but aren't very employable in today's market and we're trying to 

find ways to support those people because they have aspirations 

too and need to be supported. 

But anybody in the province can think of one person, or two 

persons, who they think probably should be working and aren't.  

And I think we need to be careful to sort of provincialize that 

because . . . Report those; we'll take a look at them.  And it's 

been my experience that about 8 or 9 times out of 10 when I get 

those kinds of referrals there is an explanation. 

 

And when Minister Schmidt was here and had a cheque 

pick-up process, ensuring that people had to come and pick up 

their cheques to make sure that they were who they said they 

were, or they existed, the department found that the numbers of 

people who didn't pick up their cheques, and when they looked 

into those situations, the numbers were very small.  It's good 

politics to say the numbers were large but they're not; they're 

very small.  And so I would encourage you to report that case 

you're aware of, and we'll look into it.  And I don't say that . . . 

I know it's a serious matter.  But encourage anybody to do that, 

we'll take the matter very seriously. 

 

But in your area the numbers of people on assistance are very 

low.  The number of people who are employable and on 

assistance is very, very low, and there's a very quick turnover, 

about two months, and then they're off assistance again. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's because most 

of the people in my area have a good work ethic. 

 

Mr. Minister, what would the average welfare recipient receive 

who was single and employable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First let me say that the average amount 

of money received by the average client on assistance is $650 

per case. 

 

Now your question more specifically was about single, 

employable people.  In Saskatchewan the average amount is 

$480 per month.  Now we rank seventh in Canada, seventh in 

Canada in terms of benefits to single, employable people. 

Manitoba, the average assistance there to a single, employable 

person is $507, and they rank fourth.  So we're at the low end 

of the range in terms of the assistance to single, employable 

people in Canada. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You 

mentioned that Minister Schmidt when he was in charge of 

your department, the cheque pick-up didn't find a lot of people 

that were abusing the system.  If my memory hasn't failed me, I 

believe the number was somewhere around 400.  And you 

know, out of 77,000 that are now receiving some assistance, 

400 is not a large number. 

 

But when you take 400 times -- and I'm just going to say that 

they were single employables because the numbers go up after 

that -- that you're probably looking in the neighbourhood of 

$200,000 a year plus, and that's not a great deal of money in the 

scheme of the Social Services department, but that is a great 

deal of money to the individual.  I'm sure either 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

one of us wouldn't mind having that in a year.  So there is some 

value, Mr. Minister, in saving that kind of monies if you can. 

 

Now if that . . . if you took the average of the $650 and added 

another 150 you're looking at 300,000-plus.  So there is some 

value there. 

 

So what would it cost the department in dollars to change over 

to a pick-up system?  Is there an added cost to the pick-up 

rather than mailing them out, or what values would be there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me say that no system 

is perfect.  What we're trying to do is prevent cheques from 

being prepared that aren't appropriate to start with, so we've 

tried to move it to the front end to make sure that people are 

eligible before we print the cheque.  So we're accomplishing 

the same thing in a different way. 

 

As I mentioned to your colleague, we've tightened up the 

controls in many ways so that we're accountable to the 

taxpayer.  If you like, I'd be very happy to review those, but 

we've identified five or six areas where we in fact have 

improved the accountability and we're satisfied that the error 

rate and the fraud rate has been . . . is lower. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, but I wonder if 

you could provide me with some indication of the values that 

you would lose or gain if you went to a cheque pick-up system? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me say that we agree 

with the value you're talking about, that is to spend taxpayers' 

money wisely in an accountable way.  And what I was trying to 

say is that we're doing this in other ways.  Cheque pick-up is 

one way to do it.  That also requires more staff to do that.  

That's one way to do it. 

 

Right now workers, individual workers, if they feel it's 

necessary can choose to have a particular client pick up a 

cheque instead of mailing it out.  So that provision is still there.  

But it's not done for everybody because the assumption there is 

that you don't trust anybody.  But individual workers can do 

that where they feel it's necessary. 

 

But we've added other measures.  We've got agreements with 

the other provinces.  We've got -- in terms of verification -- 

we've got verification with UIC program now, in terms of 

ensuring the people that are eligible and not getting duplicate 

assistance.  And we've added case-verifiers at the front end so 

we're trying to deal with the issue at the front end rather than 

the cheque pick-up option which is one option I said before; 

too, many shelter cheques are going out in joint landlord and 

client's name.  Now others oppose that.  There are many who 

don't agree with that approach.  But on the line that you're on, 

those are ways that I could argue have enhanced the 

accountability of the administration of the program. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You seem 

bound and determined to avoid to giving me a number on this.  

Can you tell me what it costs you, your department, to mail out 

all of the funds to your clients every month? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well we'll try and break out in the next 

minute or two the actual mailing costs to send the cheques out.  

But certainly let me say that recent case-load increases are not 

as a result of fraud.  I've tried to identify why we think the 

case-load is increased and by the way, the increase across 

Canada has been 51 per cent per province.  It's been about 33 in 

this province, 33 per cent.  So fraud is not the reason for the 

increases in case 

_load. 

 

I maintain and I stand by this, that the vast majority of people 

on assistance are honest.  I think that we should be as 

concerned about the money escaping through tax evasion 

where the really big bucks are.  But at the same time we still 

have to be accountable and we're trying to do that.  Verification 

of clients and their circumstances can best be done at the front 

end which I've  tried to identify the six or seven ways in which 

we are trying to do that.  I mean it wouldn't even be possible 

for many of our clients to pick up their cheque.  It just simply 

wouldn't be possible for many of our clients to pick up their 

cheque.  It just simply wouldn't be possible because we're 

talking about 13 per cent, 12 to 13 per cent of the people who 

are fully employable. 

 

You've got single parent families with children and no way to 

get down to the office.  I mean there are all kinds of reasons -- 

disabled people.  So if you're talking about the total cost of 

mailing out cheques to the 38,000 cases, families, that wouldn't 

be a desirable thing to do anyway.  And it wouldn't be very 

logistically possible for many of them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you could table that document that you were reading from, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Now we'll get you a copy of this 

document over, in terms of the control measures that are in 

place. 

 

But to answer your question with regard to the total mailing 

cost . . . the total mailing cost, right?  The total mailing costs 

for the cheques for the Family Income Plan, now these are all 

mailed because they are all lumped together -- the assistance, 

the Family Income Plan, the seniors' income plan, and all of the 

letters and correspondence and the day care subsidies and so 

on, comes to about $875,000 per year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thank you 

for the commitment to table the document. 

 

When Minister Schmidt had the cheque pick-up in place, what 

was the employment numbers of your department at that time . 

. . (inaudible) . . . Yes, the employment, what was the number 

of employees of the Social Services department when the 

cheque 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

pick-up was in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We'll get that for you because it takes a 

bit of comparison here.  If you have another question, I'll be 

happy to try and answer that to give the officials a moment or 

two to try and get that information. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well I'm sure 

you have these figures:  what is the current level of 

employment in your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The total number of employees for the 

Department of Social Services, which includes all programs, 

including institutions, you know, Community Living, Valley 

View, Dales House, Kilburn Hall -- all of the institutions across 

the province in all programs is 1,895.3 person years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes, I'm sure that .3 person doesn't cost a 

lot to feed. 

 

How many people would be working in the administration area 

that would deal with the cheques and the mail-out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The cheque printing and mailing is an 

automated system.  Actually it's done by the Department of 

Finance, but we give them the permission and the figures and 

what not to proceed with it.  So it's all done automatically. 

 

If you're asking how many people in the province, how many 

employees we have that administer all aspects of the social 

assistance program then I can answer that.  Is that okay? 

 

Excuse me just a second.  We're talking in the social assistance 

program, 292 workers. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you.  How many 

specifically would be authorizing the payments by ministry of 

Finance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We'll have to find out through Finance 

what that number is, and I'd be happy to provide that.  The 

numbers, I'm advised, would be pretty small because it's all 

automated. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  How 

many would you estimate would be necessary . . . or would 

your department even hire them perhaps?  I'm not even sure.  

They may be picking up cheques some place else, but how 

many people would you estimate would be necessary if you 

had implemented a cheque pick-up program, and would you be 

looking after that or would some other department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well that's a difficult question to answer 

because it would involve some additional work for all the staff 

because it's a more cumbersome procedure.  Let me say that in 

the analysis that was done with Mr. Schmidt's model of people 

picking up their cheques, cost about $600,000 per year to 

operate.  And the analysis is that about less than half that was, 

sort of, returned or saved in terms of that, 

recovering their cost. 

 

What we think we've done . . . and he had the special 

investigations branch, cheque pick-up measures and so on.  We 

think what we've done is we've identified, as I've tried to 

identify, the accountability and control measures that had been 

put in place at the front end and that that's been more effective. 

 

But more importantly than my word for that, let me report to 

you that the Provincial Auditor is satisfied with our control 

mechanisms and that we are continuing to work with that office 

to ensure that we are spending taxpayers' money as wisely as 

we can.  So if you want to check the auditor's report, I think 

that you will find that we're spending the money in a very 

accountable way and you don't have to take my word for it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You stated 

that under Mr. Schmidt's model it cost about $600,000 to 

operate that program within your department, that being the 

cheque pick-up.  If it's costing you $875,000 today to deliver 

those cheques out by mail, if you could save 2 to $300,000 of 

the people who are not actually legitimately entitled to that 

cheque, you could save that money.  You're up over almost 1.2 

million. 

 

If there were additional employees necessary for this program 

and if you were to take some of your clients to provide this 

service, you would be looking at another savings.  And in this 

particular case you don't have to have the physically robust to 

hand out cheques; you need someone who is capable of being 

at a particular location for a period of time.  You would save 

some further monies.  And I believe my colleague here figured 

that out at 312,000.  So you're at one and a half million dollars 

of savings there now because you're saving some on your 

payments that you would have to turn around and pay out in 

wages.  But, Mr. Minister, wouldn't there be some value in 

saving -- if these figures are at least anywheres close -- in 

saving that amount of money for the Saskatchewan taxpayer? 

 

Now I'll admit that there are people who can't physically come 

to your location to pick up the cheques.  But you say that 

caseworkers are already designated some individuals, or they 

have the capabilities of designating some individuals to come 

and pick up the cheque. Why can't you do that on the flip side 

and say, you as an individual cannot physically come to our 

location to pick up your cheque, so we'll mail it to you.  Now 

that would be an additional cost and that would decrease the 

savings.  But I'm not sure how many that would be, and 

perhaps you would have a number that you could put on that, as 

how many would be physically not capable of coming to a 

cheque pick-up place.  But would it not have some value and 

some value to investigate in having this type of a system? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me clarify; maybe I'm 

not making myself clear.  That $875,000, 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

let me make it clear that that 875,000 is our total bill for 

postage for the entire department.  Now included in that we 

send out 20,000 seniors' income plan cheques a month -- 

20,000 per month; that's 240,000 a year.  That takes postage.  

We send out 1,800 Family Income Plan cheques a month.  We 

send out 1,000 cheques to foster parents per month.  And we 

have thousands and thousands of letters of correspondence that 

we have to respond to, from clients and people who write to 

me, and so on. 

 

This 875 is our total postage budget for the whole department.  

A very small percentage of this would be for mailing out social 

assistance cheques.  A number of those cheques are also 

deposited directly into people's accounts.  So if you are 

suggesting that people should have to come down and pick up 

their cheque unless they can prove that they're not physically 

capable, then that's a value base, that's a value that you're 

making, that by and large people, if they're on assistance, do 

not have the right to feel any dignity about being on assistance. 

 

You know, if the Provincial Auditor is satisfied that we've got 

adequate control measures -- and we're working with that office 

to make sure that we enhance the control measures because we 

do have an accountability to the public -- we're accomplishing 

what you've asked, and more, by the cheque pick-up approach 

of Mr. Schmidt.  We're accomplishing more than he is, in a 

way that's more effective and a way that allows clients to 

preserve some dignity. 

 

So I'm sorry but I do not subscribe to the theory that people 

should pick up their social assistance cheque unless they can 

demonstrate that they just can't physically come down there 

and do it.  There's a dignity issue involved here that I think is 

fundamental to our program, and we make some assumptions 

about why people are on assistance, and blaming them, if we 

want them to come down and pick it up and it wouldn't be 

possible in many cases. 

 

I will send over to you now -- because we now have it available 

-- the measures that we put in place to make sure that we are 

spending money wisely and accountably, and what our protocol 

is with regard to fraud and abuse. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  You talk 

of dignity, but how much dignity is there in it for the taxpayer 

of the province if you're not even prepared to look at the 

possibilities that a cheque pick-up program may have some 

financial value.  You talk of dignity and yet you said that your 

caseworkers have the right or the authority to designate 

someone to come down and pick up that cheque.  Aren't they 

then making a value judgement much more severe on that 

individual than asking all clients, that are able to do so, to come 

down and pick up their cheque. 

 

When your caseworker designates an individual to pick up their 

cheque, they're saying, you as an individual, within your 

department system, have something special about you that 

warrants you coming down to pick up your cheque.  Whereas if 

all 

of the individuals were in that position, no one is singled out, 

no one's dignity is more or less affronted by it.  But when you 

point out one individual, then you are indeed saying to that 

person that there is some special reason why you must come 

down here. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, that the taxpayers also deserve some 

consideration in this.  And if there is some savings to be made, 

I think those savings should be given serious consideration 

because the taxpayers of this province also have dignity that 

must be respected.  It's they earned the dollar, and they 

contributed to the provincial coffers, and their dignity also 

needs some respect, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Chair: -- Can I impose on the members in the back to 

break up their large group and take their discussion outside the 

Chamber.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well you know, that's a fine political 

speech you just made, but the reality is that we've enhanced and 

we've put in place greater control measures, but in a more 

dignified way and a more . . . and a way that allows people to 

save some self-respect in a way that Mr. Schmidt didn't do.  

Plus we've done a cost/benefit analysis of his approach, and it 

doesn't recover the money that it's designed to do.  It's good 

politics.  He tried to make good politics out of it, but I am 

concerned that you're getting the message that somehow, 

because we don't herd down thousands of people to the welfare 

offices every month to pick up their cheques as you're 

advocating, that we're somehow not being accountable.  I mean 

that is an approach that I wouldn't approve of. 

 

But what I do agree with you on is that there needs to be good 

accountability systems in place.  I would venture to say that we 

have better accountability system in place than the previous 

administration.  The auditor is satisfied.  I want you to hear 

this.  The auditor is satisfied. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Are the taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well the auditor certainly takes 

taxpayers' interests into account; that's what it's all about, that 

we've got good control measures.  And there's suggestions for 

improvement, and we'll continue to work with that office.  But 

to suggest that we're irresponsible when in fact we've got very 

good control measures in place, it's just simply not accurate. 

 

The other thing I would say is we've calculated here in the last 

few minutes that less than 25 per cent of that 975,000 a year for 

postage would be . . . of the 875, pardon me -- less than 25 per 

cent would go to mailing social assistance cheques to clients.  

So keep that figure in mind; that's over the course of the year as 

well, okay? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd calculate it 

out approximately 200,000 for social service cheques. 

 

I wonder if you could supply us with the study that 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

you say shows that there isn't a value in having a cheque 

pick-up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well let me say that we did our 

assessment of the measures that were in place like the mass 

cheque pick-up, the special investigations unit, the secret police 

that were in place.  And we determined . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well that's true.  We determined basically that 

a verification approach that is targeted is a better approach to 

use.  We do randomly 850 investigations per month on a 

random basis, so we believe that to verify eligibility prior to 

printing the cheque is a better approach than a punitive 

approach later.  That's the approach that we use.  If we 

determine that somebody has defrauded the department, then 

we take appropriate action. 

 

So I sent you over the list of measures that contribute to that 

verification.  If you feel that those, when you add those up, that 

they're not as accountable as a cheque pick-up, a mass cheque 

pick-up, then we're going to agree to disagree on that matter.  

We believe that this is more accountable.  And you don't have 

to take my word for it.  Read the Provincial Auditor's report. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, thank you.  I wonder 

if you could provide us, rather than just simply your own 

words, a physical study that would indicate . . . you said you 

did a study, so there must be a study some place within your 

department that would indicate that there is not the value there 

in a cheque pick-up, that there is more value in the 

accountability systems that you have put into place.  Do you 

have such a study? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Look, we did our own internal study.  I 

mean our objective was not unlike yours, that is, to make sure 

that we're being as accountable as we can. 

 

We had no interest in being less accountable than you, than the 

former administration.  I mean why wouldn't you want to be as 

accountable as you could be? 

 

We determined in our cost/benefit analysis that we could bring 

in additional control measures that would be as effective or 

more effective than the cheque pick-up.  I'm not sure why the 

cheque pick-up is the key element in an accountability measure 

that allows you to ignore all the other measures.  And I can tell 

you right now that we're not going to return to a mass cheque 

pick-up approach. 

 

But that doesn't mean we're not accountable.  We're very 

accountable.  And the taxpayers have some confidence in that 

through the Provincial Auditor's report.  That's the place that 

they can look.  I want to ask you if you've read that report, 

because that will give you a better indication of whether or not 

that the watchdog in the financial area believes that we're 

spending money wisely.  And we fare very well there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The auditor 

determines how the money was spent and 

whether it was spent properly within your authority, but he 

doesn't determine whether or not the funds issued were done so 

within the proper criteria of the Social Services department. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you've talked about secret police and the 

verification.  Well perhaps your thoughts are reverting back to 

the old Soviet system.  But these people were not spies; they 

were investigating complaints and possibilities that there was 

fraud, but they certainly weren't lurking in bathrooms waiting 

for people. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talk about the new accountability that you've 

put into place.  Exactly what have you done?  Because 

whenever there's a change in the Social Services department 

someone is always affected.  And if they're affected, from what 

I've learned in two and a half years, they always phone their 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and complain 

about it. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I'd have to say that I've received very few 

phone calls about people complaining about any changes in the 

system.  So if you have put in new accountability systems, then 

how are they affecting people?  I receive complaints if the 

cheque doesn't arrive at the proper time, but I haven't received a 

lot of complaints about people who feel that they're being 

excluded from the system, that the accountability is too tight, 

that there's a problem with it.  So what have you done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Let me just clarify that the -- and correct 

you if I may -- that the auditor does look to see whether there 

are financial controls in place and whether they're being 

utilized.  And so that verification is done by the Provincial 

Auditor and the auditor is satisfied. 

 

Now I sent you over some information.  If you want, I would 

be quite happy to go over the financial controls that are in place 

for you because you're . . . These are additional to the ones I 

sent you. 

 

The annual program audit, a random sampling of 

approximately 300 cases are audited each year to monitor for 

annual financial error trends.  Controls are adjusted from time 

to time, as indicated by these trends.  That's the annual program 

audit. 

 

Secondly, worker accountability.  Social assistance workers 

take full responsibility for cases instead of relying on others to 

enter the data, interpret the policy and calculate entitlement.  

That's important so that there's nothing lost in terms of 

somebody else processing their file from there.  A variety of 

tools are available to assist workers including automatic 

messaging, chronological recordings and benefit calculations 

and so on. 

 

A third control, worker verification.  Workers carry out a 

variety of routine verifications including client identification, 

confirmation of living arrangements, verification of receipts, 

wage stubs to confirm their income, the verification of utility 

bills, submission of 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

receipts for special needs. 

 

(2115) 

 

The fourth area, financial assistance workers.  We hired 30 

social financial service workers primarily to verify clients' 

circumstances.  Again, adding to the verification process to 

ensure that there's proper documentation.  And from time to 

time that has resulted in some errors; detected some fraud and 

we've made the appropriate referrals. 

 

Systems controls have been put in place preventing duplicate 

assistance from other provinces with the UIC program.  Benefit 

payment methods, cheques for shelter made out to the landlord 

and the client; benefits paid directly to vendors on behalf of 

clients; trustees may be appointed for clients who have 

demonstrated that they can't manage their money; 

semi-monthly cheques for those who can't manage their 

cheques on a monthly basis. 

 

And these are -- I could go on and on -- but these are the kinds 

of controls that are in place to ensure that we're spending 

money wisely and the taxpayer can be assured that we are 

spending that money wisely.  There's nothing magical about 

cheque pick-up being the one system that is the overall best 

system.  The auditor is satisfied with our control mechanisms.  

I've sent them to you.  Well one page . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well we'll provide you with whatever's in 

place.  I'd be happy to do that.  But we're cooperating with the 

Provincial Auditor, and I want to be clear that the Provincial 

Auditor does have the authority and actively engages in the 

verification of the control mechanisms and their applicability -- 

and their application, pardon me. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Would you 

table those two documents, please. 

 

Mr. Minister, you ran through quite a number of checks and 

balances there.  Were those in place in previous years or what 

changed in there?  You talked about the Provincial Auditor.  

The Provincial Auditor doesn't do value-for-dollar auditing.  

He checks that you're spending the money as you're properly 

authorized, he checks that some of your verifications are in 

place, but he doesn't check for value for dollars. 

 

I don't care what the system is, providing the province is 

receiving the maximum value for its dollar that is being spent.  

If that means cheque pick-up, so be it.  If it means some other 

system, so be it.  I'm not particularly concerned that everyone 

has to go and pick up their cheque if there is a more economical 

way of doing it.  If that's the most economical way, then that's 

the way I think we should be looking at.  If some other method 

different from cheque pick-up, different from what is 

happening now, is the most economical way to do it, and the 

most accountable, then that should be the way that it's done. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what changes are there in place on that list 

that you read from previous years? 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I will send you over these additional 

control mechanisms and procedures.  But let me say that, just 

very quickly, worker verification -- and when you see the 

headlines here -- worker verification, the additional financial 

services workers, the benefit payment methods, the computer 

interfacing with other programs, the quality improvement 

measures, the assignment of UIC benefits, the accounts 

receivable collection procedures, and the improved client 

information are all new since we came to power. 

 

And I might say that you say you're not getting calls about the 

system not working.  Well I'm happy about that.  I'm happy 

about that.  I mean that's an indication that the system is 

working.  I can assure you that I was a member under the 

former administration, and I got lots of calls because the system 

wasn't working.  So I'm happy you're not getting lots of calls.  

We'll send this over to you.  If you have any more questions, I'd 

be happy to provide the answers as best I can. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move the committee rise and 

report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, well it's 

good to get back to Highways.  Having journeyed in from 

across the western side of the province into the city today, and 

using the highways to get here, I noted that we've got a lot of 

work to do.  So I suspect the thing to do is to get right at it and 

discuss it. 

 

I did want to take you back though.  We had a really nice 

discussion about this on Friday and some of the things that you 

indicated to us were of particular interest.  You mentioned to 

me that you were spending $62 million this year on highways; 

22 million of that is to be spent in rural Saskatchewan.  I kind 

of wondered, why is there such a difference there and where 

does that 62 to 22 kind of balance come in?  How did you 

figure that out and what's going on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

Highways capital budget this year is $62 million.  The 

Department of Municipal Government actually funds a rural 

road programs. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Interesting, Minister.  Well I think we'll 

attack this a different way.  We'll get at some specific issues.  

Maybe we can find out where the 62 million is getting spent by 

going about it that way. 

 

In February of this year, Minister, Doug Archer, the mayor of 

Regina, and the entire Regina Council, expressed concerns 

regarding the department's plans to build a series of bypass 

roads that would cause a great deal of commercial traffic . . . 

And this traffic would be caused to be diverted around the city, 

I take it, and completely bypass the city.  Now the concerns of 

course being expressed that this would sort of rob 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

the city of people attending into the city to buy the things that 

they buy as they come through, and there might be some 

serious economic spin-offs that would be lost as a result of 

those kinds of construction bypasses. 

 

So what is your plan with regards to those bypasses?  Are you 

still planning to go ahead with them, and if so, perhaps you 

could give us a brief outline of what they would be entailing 

and how they would work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

Transportation studies are done around major communities on 

an ongoing basis.  For example, there was one just completed 

in North Battleford, Saskatchewan, because as you know, as 16 

is twinned, North Battleford has some concerns about how their 

transportation system will look like.  The study by Reid 

Crowther actually had two options in the case of North 

Battleford -- one was a bypass and one was a direct route 

through the city, pretty much as to where Highway 16 travels 

now.  With consultation with the community, Reid Crowther 

decided that probably the best option was directly through the 

city on the existing route. 

 

So that's exactly what's happening in Regina.  There is a study 

because of the transportation needs around Regina, but 

certainly there will be consultation with the city, with the 

people of Regina, before any decision will be made.  It's a 

long-term study to look at the needs of the future. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So I take it, Minister, that you wouldn't be 

planning on doing that this year then, probably, or next.  It'll be 

something that you'll decide as you're going along, and you're 

going to do these consultations with the mayor and his council 

as you go along.  Will you be doing that directly at all yourself 

or will you allow this study group that you're . . . I think you 

implied you're appointing some people to a study group to 

study this out.  Will they be doing it all or will you get directly 

involved yourself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Certainly, through you, Mr. Chairman, I 

am not an engineer so I will certainly not be involved myself.  

Reid Crowther will be doing the study in consultation with the 

community and the Department of Highways, and it's a study to 

look at the next 10 years of the transportation needs of the city 

of Regina. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Minister.  I'm 

sure that the fathers of the city of Regina and other cities 

throughout the province will be listening very carefully to how 

you're planning to conduct this process. 

 

I know that we talked about the serious problems that you have 

trying to finance your department last Friday, and having 

thought about that over the weekend, I feel nothing but 

sympathy for you as a minister because it is a reality that the 

Department of Highways has been cut very significantly in 

dollars to work with.  And I'm seriously concerned that you 

may not be able to do the job that is necessary to be done.  I 

therefore am suggesting to you that everybody in this province 

should write a letter to your Finance minister pointing out that 

highways do need to have some consideration in the budgetary 

process. 

 

I think that when I looked over the figures, it seemed that you 

were proportionately cut back far more over the years in the 

Department of Highways than many of the other departments 

have experienced.  And I won't restrict that simply to the last 

two years.  I'll go back for several years and let the shoe fall on 

who it may, the truth of the matter being that Highways has 

suffered cut-backs to finance other pressing matters for a 

considerably long time. 

 

And we do have some very serious repercussions that are going 

to result from that and those repercussions being, of course, 

that some day we're going to find ourselves with just a huge 

amount of road repair to do and a whole lot of rebuilding to do 

that we simply won't be able to afford, and we're going to have 

to actually maybe go ahead with some of the ideas that were 

talked about before where we may have to just close highways 

down and block them off and say, no longer fit for use.  And 

that worries me, and I'm sure it worries the people of 

Saskatchewan because we have so many miles that need to be 

taken care of. 

 

And just for the record, I wonder if you would have your 

officials look up the numbers of miles of highway that we do 

have.  I know that you'll have that on the tip of your fingers 

there.  How many miles of highways do you have in your 

jurisdiction that you have to take care of?  And with this 

budgetary figure that you mentioned earlier, how many dollars 

do you have per kilometre to maintain our highway system in 

the province?  I want to know if that is a realistic kind of thing 

that we're looking at or if we are in the kind of serious trouble 

that some folks have indicated to me that we might be in. 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you for the question, through Mr. 

Chairman.  As you are well aware, we have a $6 billion road 

infrastructure in the program.  About four and a half billion 

dollars of that is highways.  We have 25 per cent to 30 per cent 

of the highway network in Canada. 

 

Our priority of course at this time is to preserve and maintain 

that infrastructure.  Do we need to add to it?  Certainly there 

are certain areas that we need to look at, and that was brought 

up on Friday by yourself, the twinning of some of the 

highways.  There's roads in the North like the Athabasca road.  

So there has to be some addition to our infrastructure.  But 

certainly our goal is to priorize maintenance and preservation 

of our existing system. 

 

There are 26,000 miles of highway that has blacktop, either 

thin surface or better surface.  And so if you divide 26,000 

kilometres into the $62 million budget, I guess, you sort of 

know what it is per kilometre that we have to spend this year. 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Minister, my shorthand figuring isn't all that 

quick, but I'll get a calculator out here in a minute.  But 

seriously that looks like you're cutting it pretty thin to try and 

keep things going.  And of course we've heard from the budget 

time this year on talk about how different departments are 

taking cut-backs in manpower and so on, and you alluded to the 

numbers that were being cut back in the Department of 

Highways last time we discussed this matter. 

 

The reality is though that folks are concerned that we don't 

have enough crew left in the province to properly maintain the 

highways system.  So having said that, and recognizing that we 

do get crises situations occasionally -- more often in the winter 

than any other time of course -- but do you have any 

contingency or backup plans where you can draw on 

workforces from other areas or anything that we can do to 

comfort people that crises situations can be taken care of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you to the member's question.  

Again I want to say that the reduction in budget has not 

affected the preservation and maintenance which is our goal.  

The cut-backs were actually in adding to the infrastructure. 

 

People are very understanding in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I hear from them every day, and they are saying 

that our highways are as in good a condition as can be 

expected, and they actually commend the Department of 

Highways and the maintenance crews in our province.  They 

understand the financial restraints that we're under and are 

very, very understanding. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I can appreciate your answer, Minister, 

because I guess I wasn't really clear.  But I was sort of 

wondering whether you have any kind of contingency plans or 

agreements, formal or informal, with rural municipalities, for 

example, or maybe with urban municipal people to hire their 

equipment and that sort of thing, to go out onto the highways if 

you happen to have an emergency situation.  Do you have any 

kind of contingency plans of that nature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the 

member opposite.  We have worked some arrangements in the 

past, and we always have our mind open but we don't see any 

real need for it at this point in time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  Well I'm aware 

that in the past municipalities have been hired to go out and do 

emergency snow removal and that sort of thing.  And 

considering that we've heard from SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), and some of our own 

constituents, and other people from around our province who 

have great concern over the department's dramatic cut-backs 

and the numbers of rural highway crews, especially out in the 

miles and miles of miles and miles that we have in this 

province.  We had reports in the media, for example, that have 

your department cutting numbers of crews from 280 from 130 

and that . . . I think I have a note that says it was reported in the 

Leader-Post on November 9, 1994. So maybe they were wrong 

and maybe you need to correct that. 

 

But the reality is that folks out in the country, where we have 

miles of roads that need to be taken care of, are quite concerned 

that if we cut back all these crews even further . . . And we've 

had a track record in the past where municipalities have had to 

be called in to plough snow for the Department of Highways 

and to keep the roads open in the wintertime. 

 

And just one little thing that happens to have occurred when I 

was heading home on the weekend.  There was a great, gaping 

hole in the pavement on No. 1 Highway -- nobody's fault, it's 

just one of those things that happens in the spring -- but there 

was great, huge chunks of asphalt laying up on the road.  And 

we had to do a snake trail through them with the car, bounced 

over a few and some weren't so lucky and the guy was sitting in 

the ditch over there.  It was all fixed up the next day. I had 

occasion to be back on the road again the next morning.  And I 

give full credit to the people in the department for getting those 

things corrected in a hurry. 

 

But the reality is that you can get a lot of that sort of thing 

going on.  In the springtime you may end up with a shortage of 

crew.  So we really seriously think that you should reconsider 

your position of back-up crews and comfort the people by 

agreeing to get out and make some deals with municipal people 

or whoever it takes, maybe private contractors, to have them on 

call. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you. Through Mr. Chairman, 

certainly we've looked at the maintenance crews and studied 

the efficiencies of the crews.  In fact we've looked at a lot of 

efficiencies in Highways.  For instance, we are contemplating 

allowing our signs to be left on the highways for an additional 

two years, which will be quite a savings.  We're looking at 

building snowploughs right in the province of Saskatchewan, 

which will save us another $160,000. 

 

And in fact, sir, we're looking at taking the minister's picture 

off the highways map, which is kind of disappointing to myself 

but which will save the taxpayers of this province quite a sum 

of money, especially if we can look at selling advertising in 

that place.  But I want to say that there is no plans to change the 

highways crew.  We will continue to look at efficiencies in the 

system. 

 

You speak of cooperation.  It was interesting at the SARM 

convention that I met with a lot of municipalities that suggested 

we talk to each other, to private industry, to see if we can come 

up with some partnerships in regards to roads in a particular 

region, and we certainly will be meeting with those 

municipalities. 

 

As far as the hole you hit on No. 1 Highway, certainly let me 

know where it was and I will certainly be more than happy . . . 

or have my department officials look into that. 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Minister.  I really do 

appreciate that, but the road was fixed the next morning and 

that one's taken care of. 

 

I wanted to talk to you a little bit about the federal program and 

whether we have any chance of getting that expanded.  Now I 

heard some talk about that there was some things up North that 

were cut back and that sort of thing.  Maybe you can enlighten 

us about that and give us a bit of insight as to whether or not 

you have negotiations going with the federal government to 

initiate some further plans for:  No. 1 Highway of course would 

be the first one to come to mind; the Yellowhead trail would be 

the second one; the Red Coat Trail of course would be the third 

one.  And then of course, you know, how the priorities of our 

roads go as far as federal relationships are concerned, and sort 

of interprovincial travel and those kinds of things.  So where 

are we at with those kind of deals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I'm not quite clear of the question, Mr. 

Chairman, but I believe it's to do with the strategic highway 

improvement program which was signed last year.  That's the 

program where it's cost-shared between the federal and 

provincial government.  We were able to sign a deal for $70 

million which included some of the twinning of No. 16 -- about 

half of the $70 million will be used there.  There is work on 

No. 1 Highway.  There was some last year and there will be 

more this year.  No. 7 as well is another highway that's under 

SHIP (strategic highway improvement program) program; No. 

11 as well.  So there are a number of projects under the SHIP 

program. 

 

We certainly would like . . . and we will continue to be talking 

with the federal government as to some type of national 

highways program.  There is a considerable amount of 

highways in Saskatchewan that are of a cross-Canada nature, 

and we believe that the federal government should certainly 

participate in the upkeep and the enhancement of those roads, 

and we'll continue to work that. 

 

Our budget . . . with 3 per cent of the population in Canada, and 

our tax base, we just cannot afford to fund major highway 

programs like No. 1 Highway or like 16 on our own, so we'll 

continue to work with the federal government in that regards.  

And I'm certainly glad that you realize how good our 

maintenance staff are in your area to have that hole fixed the 

next day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman. I wonder, Minister, if you 

could tell us some of the percentage figures of the traffic that 

comes through our province that uses those highways that 

interconnect Manitoba and Saskatchewan and Alberta and, of 

course, the flow from north and south a little bit.  Are there any 

studies done or do we do any road counts or anything to try and 

determine what percentage of the traffic on, say No. 1 and the 

16 highway and the Red Coat Trail, what percentage of the 

traffic on there would be out-of-province traffic or people from 

the province leaving to go to other provinces?  In other words, 

sort of a federal responsibility that we could tie to it in a 

negotiating process. 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

member opposite, what I can do is send you a copy of the map 

that has the traffic counts for the whole province which might 

be very handy.  But, like No. 1 for instance, the average daily 

traffic count at the Alberta border is 2,050 vehicles per day.  

And if we go to the Manitoba border, the count there is 2,020.  

On No. 16 at Lloydminster it is around 1,700 vehicles per day, 

and at the Manitoba border it's approximately 1,400.  So I'm 

not sure if that's the figures you are looking for, but that's the 

count on the Manitoba border side and the Alberta border side.  

Now how much of that is through traffic because, of course, 

some of that would be local traffic, I can't give you that 

number. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Minister, I 

wonder if we took then the count some place like at Regina or 

Moose Jaw and kind of compared it, would we get an idea of 

how much of that traffic then is local?  Is there any chance that 

we might be able to come up with some kind of a debating 

point or an arguing point that we can go to the federal 

government with and say, look, Saskatchewan's a big province, 

but we are accommodating traffic that is passing through our 

province, and therefore there's a federal responsibility to help 

us to finance these roads? 

 

I'm trying to build an argument for you and for Saskatchewan 

to get some more dollars from the federal government to 

improve our highway system, because I honestly think the 

federal government does have some responsibility here, 

especially in view of the fact that they are seemingly going 

along with the abandonment of many of our railroads and 

causing even a lot more heavy traffic onto a lot of our roads 

because of the transportation of our goods and services where 

our railroads are being abandoned, and people have to use the 

only other alternative which is road traffic. 

 

We don't have helicopters big enough in this province to 

transport our grain around.  So I think we have to put together a 

package argument as a province that will somehow convince 

the federal government that they have some responsibilities in 

this area. 

 

Would you like to try and work on those figures a little bit and 

show us if we do have in fact some kind of an argument there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To the 

member opposite, it's quite interesting to note that on No. 1 in 

the Indian Head to Pilot Butte area, the average daily vehicle 

count is forty-two ninety, and between Regina and Moose Jaw 

is 7,100.  If we go to Saskatoon now on No. 16, the area from 

Colonsay into Saskatoon is about 6,500.  And the area from 

Saskatoon toward North Battleford, right near Saskatoon, is 

5,300. 

 

I do appreciate your support because I really believe that it is 

important that the federal government help us in this situation.  

The Canadian federal government, as I mentioned earlier, funds 

about 6 per cent of national 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1994 

highways in Canada, and that's the lowest of the industrial 

countries.  So certainly they have a responsibility, and I would 

appreciate your support. 

 

We are of course concerned, as you are, about rail line 

abandonment and what it's going to do, not only to the 

provincial highway system, but also to municipal roads in our 

province.  So any support that we can get from the official 

opposition would be greatly appreciated. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

just looking at the figures that you threw out now, it looks like 

you've got a couple of thousand traffic numbers on the edges 

by Alberta and Manitoba and 1,700 . . . 1,400 up North.  When 

you compare that with the sort of periphery figure that you 

gave us, it looks like that's about half the traffic as compared to 

that.  And then closer to the cities it gets to be about one-third 

of that amount of traffic.  So in reality we've got about between 

one-third to one-half of the traffic on some of these main roads 

that is attributable to traffic outside of our province just coming 

through. 

 

Now I know it's kind of a long stretch, but those figures seem 

to support a pretty good argument that the feds should be 

kicking in some dollars here.  And that's not even considering 

the offloading that we're going to get, as you say, as a result of 

the loss of our rail lines in our municipal areas.  And there's 

great concern about that out in the country.  And I think that's 

another issue that we definitely have to throw in the mix when 

we go to negotiate.  And I'm hoping that you'll do that.  I hope 

that you will take these arguments very seriously, do some 

good mathematics on it, and take it to the federal government. 

 

(2145) 

 

I'm also concerned whether or not . . . I've got two more areas 

here.  First of all, the one of interstate highways in the United 

States.  The American government obviously has taken 

responsibility for its country at a federal level, and they've built 

an interstate highway system, and the federal government has 

put an awful lot of money into that.  And I'm sure you're aware 

of the fact that in their transportation system, the American 

military puts an awful pile of money into the Mississippi River 

system so that grain can be moved practically free of charge at 

the military's expense. 

 

Unfair subsidizing of transportation -- when they compare their 

transportation costs to ours in some of these negotiations that 

go on, but just something for you to think about.  I'm sure that 

you already know about, but to refresh your memory, that those 

kinds of things have happened to our neighbours in the South 

and they take their responsibilities very seriously down there at 

a federal level.  Maybe we can make those arguments with our 

federal government as well. 

 

The other area of concern I have is whether or not you've given 

some consideration to the possibility that we can tie a federal 

responsibility to our road structures as a result of the need for 

health care.  We 

see more and more the need to centralize our health care.  Your 

government has worked very long and hard to a lot of detriment 

to some folks, I guess, or at least they think so. 

 

But the reality of -- you know whether we agree with the 

program or not -- the reality is that we are centralizing our 

health care, and that means we have to get patients from rural 

areas into central locations if they're going to get emergency 

care or health care in a lot of cases.  So how do we get them 

there?  Well we don't have this fleet of helicopters that one 

Reggie Gross talked about some years ago, and maybe it wasn't 

all pie in the sky.  But I remember people thinking, you know, 

it was very expensive and we couldn't do it.  And we don't have 

it.  That's the reality. 

 

We do have roads though, and we do have ambulances, and if 

we're going to centralize our health care because of all the 

reasons that we've heard -- I know many people on your side 

have made the argument that downloading from the federal 

government has caused us to have to do a lot of these terrible, 

hurtful things to our people in the province -- so maybe we can 

tie a responsibility of road upkeep for health care to the federal 

government as well, and maybe we should be lobbying for 

some dollars to fix up our highway system on the basis that 

they're causing us the problems of keeping our roads up, so that 

we can get our people into the hospitals and that sort of thing. 

 

And maybe I'll let you comment on that sort of round of 

discussion before I go into some more of the actual facts and 

figures here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

member opposite.  We of course have made all the arguments 

to the federal government and we will continue to do so.  I 

think it's really important to look at the economy of 

Saskatchewan, what's happened in the last year or two.  Grain 

movements, as you mentioned earlier, used to be short 

distances.  I know when I was on the farm probably we had to 

deliver our grain 16 miles perhaps, or 10 miles, to an elevator.  

Now lots of those trips are 150 kilometres or more. 

 

We look at the oil industry and how it's picked up in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  In many areas the municipal roads, 

as well as the highway system, are getting tested because of the 

additional oil activity in the province.  I know in the 

Kelsey-Tisdale area, for example, lumber is of good value right 

now and the mills are very busy, and the lumber industry is 

doing well, but it is a test on the road system again.  So we will 

continue to work on maintenance and preservation of our road 

system, and any federal help that we can get would certainly be 

appreciated. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well, Minister, 

somebody has informed me that if I don't get busy with my 

questions, I'll have to shut the lights out here tonight, and I 

don't know where the switch is.  So I want to get right down to 

. . . One of the articles I read in the Leader-Post here, on 

March 12, 1994, and it says there that apparently there's been a 

withdrawal of 



March 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

some money.  And I'd like to know what the current status of 

the plans are for a road from Points North Landing to Black 

Lake, now that the $15 million federal funding for this project 

has been withdrawn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the 

member opposite.  Originally when we're dealing with the 

federal government, the offer that was on the table was about 

$14 million.  They requested that the province match that.  

Their $14 million was actually savings that would be made, or 

part of it was savings that would be made because of the 

dredging costs on the Alberta side of the border to supply 

barges to the communities on Lake Athabasca.  Since that time 

the federal offer of course, has dropped dramatically.  They're 

now at 6 million, or they were at 6 million, and then finally 

they were at zero.  We are continuing to discuss the Athabasca 

road with the federal government because we think it's 

important not only to the people of the North, but to the 

industry in the North as well as tourism. 

 

Our last proposal to them was that, if the federal government 

did fund the road, that we would look after the maintenance of 

the road and slowly upgrade that road to an all-weather road.  

The cost of that is about $15 million.  The cost of maintenance 

is approximately $1 million per year.  So if we maintain that 

road for a period of 15 years, our contribution would be $15 

million. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was trying to 

put together the thoughts that concerned that whole process, 

Mr. Minister.  It seems like you've been sort of -- I don't know 

-- shot down I suppose or . . . I don't know.  What's the word 

when somebody makes a deal with you and then backs out and 

tries to stick you with all the costs and tries to manipulate the 

process so that over a period of time the people of a province 

end up caught paying for the whole project through some kind 

of manipulation.  It makes me wonder what's going on up there. 

 

So I'm hoping, Minister, that -- if I understand this right -- I'm 

hoping that you can get back to the negotiating table with those 

folks and get this thing straightened out.  I've never been up 

there so I have no personal idea just exactly how this project 

would work.  But it obviously seems important enough that 

people have talked about the economic spin-off for the whole 

province as a result of opening up certain areas of the North for 

trade and industry and employment and all kinds of things.  

And certainly, Minister, we do need a lot of jobs in this 

province.  And if there's an avenue up North for us to be able to 

work something out so that we can create something or get 

more manufacturing, more lumber, more whatever -- mining, 

fishing, tourism, anything -- it certainly holds well that we 

would bargain for that. 

 

So, Minister, I encourage you to get right up there and go to 

Ottawa if you need to, and I'll go with you if you have to, and 

we'll see if we can't smarten these guys up and get some money 

for the province of Saskatchewan and build some roads. 

Hon. Mr. Renaud: -- I'm not sure what the question was, Mr. 

Chairman, but I believe the reason that the talks fell apart was, 

as the member will know, about election time last year, and I 

guess the federal Tory government didn't want to make any 

commitments and now the federal Liberal Party seems like 

they're not that sure about making any commitments.  But I can 

assure you that we will continue to work with the federal 

government to try and get a commitment.  I know if the Leader 

of the Third Party was here tonight I would ask her for her 

help, but we will continue to work with the federal government 

to make this project a reality. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, Minister, I'm guess I'm sorry about 

that.  I didn't actually end up with the question I wanted to ask 

you which was of course: how would those federal government 

funding changes affect that road in the North, and would you 

be able to continue with it or not?  And so while you think 

about whether or not you can do something, you know, on our 

own to at least get the folks through up there to sort of coexist 

or keep living, perhaps you can enlighten us a bit more on that. 

 

I guess one of the things that we worry about in the province 

right now, Minister, is the roads that are going through some of 

the reservations.  Now I've had several calls myself, and I don't 

want to get into this at length tonight, but I want you to think 

about it because I know we're going to have to get together and 

do these estimates and considerations of highway matters in the 

future and this does pose something of a problem with getting 

these roads through the reserve.  So I wonder if you would 

think about that, maybe you want to answer tonight a little bit, 

and get a grander plan for another evening. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Rosthern: 

 

That by leave of the Assembly, that notwithstanding rule 3 

of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly, 

when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, March 31, 

1994, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, April 5, 1994.  I 

so move. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 p.m. 

 


