




















































Hansard: May 09, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  

 May 9, 1994 

 

2119 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it 

is my pleasure to inform all members this afternoon that the 

large group of students in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from Westmount School, in the constituency of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 66 students there -- 45 grade 8 students 

and 21 grade 4 students, Mr. Speaker.  They are accompanied 

today by their teachers and chaperons -- Kerry Kirkpatrick, 

Mike Murray, Grace Walton, Shawna Ferguson, Jerry 

Nekrasoff, Sandra Hammon, Olive Brummet, and Kim 

Longworth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in giving 

a warm welcome to the students from Westmount School in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

Assembly, a group of grade 7 to 9 students from Colonsay 

School.  I'm introducing them on behalf of my colleague, the 

member from Humboldt. 

 

They're accompanied by their teachers -- Les Eley and Laurie 

Ulrich -- and their chaperon, Brenda Templeman, and I'm 

looking forward to meeting with them later on in the members' 

dining room to answer questions; and I hope that they enjoy the 

proceedings today and ask all members to join me in 

welcoming the students from Colonsay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to introduce to you and to members of the 

Assembly five students who are seated in your gallery from the 

C.O.R.E. (Co-operative Optional Re-entry Education) High 

School.  They are here with their teacher, Don Gartner, and I 

want to welcome them here today for question period. 

 

I would say as well that I want to invite them to my office, 

room 322, after question period, where we'll have a chance to 

discuss the workings of the Assembly here today.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Thank You to Palliative Care Representatives 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Rarely are we able, 

Mr. Speaker, to acknowledge the contributions of individual 

Saskatchewan people to 

the formation of public policy, and I would like to do that today 

with respect to the new guidelines for the development of 

integrated palliative care service here in Saskatchewan. 

 

These individuals represent physiotherapists, occupational 

therapists, cancer workers, clergy, nurses, doctors, social 

workers, palliative care coordinators, pharmacists, and home 

care workers.  And the individuals are: Kam Chow, Rev. Ron 

Evans, Nancy Guebert, Miriam Hills, Felicity Hogg, Lorraine 

Holtslander, Kim Kerr, Luella Moore, Joan Sajtos, Brenda 

Thiessen, and Dr. Zachariah Thomas. 

 

These individuals, Mr. Speaker, helped to give Saskatchewan 

new palliative care guidelines, helped to put concrete action 

into the wellness reform that is being done here in this 

province.  And what better gift could we give those who are 

dying than a well-thought-out approach to how we will support 

them and their families and other care-givers. 

 

So on behalf of all members of this Assembly, I want to say 

thank you to those who are working in the area of palliative 

care to bring these guidelines to bear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battered Women's Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, May 9 

to 16 has been proclaimed Battered Women's Awareness Week 

by the ministers of Social Services and the Status of Women on 

behalf of the Provincial Association of Transition Houses. 

 

Following our debate in this House, this week gives us all 

another opportunity to reflect on the impact of domestic 

violence on women and children in our society, and to once 

again send the message that such behaviour is intolerable. 

 

The statistics themselves are staggering, and the reality behind 

the numbers is a discredit to our society.  One in four Canadian 

women is abused.  In Saskatchewan, it is one in five. 

 

To counter this violence, we have introduced The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Act and also allocated $4.4 million under 

the Saskatchewan action plan for children. 

 

As well, the Saskatchewan Women's Secretariat has developed 

an information kit on domestic violence.  And the Provincial 

Association of Transition Houses promotes public awareness 

through a series of necessary activities.  This is in addition to 

the heroic and unheralded work they perform on the front lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the theme of this week should be its own 

extinction.  Until that day comes, however, we must all 

recognize the need for the entire community to work for the 

elimination of violence. 

 

I ask all members to join in raising awareness of this 



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

vital issue.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Chinchilla Ranching 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  More economic 

development news from my constituency.  We have had reports 

in this Assembly on ostrich farming, on share farming, on hog 

exports to Cuba, and on a host of other innovative ways 

Saskatchewan people are using to boost their own income and 

also the provincial economy. 

 

I want to report on another enterprising individual who is 

helping us redefine the meaning of the word diversification.  

Gilbert Etcheverry, close to North Battleford but in my 

constituency, is Canada's largest chinchilla rancher.  Started by 

John Etcheverry, Gilbert . . . It is Canada's largest chinchilla 

ranch, started by John Etcheverry; Gilbert rides the range on a 

business that has been in recession in the past few years but one 

that now shows signs of recovering. 

 

At a recent sale in Winnipeg, the price for pelts averaged $50 -- 

that is double the average of two years ago and the demand is 

now outstripping production around the world.  The Etcheverry 

enterprise is well positioned to take advantage of the excellent 

prices.  This comes about because they have believed in their 

company and have handled their business well. 

 

I'm glad to see the Etcheverrys' ranch succeed because, as I 

said, it once again shows the innovative quality of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Team Canada Wins World Hockey Championship 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

recognize the efforts of a group of Canadian men who 

accomplished yesterday what no others have been able to do 

since 1961.  I'm speaking about Team Canada winning the gold 

medal at the World Hockey Championships in Italy.  Canada 

beat Finland 2-1 in an overtime shootout yesterday to strike 

gold at the tournament for the first time in 33 years. 

 

In particular I'd like to congratulate Kelly Buchberger, Rod 

Brind'amour, Joe Sakic, and Geoff Sanderson all of whom 

played junior hockey here in Saskatchewan and all of whom 

played a big role in Canada winning the gold medal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Team Canada for once again proving that we're 

truly the best on ice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan's Population 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, once 

again today we are bringing questions from Saskatchewan 

citizens to the Legislative Assembly.  And today my question 

comes from a Mr. Abe Cottrill of Caronport.  And his question 

is: Mr. Premier, what are you trying to do about the negative 

population growth which is threatening Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to 

the member opposite that the issue of population in 

Saskatchewan is one that . . . the debate on population has been 

going on for many, many years; as the member asking the 

question will know, that while he sat on the government side 

between 1986 and 1991 the population of Saskatchewan 

dropped very dramatically.  He will also know that it has now 

balanced out and basically is stabilized at just a touch over a 

million people, and in fact we're hopeful that over the next and 

coming months, that the population of Saskatchewan will start 

to edge up again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tax and Utility Rate Increases 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier comes from a Mr. E.A. Boston from Kipling.  And his 

question is this:  Mr. Premier, you promised utility rates would 

not rise, so why are the rates going up when the utility 

companies are making such a profit?  Also, I want to know why 

you promised no more PST (provincial sales tax) and no tax 

hikes for Saskatchewan residents, and yet both have increased 

and we are getting less for our money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank the 

member for the question.  The utility rates in Saskatchewan are 

based on the cost of producing the resource that we're selling, 

whether it be electricity or natural gas or telephones, and that's 

what they're based on. 

 

We expect all the utility companies will be running in the black 

and will be producing a profit, Mr. Speaker, so they can also 

help in getting the finances of Saskatchewan in order.  So that 

when the utilities go up, it's not because of some whim or wish 

that somebody wants utility rates to go up.  There's a good, 

solid reason for raising utility rates, and that is to keep the 

companies viable, to pay for the resource, and to keep the 

province viable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Use of American Health Care 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

Premier as well, and it comes from Arthur Floer of Minton:  Mr 

Premier, I want to know why the people living along the United 

States border cannot continue using the American doctors and 

hospitals that are 25 minutes away.  Our Saskatchewan 

hospitals and services are one and a half hours away.  And all 

we ask is that the same rates as you pay in Saskatchewan are 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

paid to them.  We'll pay for the rest, they suggest. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as much as possible we 

encourage people to obtain their health care in Saskatchewan at 

Saskatchewan facilities and with Saskatchewan physicians.  In 

situations of emergency, however, there are special provisions 

made if people want to get services in the United States or 

something of that order. 

 

I want to indicate to the person who wrote the letter that it is 

very important that we keep our health care system affordable.  

And in order to keep it affordable, we must use Saskatchewan 

services as much as possible.  There is recognition for 

compensation when there are emergencies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tax on Maintenance Payments 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question to the 

Premier comes from Tina Durbin from Fleming.  And Tina is 

asking the Premier: based on a recent court decision that taxing 

child maintenance payments is discriminating against single 

parents, I want to know what your government is intending to 

do and when. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

question from the member on behalf of his constituent.  I want 

to say that this being a federal matter obviously there are 

ramifications that may come back to the province.  We're 

looking at it and we'll be able to give you a report once the 

analysis has been done.  But at this point it's far too early to 

know what the ramifications might be given the fact that it's a 

federal matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Social Assistance Policies 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have one more 

question to the Premier.  This question comes from Anne King 

from Saskatoon.  And Anne King would like to know: Mr. 

Premier, I would like to know what reasoning lies behind the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) social welfare policies.  Are 

workers at the local level allowed to use their own judgement, 

and if so to whom are they accountable? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you.  I want to thank Mr. King 

for the question. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Nan . . .  I'm 

sorry, Mr. Nan for the question.  As I understand the situation, 

having been the former minister of Social Services, when 

people in his position have difficulty with a tenant, for instance, 

who is receiving social assistance, they do have the opportunity 

to contact the local assistance worker to determine what may be 

done in order to assist, the landlord in this case, with a 

particular problem.  So I would encourage the landlord in this 

situation to continue to work with the social assistance worker 

in 

the Saskatoon area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cigarette Smuggling 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, you'll 

remember on Friday I asked a question about cigarette 

smuggling, in particular the case being tried in Melville 

involving two Peepeekisis Band members. 

 

The case, as you may be aware, Mr. Minister, has now come to 

fruition.  However, I would suggest that the results would be 

very unsatisfactory in the minds of most of the Saskatchewan 

public.  Despite the fact that the two individuals involved were 

found guilty of smuggling about $120,000 worth of cigarettes 

and tobacco, despite the fact that they were fined $50,000, the 

judge effectively told them that they will never have to pay this 

fine.  And I quote his comments:  He said: "But I'm not going 

to turn this court into a collection agency." 

 

Mr. Minister, this ruling sends a message to smugglers that 

they are under no obligation to obey the law.  What further 

action does the Department of Justice intend to take in this 

matter?  Is there anything your department can do to ensure that 

the penalties against these two individuals are enforced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question.  The member will know that this is a prosecution by 

the federal government under the excise and customs tax Act 

and not a charge laid by the provincial government. 

 

I know the member has a great deal of respect for my office 

and for me but he must know that even my powers are limited.  

I can't overrule a judge's decision.  I can't make a decision to 

substitute that of the judge.  Nor can I take any form of appeal 

action considering that it is a federal prosecution. 

 

Our system works in the way that it works.  Judges fulfil their 

function, as do I, as does the hon. member.  The judge here has 

spoken.  It's not up to me to second-guess his motives.  Nor is it 

within my power to appeal his decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Minister, I'm aware of the fact that this is a case of federal 

jurisdiction.  However, Mr. Minister, you're still the Justice 

minister in the province, the supreme justice officer in this 

province, and I think the Government of Saskatchewan should 

be setting some leadership. 

 

I'm not sure, Mr. Minister, if you happened to hear the Harasen 

line this morning, but I think there was some very interesting 

observations about justice that were brought forward.  This 

case on last week is certainly indicative of what's happening in 

our society.  And it 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that not only are the people of 

Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, but even our police 

officers are becoming frustrated, frustrated with the system. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, what this is saying. . . and it's sending a 

terrible message to the people across this province.  I'm asking 

you, Mr. Minister, what will you do to . . . and speaking to the 

Minister of Justice federally, Mr. Rock, and informing him that 

the actions that have taken place regarding this case in 

Saskatchewan are unacceptable and you will be pursuing this 

matter and asking for a clarification of the ruling here, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that it's clear, Mr. Speaker, that 

the member understands that there is nothing I can personally 

do in my capacity as the minister by way of appeal or by way 

of dealing with the decision of Mr. Justice Barclay. 

 

I will however pick up on the member's suggestion and I will 

contact Mr. Rock and be sure that this case is drawn to his 

personal attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one further question.  A few months 

ago when the federal government lowered cigarette taxes, the 

Prime Minister said they had to do so because they were unable 

to stop smugglers.  And we suggested that that was a complete 

abdication of their responsibility. 

 

And we commended you at the time and your government for 

not giving in to the pressure to lower tobacco taxes and for 

promising to crack down on smuggling.  I think that's what's 

really worried Saskatchewan people today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, the fact that the two individuals may walk away 

from the penalty that was imposed upon them, the fact that it's 

a crime and prosecution was done on the federal side, does not 

significantly take away or allow you to abdicate your 

responsibility. What I would like for you, Mr. Minister, is to 

indicate to the people of Saskatchewan what your government 

and what your department will be doing to really make it very 

clear to the federal Minister of Justice that these types of 

examples are not appropriate in this province, and that we will 

indeed stand up for justice in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I know that the member opposite and his 

party are of one mind with the government on this question of 

cigarette smuggling.  We think that the federal action was the 

wrong action, and we are on top of this issue with all of the 

resources at our disposal.  We also have the full cooperation of 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) in trying to 

ensure that cigarettes are not smuggled into Saskatchewan. 

 

The member will know that the charges in question date from 

1992 and were before the recent relaxation in tobacco tax at the 

federal level and in some of the 

provinces.  We are working very closely with the federal 

government, and especially with other provincial governments 

in western Canada, trying to stop the flow of tobacco at the 

Manitoba-Ontario border if possible, and ensuring that 

smuggling does not take place in our province. 

 

And I want to say to the member again, Mr. Speaker, that I will 

contact my federal counterpart, Mr. Rock, and bring this case to 

his attention so that appropriate federal action can be 

considered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question this afternoon is for the Minister of Economic 

Development.  Mr. Minister, you and I obviously have very 

different impressions of what is needed to protect 

Saskatchewan jobs.  But ultimately it's not important what you 

or I think, but what Saskatchewan job creators think. 

 

Your Premier struck a committee of business people to give 

him special advice on the economy.  Has the Provincial Action 

Committee on the Economy advised you that changing The 

Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards Act will be good 

for the Saskatchewan economy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would appreciate the 

opportunity to respond to the member.  As recently as this 

morning, we held a two-hour telephone conference with PACE 

(Provincial Action Committee on the Economy).  This is one of 

many discussions I've had with PACE members on the issue of 

the changes to The Trade Union Act and labour standards. 

 

As you know, in our document Partnership for Renewal, we 

very clearly stated out in the document that we would be 

moving on such things as occupational health and safety, The 

Trade Union Act, as well as labour standards.  In our 

discussions that we have had with PACE, obviously there have 

been many points of view put forward. 

 

But I think it's fair to say that over all, the belief is that with the 

most recent announced amendments to The Trade Union Act, 

as proposed by the Minister of Labour, along with the 

amendments now proposed on labour standards, that is the 

House amendments proposed, that there is general agreement 

that we are headed in a direction whereby, I might add, for the 

first time in Saskatchewan's history, on dealing with labour 

standards and Trade Union Act, that actually there has been 

direct consultation with both sides of the formula, that is labour 

and business. 

 

That's much more than can be said when the Liberals were in 

government and amended The Trade Union Act, or with Bill 

104 when the then Conservative government arbitrarily 

changed The Trade Union Act on consultation with only one 

side of the formula. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

And so this is how we're trying to balance dealing with 

business and labour, and we think we have got the proper mix. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in 

an article dated today, which is May 9, the May 9 edition of the 

Alberta Report, Mr. Les Dubé, a member of the Provincial 

Action Committee on the Economy warns, and I quote: 

 

 He will move his company's main warehouse from Saskatoon 

to Calgary if The Trade Union Act and The Labour Standards 

Act amendments succeed. 

 

End of quote. 

 

Mr. Minister, if one of the Premier's main advisers, one of your 

main advisers, will move his own company don't you think it's 

time that you accurately measured how many other businesses 

are going to take their jobs elsewhere? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to 

the member opposite that I haven't had an opportunity to read 

the report where she alleges Mr. Dubé to have made the 

statement. 

 

But what I can say is that there are a number of companies that 

we deal with on a regular basis; for example, this morning in 

talking to Dave Radford of Sears he made it quite obvious 

while he had concerns about labour standards when they were 

first introduced to the House, he made it clear that in our 

discussions with him that he is of the opinion that a proper 

balance has been struck and that Saskatchewan is a good place 

to do business. 

 

I think it's fair to say that the vast majority of business people 

in this province want to stay in Saskatchewan and will find this 

a perfectly good place to do business.  Not only that, there are a 

number of other companies looking, even as we speak, at 

moving to Saskatchewan and over the coming months we will 

have announcements to make that show that Saskatchewan 

does not stand out when it comes to labour law.  Obviously 

labour will not be terribly overwhelmed that there aren't 

anti-scab legislation in the proposed amendments that we're 

putting in. 

 

So what we have tried to do is find a balance that will meet the 

needs of business and labour, and I think in fairness, if the 

member were being fair, that she would see that this is a much 

better process than that used by the Thatcher government in the 

1960s or by the Conservative government in the 1980s with 

Bill 104. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, a 

member of the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy, 

your senior independent 

economic adviser, has been quoted as saying that the exodus of 

businesses from the province is not going to happen all at once, 

but it will be a steady process.  He says, and I quote, Mr. 

Minister: 

 

 These labour laws will just accelerate something which began 

when the New Democrats took over this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, your senior economic adviser is telling you that 

your policies are causing businesses to flee the province, and he 

implies that your government policies are the cause.  In fact the 

title of the article dated today is: "Businesses brace to flee 

Saskatchewan," Mr. Minister. 

 

In light of this advice, could you please tell the people of 

Saskatchewan whether or not you are willing to cease your 

labour Bills now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- In typical, old-style Liberal politics, 

Mr. Speaker, we see today the member opposite trying to stop 

Bills that will improve the working condition for men and 

women who work in this province. 

 

I can give you a guarantee that we will not be stopping, as you 

say, The Trade Union Act and labour standards, that is not . . . 

no intent.  But what I can tell the member opposite is this: that 

whether or not the quotes she's using are recent ones from Mr. 

Dubé, or when the Bill was first introduced, we'll have to look 

at that, but obviously we will want to see whether or not her 

statement is accurate. 

 

But what I can say as well, that in meeting with gas and oil 

companies in Alberta recently, within the last six weeks, they 

say that the reason that their portfolios are balanced towards 

investing in Saskatchewan, exploring for gas, is because of the 

lack of overregulation that they find in Alberta.  And in fact 

when it comes to hooking up new gas wells, where it may take 

18 months in Alberta, we're doing hook-ups in Saskatchewan in 

about 24 days to 30 days.  And therefore their investment in 

Saskatchewan is overbalanced as it would be with Alberta. 

 

So for you to stand there and say that everything is terrible in 

Saskatchewan and everything is rosy everywhere else simply 

flies in the face of reality, and you should try to get a grip on 

the facts of what doing business in Saskatchewan is all about 

before you make those outlandish comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cameco Trucking Contract 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 

Corporation.  Mr. Minister, it has been reported that Cameco 

Corporation has cancelled a long-standing arrangement with 

Siemens Transport & Service Ltd. of Saskatoon and has given 

their business to a company controlled by two of its own board 

members.  There was no tender involved in this 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

arrangement, which involves all of Cameco's northern 

transportation requirements. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, when a corporation gives a major contract 

to a supplier which is controlled by two of its own directors, 

wouldn't you agree that there is, at the very least, a perception 

of conflict of interest in this deal?  Would you agree with that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Cameco, as I 

mentioned in one other question period, is a privately owned 

company.  It was privatized by the members opposite, who are 

now asking the questions.  Cameco can make its decisions 

based on its own judgements, and that's what they're doing. 

 

They've made a decision, they're a private company; the 

management makes that decision with the approval of the board 

of directors, and this government has nothing to do with the 

decisions of Cameco.  And from our point of view there is no 

perceived or real conflict of interest here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan own 40 per cent of Cameco directly 

and another 9 per cent indirectly, through the federal 

government.  So our interests in this deal are acute, especially 

when you consider that two members involved were voted onto 

the board by the existing Cameco board; a board which your 

NDP government appointed five out of eight; a board which 

includes notable people such as Allan Blakeney and Nancy 

Hopkins.  Until that company is completely privatized by your 

government, you had better answer these questions. 

 

And as I said, the two principals of the trucking firm voted onto 

the Cameco board by your appointments have been given an 

exclusive and lucrative contract.  Can you tell me if you, your 

department, the board members of CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) or members of cabinet were 

involved in nominating or recommending these members to the 

board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to just 

run through very quickly how the members of Cameco board 

are elected.  There's a nomination process that takes place, and 

the three organizations or three partners -- that's Saskatchewan, 

the federal government, and the private shareholders -- 

nominate members or a slate of officers to a selection 

committee.  A selection committee then recommends to the 

board of directors a slate of 12 directors.  Since Saskatchewan 

is a 33 per cent shareholder in Cameco, we are entitled to five 

board members.  And five of those people are then selected 

from this slate, who are nominated by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Did our cabinet, did the department, or did I personally have 

anything to do with the nominations?  The answer is yes, I have 

something to do with the nominations.  We submit to the 

Cameco board a list of 

possible board members, and then the selection committee 

recommends a slate of officers to the Cameco board -- Cameco 

shareholders, I should say. 

 

Did we have anything to do with the awarding of the contract?  

The answer is no.  I read about the awarding of this contract in 

the paper, as the members opposite did, and this is purely under 

the purview of the management and the board of Cameco. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, are you saying 

that you had absolutely no knowledge of this arrangement with 

this trucking company?  I want you to be very clear.  The 

Cameco board has five out of its eight members, as you just 

stated, appointed by your government.  One is none other than 

Allan Blakeney.  And reportedly he has a special service 

contract with Cameco board.  They report to you; that is why 

they are there. 

 

Are you saying that the appointment of the same two 

individuals who control the new trucking company was just a 

coincidence?  Is that what you're saying, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Just to repeat again, Mr. Speaker, how 

these board members are selected.  Saskatchewan nominates 

people to a selection committee; so does the federal 

government; so do the private shareholders.  The selection 

committee then chooses 12 -- I'm not sure where the member 

gets eight from but there are 12 board members on a Cameco 

board -- selects 12 people to sit on the Cameco board. 

 

This slate of nominees is then presented to their annual 

meeting, and the shareholders either reject or approve the slate 

of officers.  They accepted this slate of officers.  And the two 

members in question that the member's referring to, one of 

them is a Saskatchewan nominee; the other is a nominee from 

either the federal government or the private sector. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, your answers 

aren't acceptable, Mr. Minister.  You are responsible for the 

CIC which has controlling interests on the board.  It is 

incumbent upon you to personally review this situation and 

report back to this Assembly. 

 

Taxpayers would dearly like to hear that there was no conflict 

of interest on the decision in the part of these two individuals 

when they made that decision on that trucking firm; that there 

was no political interference on your part or the cabinet's or 

anyone else's.  And we want to know whether you will 

undertake to give that review today, to provide that to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Speaker, I can unequivocally say that 

there was no interference and no conflict of interest from the 

Government of Saskatchewan on the appointment of this 

trucking firm to do the hauling for the Cameco Corporation. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

What happened internally is not our concern.  This is a 

privately owned company; it is run by a board of directors and 

a management.  They make the decision as to who does the 

trucking for Cameco. 

 

And just as an aside, Mr. Speaker, the company that got the 

trucking contract is an Alberta company who's moving into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Credit Union Act, 1985 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Bill No. 55 Removed from Order Paper 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like to make 

a Speaker's ruling. 

 

I draw to the attention of members that until recently this 

Assembly had two Bills with substantially the same purpose on 

the order paper --  Bill No. 55, An Act to amend the 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, under the name of the 

member from Shaunavon; and Bill No. 63, An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act (No. 2), under the name 

of the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 

 

According to Erskine May, 21st edition, page 468, and I quote: 

 

 There is no rule or custom which restrains the presentation 

of two or more bills relating to the same subject, and 

containing similar provisions.  But if a decision of the House 

has already been taken on one such bill, for example, if the 

bill has been given or refused second reading, the other is not 

proceeded with if it contains substantially the same 

provisions; 

 

I would also direct members to a ruling of the Chair of this 

Assembly on May 17, 1990 on the same question ruled in 

respect to Bills.  It was ruled that once the Assembly has given 

or refused second reading on one Bill, the Speaker then must 

prevent any further consideration of the other Bill. 

 

On May 5, Bill No. 63 received second and third reading.  

Consequently it is necessary that Bill No. 55 be removed from 

the order paper. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask leave of the House to introduce a motion to appoint 

the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion that Derril 

McLeod, Q.C., of the city of Regina be appointed on a 

permanent basis as the Conflict of Interest Commissioner by 

this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will recall in the last session of the 

Legislative Assembly, The Members' Conflict of Interest Act 

was introduced.  Implementation of this Act has been a major 

step forward in fulfilling this government's commitment to 

democratic reform.  It has been a major step forward in 

ensuring that violations of the public trust do not occur. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, takes a very clear and precise 

approach to a number of elements.  First of all, it clearly 

defines the concept of conflict of interest for a member of this 

Assembly.  Secondly, it sets out the duties required of the 

members of the Assembly and cabinet ministers to avoid such a 

conflict of interest.  Third, it establishes the Office of a Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner. 

 

The commissioner's role in the operation of the legislation is 

vital and I would like to speak to that role briefly.  Members 

will be required to disclose all their personal and business 

interests and those of their spouse and dependent children to 

the commissioner for use in a public disclosure statement. 

 

Members must seek the approval of the commissioner before 

participating in any government contract.  The commissioner 

may be asked to rule on potential violations of the Act and may 

conduct an inquiry for that purpose. 

 

I am pleased to note that this legislation was introduced and 

passed by this Assembly with the support of all members. 

 

I'm also pleased to note, Mr. Speaker, that in February of this 

year the Board of Internal Economy appointed Derril McLeod 

as Acting Conflict Commissioner until such time as the 

appointment could be ratified by this Assembly. 

 

We all know Mr. McLeod as a senior and well-respected 

member of the Saskatchewan legal community.  We are also 

pleased to have him presently serving the people of 

Saskatchewan in his capacity as the Freedom of Information 

and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

Following his appointment as Acting Conflict Commissioner, 

Mr. McLeod has met with each of the caucuses of the political 

parties represented in this Assembly to ensure that all members 

are fully 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

informed of their responsibilities under the legislation.  He has 

also been working to develop the regulations necessary for the 

implementation of this legislation later this summer. 

 

We are indeed fortunate to have had an individual of the calibre 

of Derril McLeod serve as Acting Conflict Commissioner.  I 

am pleased to propose that his appointment be made permanent 

as the province of Saskatchewan's first Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by making 

the following motion, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition: 

 

 That this Assembly hereby appoint Derril McLeod, Q.C. of 

the city of Regina, in the province of Saskatchewan, Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner pursuant to section 18 of The 

Members' Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's an 

honour for me today to rise in the House and join the minister 

in seconding the nomination of Mr. McLeod.  As the minister 

said, this is a move I think that all members welcome.  There 

are a number of issues that have arisen over time, Mr. Speaker, 

where I'm sure the commissioner will be able to help out. 

 

And I think it's also important, as the minister noted, that all 

members of this Assembly have the confidence in this new 

commissioner, that we do support it in a unanimous way.  

We've had the opportunity to have a visit with Mr. McLeod and 

I spent about an hour of time discussing various potential 

issues, and I think the caucus really appreciated his very frank 

answers.  When he didn't understand something, he said, I'll 

certainly take that under advisement; I'll get back to you. 

 

Mr. McLeod has made the endeavour that he will meet with 

each and every member of this Assembly and I think that's 

absolutely necessary to gain the kind of trust that the public 

would want in an officer of this Assembly performing those 

functions.  All of us understand in public life that you not only 

must be above any suspicion in matters, but you must be 

perceived to be.  And I think it not only in the best interest of 

the taxpayer but also the members of the House. 

 

So I join with the minister in seconding the motion and 

welcome Mr. McLeod to his new job and very much look 

forward personally to visiting with him as I'm sure all members 

do. 

 

And at the end of the day the process of democratic reform in 

this institution will be taken one step further.  And I hope that 

with this move toward more democratic reform, that the 

members of the 

government are prepared to also look at a number of other 

initiatives which I think would go a long way down the road to 

making the public feel more comfortable with their institution, 

their parliament, the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1415) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to speak in favour of this motion as well by the 

Attorney General, the member for Saskatoon Fairview, 

seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, appointing the 

Conflict Commissioner, Mr. Derril McLeod. 

 

Mr. McLeod has an exemplary reputation in our province and 

within the legal profession.  And during his 47 years of legal 

practice since being admitted to the bar, Mr. McLeod has 

developed a long and very impressive professional resumé.  He 

also shows a tremendous personal dedication to his community 

and is evidenced by his many years serving on the Board of 

Governors of both universities and on the boards of the Regina 

Pioneer Village, the Wascana Centre Authority, as well as SED 

Systems. 

 

This Assembly is perhaps most familiar with Mr. McLeod 

through his role as the Information and Privacy Commissioner, 

a role which he has served since 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that all members of this Assembly and 

especially the people of Saskatchewan will be very well served 

to have Derril McLeod responsible for the tasks that we have 

entrusted to our Conflict of Interest Commissioner.  I'm very, 

very pleased that this has happened today. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 28 -- An Act 

respecting Public Health be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Bill 28 

represents the rewriting of The Public Health Act that has been 

in existence in this province since 1909.  And of course that 

Bill has been revised on a number of occasions since that time. 

 

It is of vital importance that the health of our children and 

families are protected in our schools, workplaces, and homes.  

Each and every citizen in Saskatchewan 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

has a right to clean water, safe food, milk and milk products, in 

order to maintain healthy lifestyles. 

 

Regulating these substances also allows the government the 

opportunity to do as much as possible to control communicable 

diseases -- diseases such as hepatitis, HIV (human 

immunodeficiency virus), AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome), and others need to be suppressed and controlled as 

much as possible. 

 

Controlling non-communicable diseases must be a priority of 

every government in this country as well.  Each and every one 

of us has a family member or friend who has suffered from 

heart disease, cancer, diabetes, or other serious 

non-communicable diseases, and it's a terrible ordeal for the 

families of these people and the persons affected to go through.  

These are the non-communicable diseases that kill many 

Saskatchewan people every year, and it is important that we all 

work together to continue to prevent the spreading of these 

deadly afflictions. 

 

I've been in contact with Dr. Kendel from the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, and he informed me 

that his organization supports this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, there are 

some specifics that I would like to question the minister on in 

Committee of the Whole, but until that time, I see no reason 

why Bill 28 cannot be sent forward to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 29 -- An Act 

respecting the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, Bill 29 

allows for yet another commission to be set up by the members 

opposite to study.  They have set up commissions to study 

judges' salaries, commissions to study clean air, the Sask 

Pension Plan, store hours, the Crown Life deal -- and the list 

goes on and on. 

 

This government talks a lot about independent, arm's-length 

bodies of the government. In fact the Health minister used these 

very words to describe the Health Services Commission in her 

second reading speech.  Yet keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that 

these are the same people said that the commission set up to 

review judges' salaries was independent and their decisions 

would be binding on the government.  And the Saskatchewan 

government will probably wind up spending a million dollars 

when they lose that case in the Supreme Court. 

 

When decisions of the NDP commissions don't suit their 

political agenda, the recommendations of these independent 

commissions are cast aside.  We've seen it time and time again, 

Mr. Speaker. And there's 

another side to this coin as well.  When NDP ministers want to 

duck decisions like threats made by the Liquor and Gaming 

Commission to the Warman fire department, they say sorry, 

that's an independent branch of government and I can't overturn 

their decisions. 

 

Or when the Health minister is asked to review Interferon for 

hepatitis C sufferers, she says well that's not covered and 

there's nothing I can do about it. 

 

Well which way is it, Mr. Speaker?  It can't be both ways.  The 

government's news release dated March 7, 1994, states that: 

one of the objectives of health care reform is to make the best 

possible use of the resources we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that if the Health minister is 

serious about saving money, I can give her a couple of free 

suggestions -- suggestions that were already made to her by 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 

SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), and others. 

 

They say forget about Garf Stevenson's independent study on 

health board elections.  That could save you $200,000 right 

there.  Then hold elections as promised which would save the 

city of Regina $500,000 and the rest of the province and the 

city of Saskatoon another $500,000, and the list goes on.  A 

couple of million dollars could be directed towards proper 

health services just through these few, easy decisions. 

 

Now I'm sure some of the information compiled to date by the 

Health Services Commission has been very helpful, Mr. 

Speaker, but is it really necessary to set up yet another 

commission to review health services in Saskatchewan? 

 

In order for the commission to function, there was a research 

staff plus other researchers hired on a contract basis and the 

minister stated the cost for the first year was $610,000.  That 

was reported in the Leader-Post, February 21, 1992.  Mr. 

Speaker, that's a lot of money and it's important that the citizens 

of this province know just where that money is being spent and 

what they are getting as a result of that spending. 

 

When the former government's Murray Commission outlined 

its recommendations for the direction of health care in 

Saskatchewan, the current Health minister spoke loudly against 

it.  While in opposition the Health minister criticized the 

Murray Commission's finding roundly.  She said and I quote: 

 

 I do not like the Murray Commission's regionalization 

proposal.  I do not like that proposal. 

 

The Hansard of June 5, 1990. 

 

And she said as well: 

 

 . . . health care costs as spiralling out of control, and that's a 

phrase that we've heard a lot in the 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

last few years.  Yes, we've heard it many times, and it's all 

part of the PC rhetoric to try and get people to believe 

medicare cannot be properly financed and cannot be publicly 

funded without cut-backs, without cut-backs or some form of 

rationalization of health care services.  That's all part of the 

PC rhetoric to attempt to convince people that in the province 

of Saskatchewan that we cannot afford medicare as we know 

it and we have to make changes. 

 

That was in Hansard, reported June 5, 1990. 

 

She said there was no need for the rationalization, no need for 

any cut-backs or job losses, and that she did not support the 

Murray Commission in any way.  The current minister said 

that. 

 

I guess the minister has had quite a change of heart since her 

commission is headed by Dr. Stewart McMillan, the same man 

who chaired the Murray Commission's hospital utilization 

management system's task force.  Finally, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP have come to realize that the advice received a few years 

back was worthwhile after all. 

 

I will be having a number of questions that I will be directing 

towards the minister.  For instance, if the commission is to 

have input from all over the province, why are 10 of the 12 

individuals on the commission from Regina and Saskatoon?  

And I'm sure that the minister will be happy to answer those 

kinds of questions once we reach the committee stage. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I see no reason why we would 

want to delay it any further. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  For 

the member opposite's clarification, I wish to say the following.  

The utilization commission that is being established is nothing 

like the Murray Commission.  It isn't anywhere close to being 

like the Murray Commission. 

 

This is a commission that replaces the Health Research Board 

that was funded by their government and by our government 

for a period of time.  It's a consolidation of health research and 

has added the component of health utilization.  It is a 

commission that's established of people with very special skills, 

and that's why many of them come from the urban centres and 

from Saskatoon, associated with the medical college.  They 

have very special skills to analyse health services utilization. 

 

Now this isn't the only province with a commission of this 

nature.  There are many of them across Canada with health 

services utilization commissions.  The purpose of the 

commission is to analyse how health care services are utilized 

and whether or not we can use our health dollars more 

effectively.  To date, just on the thyroid testing alone that the 

commission did -- and that's only one of many studies it's done 

already -- we've saved at least a million dollars annually. 

They have put out studies in other areas that have generated 

huge savings to the health care sector because what they do is 

point out, for example, that this kind of testing should only be 

done under this criteria. 

 

This information is sent out to the medical profession and to 

others.  And as a result they don't continue to test unnecessarily 

or in cases that may not be appropriate.  As a result there are 

savings and the patient gets a higher quality health care because 

we know that people shouldn't be tested unnecessarily. 

 

That's just one of the kind of things this commission does.  It 

does not do as the member opposite suggests, go out about the 

province and talk to people.  That's not the purpose of the 

utilization commission.  Hasn't done that in the last year and a 

half; it won't do it in the future. 

 

It analyses services and determines whether they're being used 

more appropriately.  In addition, there is funding for this 

commission to do the kind of health research . . . and provide 

health research grants to particular specialists in the province to 

maintain certain health research. 

 

So to make an analogy between this and the Murray 

Commission is totally incorrect.  They're nothing at all like 

that.  In fact this body replaces a body that was already there 

under their government as well, but the mandate has been 

expanded. 

 

So I'm very surprised that the member opposite has sat in this 

legislature now for two and a half years, this body was put 

together over a year ago, and the member still doesn't 

understand what its mandate is or what it is attempting to do.  

So that I find very surprising that he wouldn't understand. 

 

As to the regionalization that he referred to in the Murray 

Commission, the Murray Commission regions were purporting 

to establish regions of 40 to 80,000 people.  Now the member 

opposite comes from a rural constituency.  He knows that his 

community would have been very upset if the Murray 

Commission had demanded a region of 80,000 around his 

home town of Eston or wherever he comes from in that 

particular area. 

 

We know that the people of Saskatchewan wanted to work in 

smaller communities.  Therefore the Murray Commission 

regionalization of course wasn't appropriate for Saskatchewan 

we felt, after consulting broadly with people across 

Saskatchewan, because the regions being proposed were so 

large. 

 

Now the members opposite have . . . the member alluded to the 

fact that we criticized the way they were handling medicare.  

And that is correct.  Because they had absolutely no plan as to 

how they were going to deal with the need to revamp the health 

care system and provide a better quality health care system in 

Saskatchewan.  They had absolutely no plan.  And we 

criticized that constantly when we were in opposition 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

What we saw under their government was simply cut-backs 

without any plan and we're witnessing that already in some 

other jurisdictions.  We see in Alberta, for example -- another 

Tory government -- major cut-backs without any plan, Mr. 

Speaker, for a better health care system down the road. 

 

Now Alberta, however, may be putting together a plan.  But the 

point is, is they've started out with that approach which was the 

approach we saw under the former Tory government and which 

we've criticized very roundly. 

 

But to get back more specifically to the Health Services 

Utilization Commission, I do want to impress upon the member 

opposite that this commission has also been stated to be if not 

the best, one of the best of its kind in Canada.  The contribution 

it has made to Saskatchewan society is already being 

acknowledged nationally; that this commission is of a very high 

quality, it has done some tremendous work, and it is considered 

to be if not the best in Canada, one of the best.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: -- I would invite the minister at this time to 

introduce the officials who have joined us here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  To my left, Mr. 

Chair, is Mr. Duane Adams, the deputy minister; to his left, 

Kathy Langlois, the acting executive director of management 

support services; immediately behind him, Mr. Rick Kilarski, 

acting executive director of finance and administration; Mr. 

Dan Perrins, associate deputy minister; Ms. Glenda Yeates, 

associate deputy minister; and Ms. Lorraine Hill, the senior 

associate deputy minister. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, and 

welcome to your officials this afternoon. 

 

We'll, I guess, deal maybe first of all with some unfinished 

business of the last opportunity we had to speak with you with 

respect to the global questions that we provided your 

department with prior to the budget, I believe it was. 

 

At that time you had promised that you would have those 

hopefully completed for the next opportunity, which I guess is 

now, this afternoon.  I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you 

would provide us with the answers to those questions. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We understand they've already been sent 

over to you, is that not correct?  This is what I'm being advised. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- No, Madam Minister, to my knowledge they 

haven't been sent to my office at least, anyway.  We'll check on 

that but to my knowledge we haven't received them. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay.  I'll check on it as soon as we 

leave, okay? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Madam Minister, there's a couple of 

very specific type items that I wanted to deal with first of all, 

and they come from . . . Actually there are two constituents of 

my own in fact -- situations that I think are of importance.  A 

gentleman by the name of Mr. Gordon Leach called my office, 

and I in turn called your office with respect to a situation that I 

think points to the need for some review of the health care 

system. 

 

Mr. Leach's wife has been waiting some seven months now for 

a hip surgery operation.  She was told originally that it would 

be scheduled for April, just past, and now they've called the 

Leach family and have told them that it will be some time 

before . . . an undetermined time before the actual surgery will 

be scheduled now. 

 

As I say, I brought it to the attention of your office directly, 

Madam Minister.  And I'm wondering if there's anything that 

you could report back this afternoon with respect to that 

particular situation, and I guess the larger issue of the extended 

periods of time people are having to wait in Saskatchewan for 

surgery. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the member opposite knows that I 

cannot deal with the individual case on the floor of this 

Assembly, and so I won't. 

 

Now with respect to waiting times for orthopedic surgery, the 

member opposite is also aware that I had commissioned an 

independent panel to look into that matter some time ago.  

They have reported, as I'm sure the member opposite is aware, 

and the report has been given to the Regina Health District 

Board.  My deputy advises me that the Regina Health District 

Board has been looking at ways of implementing 

recommendations in the report and have implemented a 

substantial amount of it. 

 

I understand that there may be some sort of reorganization of 

allocation of time, because the issue really comes down to 

allocation of operating time and bed time.  And it's my 

understanding that the Regina Health Board is not only looking 

into the issue but has been acting on it.  And hopefully this will 

help out with cases of this nature. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  And the second 

specific type of question that I have for you this afternoon -- I 

understand you can't respond to these things directly, but I 

wanted to . . . I guess these people had asked me to bring them 

up with you personally 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

and that's exactly what I'm doing. 

 

A gentleman from Eatonia, Saskatchewan, by the name of 

Erwin Jasman -- Mr. Jasman has been suffering with migraine 

headaches for some time.  The only medication that seems to 

be working for him is one called Imitrex, I believe it's 

pronounced.  And it is not currently under the formulary plan 

so he's having to bear the full responsibility of costs for it.  It's 

something in the order of $45 per dose of this drug.  He has to 

take something in the range of two a week. 

 

I guess the question that he would ask is simply this, is how 

long a period of time does it take before a drug is reviewed and 

then put onto the plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, for the member opposite's 

edification, I have been advised that the questions were 

delivered to your office a couple of weeks ago, so would you 

check with your office.  And we can get you more copies if 

they've been misplaced. 

 

Now with respect to the prescription, the drug Imitrex.  Now 

there are two times in the year that the committee puts a new 

drug on the list if it's going to go on the list, and that's July 1 

and January 1 in each year.  That process is completed twice a 

year. 

 

Now what happens as to what length of time does it take?  Well 

there isn't any set length of time because the committee reviews 

the effectiveness of the drug and whether or not this is the type 

of drug that should be put on the formulary. 

 

They will need information from the manufacturer.  They will 

then test the drug and review the information.  They may then 

need more information from the manufacturer.  So it will really 

depend on the particular situation.  So there isn't a set time for a 

drug within which it goes on or doesn't go on.  But the two 

dates that are available for it coming onto the formula is July 1 

and January 1. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I just wonder if 

this sort of situation is happening with increasing frequency.  

Are we seeing people being prescribed drugs that are not under 

the plan right now with increasing frequency, and if so, if that's 

the case, is there a need for the committee to meet more 

frequently than that to review these types of situations?  Or is it 

your opinion or your officials' opinion that it's adequately met. 

 

We've seen, I guess now, Madam Minister, a couple or three 

situations that I can recall in the course of this session where . . 

. Taxol is one of them, as you remember, and I just forget the 

name of the other drug, that were brought forward.  It seems to 

me that maybe the time frequency of the committee meetings 

isn't often enough to deal with this problem.  If it is indeed 

increasing in frequency, I just wondered if you'd comment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all I have been asked to point out 

that Taxol is under a different system.  It doesn't go under the 

drug plan formulary.  It is a drug 

to deal with cancer, so it's the Cancer Foundation structure that 

takes a look at Taxol. So it's into a different category and it 

goes through a different route. 

 

Now as to the drug plan formulary system, the drug plan 

formulary people meet once a month, and they revise the 

formulary twice a year, and it's at regular set intervals.  This is 

something that we enjoy in Saskatchewan.  Other provinces 

have longer periods of time or they're not at regular intervals 

before the formulary is revised . . . or some other provinces. 

 

So we believe that the system in Saskatchewan, which has 

always been this way and continues to be this way, is they meet 

once a month, and twice a year the formulary is revised.  And 

as to increased requests, no, we have not noticed any increased 

requests.  This is quite normal for people, new drugs to be 

produced or different drugs to be lobbied to go on the 

formulary, and it's reviewed systematically in that fashion. 

 

I do have a concern, however, with the increase in drug costs 

that we've experienced as a result of the drug patent legislation 

that was put in under the former Mulroney government which 

has shot the cost of drugs up right across the country. 

 

(1445) 

 

I forget what the statistics were, I forget what the numbers 

were, but I think when we took government it was 80 million or 

89 million in drug costs.  And even with reductions that took 

place in the first year, it would have gone up to over 100 

million just with the increases that came on from the drug 

patent legislation.  And we still haven't felt the second round of 

increases as a result of the most recent Mulroney measures. 

 

So we are concerned about that, about increase in drug costs 

and the fact that we now have to pay for brand name drugs 

when we used to be able to move to generic drugs much more 

quickly.  However, our formulary in Saskatchewan is 

considered to be very good and is often looked to as a 

precedent setter by other provinces.  We have highly qualified 

people on the formulary.  They deserve a lot of credit and 

recognition from the government and Saskatchewan people.  

They've been doing an excellent job. 

 

So we haven't noticed a particular increase in people wanting 

their drugs on the list, but we work with this every time the 

issue comes up and we target January 1 and July 1 as the dates 

under which we can achieve a change in the formulary. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- So as I understand what you're saying then, 

Madam Minister, there is no increasing frequency of these 

problems coming up where people are . . . we aren't seeing a 

flood of new drugs coming forward and therefore a need for the 

committee to meet more frequently. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm advised we don't have the statistics as 

exactly how many drugs are being reviewed now and how 

many before, but we don't 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

have a backlog and there's a constant flow of drugs through the 

system.  So there is no problem with a backlog.  And they meet 

once a month. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  Madam 

Minister, and your officials, greetings again. 

 

Just to review, when we were together last time we had spoken 

about the Department of Health mandate.  You'd expressed 

what was your vision for the department; we talked about 

department objectives and goals, department structures and 

processes, and some general administrative questions as well 

were posed. 

 

Just to continue with some greater specificity today, I'd like to 

talk with you about staffing.  The total staff has been reduced 

by approximately 35 full-time equivalent positions, but this is 

an overall total.  And I'm wondering how many employees 

have been hired in your department through the Public Service 

Commission in the past year. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The reduction has actually been 36.  And 

as to how many employees have been hired through the Public 

Service Commission, we don't have that information available. 

We would have to do a count by count for the whole year to 

determine that.  We can get the information if you want it.  It'll 

take a while for us to put it together. 

 

There is a constant recruitment that goes on in the Department 

of Health because we have so many people in the field.  The 36 

reduction is a net, after we've hired and people have left and so 

on.  Okay?  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, 

it's not necessary to have that information immediately, but it 

would be of interest to know, so if there is . . . I'm sure that 

you're gathering this information anyway.  We would very 

much appreciate you sending that to our office when you have 

it. 

 

I would like to know, when you gather that information, how 

many of those newly hired employees are classified as in scope 

and those that would be classified as out of scope.  How many 

employees have been transferred from in scope to out of scope 

this past year? 

 

And I'd ask to be provided with a complete list if I may, of 

those transfers including -- and I'll state this slowly so your 

officials can get it down -- by employee name; by department; 

by old classification or title; by new classification or title; and 

salary change, if any. 

 

And I will agree to this as well being provided with these 

details outside of the House, but I would appreciate an answer 

to the original question if I may, today, which is how many 

employees have been transferred from in scope to out of scope 

status during this past year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, we don't have that 

information immediately but we can get it, and will get it for 

you as soon as we possibly can.  If we can get it for tomorrow 

or the next day, we'll do that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  What I will do, I 

would just like to pose three questions then that may be in the 

same category as what I've just been putting forward to you, so 

if you're gathering this information it's all in the same ballpark. 

 

How many employees have been reclassified in your 

department in the past year through the Public Service 

Commission's reclassification process, and was the 

reclassification process initiated by the employee, by the 

department, or by the Public Service Commission? 

 

And secondly, could you commit to provide me with a list of 

all positions that have been reclassified by your department in 

the past year?  And that of course would be providing position 

number, employee name, department, old classification or title, 

new classification or title, and salary change, if any. 

 

And I am interested in knowing whether or not your 

department abolished any positions or terminated any staff in 

this last budget.  And if the answer to that is yes, when you're 

providing our caucus office with the information, if you could 

then use the details from that previous question and answer 

each one of those -- the position name, the employee name, the 

department, and classification, and that kind of thing as well.  

Is that doable? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We can provide that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  Madam Minister, I 

would like to move into the cost of severance questions on 

March 18, 1993, the budget date for the 1993-94 fiscal year.  It 

was stated that your government cut 291 government positions.  

The minister for the Public Service Commission has already 

confirmed that the cost of severance to those individuals was 

$2.8 million government wide.  I'm wondering if you could 

advise me, please, of the cost of severance to those employees, 

to the employees that are from your department. 

 

And I ask you to provide the following information at a later 

date.  First, the positions that were abolished, including the 

position number and working title; the name of the employee 

employed in the position at the time of abolishment; (c) the 

seniority or years of service of each terminated employee; (d) 

the amount of severance paid to each employee; (e) whether the 

employee has since been re-employed with the government and 

where; and (f) what has the domino effect been in the 

departments where staff were eliminated -- for example, how 

many jobs were reclassified and at what cost in order to absorb 

the duties of the terminated employees. 

 

Now what I will do is just reiterate then the question that I 

think could be better answered today, and the rest I think will 

probably have to be addressed in writing. 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

I'm wondering if you could tell us how much the severance cost 

to . . . payments to those from the Department of Health were 

in the past year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The total cost of severance for '93-94 was 

$377,455.  As to the other information, we will have to get it 

together in a package for you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm going to move to subvote questions 

now -- the first on administration.  Your officials have saved 

$115,000 in administrative spending; and could you tell me 

please how this was achieved and where one was able to save 

the money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The 115 million is a . . . 115,000 rather, 

was largely saved in reduced computer and related costs, and 

reduced travel and other miscellaneous costs. 

 

It is a balancing, however.  I understand that that's the net 

figure because there were some increases in some areas, but the 

savings were primarily in reduced computer costs and reduced 

travel and other miscellaneous. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  How have internal 

administrative services changed as a result of that savings?  In 

other words, are there any services that your department is now 

going without? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  I guess in a general way 

what we can say is this, is that the Department of Health is 

getting away from minute administration of the health care 

system and we're instead trying to use the time of our 

administrative officers to get involved with helping the districts 

set up their systems and work through the coordination that's 

taking place in the health care system. 

 

So we're moving more into district development time, as 

opposed to minute administration because we are trying to 

move to global funding for districts. We want district boards to 

take over responsibility for a broader range of health care 

services instead of just institutions.  They will go beyond that.  

And so much of our time is being taken up in working with 

districts as opposed to administering the health care system in a 

more minute fashion.  That is one of the ways that there has 

been a change in internal administrative services. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  The second subvote is on 

accommodation and central services and I note that the 

accommodation budget is going down by some $766,000.  

How has this cost reduction been achieved?  And I'm curious as 

well about the department operations and whether or not they're 

affected as a result of that size of decrease in the budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- That subvote was largely a one-time 

budget.  It had to do with developing the forensic unit and also 

with some reorganization within the department and it was a 

one-time vote and the reason it's not there is those things have 

been 

completed. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  So what you're saying is that 

the reason why the size of monies was in the budget in the first 

place was for a one-time project?  Okay. 

 

There was a charge for what's called capital operating that 

appears in the budget and it just seems like a contradiction in 

terms.  I'm wondering . . . in other words, capital costs, in my 

view, are usually different from those which are operating 

costs. 

 

Can you tell me what it means, like what this term actually 

means?  What was the spending for, and how was the money 

spent?  I'm just wondering how those functions are funded now 

as well.  I mean I was quite confused by that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well the member opposite may wish to 

get more clarification on this when talking to the Finance 

minister.  However I'll explain it as best I can. 

 

The capital operating is when the Department of Health pays 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) to 

do renovations or construction within government facilities.  

And so we paid a sum of money for the renovations pertaining 

to the forensic unit.  That becomes capital operating.  That's 

different from the capital that's referred to further on, because 

that is the money that we provide to district boards to renovate 

their health centre or to do other . . . the hospital in La Ronge 

and so on. 

 

So we distinguish it that way.  SPMC is capital operating, and 

the other capital is capital that goes to third parties to do their 

capital construction. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much.  The subvote on 

district health services and support, there's a $10 million cost 

reduction in the acute and rehabilitative services.  And on the 

one hand, I can imagine that there are a number of areas where 

costs rose, and then many other areas where there were cuts.  

Since $544 million is a substantial sum of money by anybody's 

standards, it's a substantial lump sum, particularly in a budget, 

will you tell me where the cuts came and where the savings 

were found? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The 9 million or 10 million that you're 

referring to is a . . . First of all there was a reduction in acute 

care funding that was announced, not this budget but last 

budget, of minus 2.8.  And then there was the impact of 

recently negotiated collective agreements.  And that forms that 

10 million. 

 

There was a further increases in district board budgets that are 

as follows: for example home-based and community services 

had a $3.5 million increase; emergency response services, 442 

-- 3.59 per cent increase; there was a rural health initiatives 

fund of 10 million; there was . . . and some other increases.  I'm 

having a little difficulty reading through all of this; there's 

writing all over it.  But I can get you all that detail if you wish. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

But the 10 million consists of acute care and negotiated 

collective agreements, and then there's increases in other areas 

such as emergency response system, rural health initiatives 

fund, home-based and community services. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'd like to take up the questioning now.  

How will the budget cuts affect rehabilitation services? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There have been no cuts to rehab 

services.  And in fact what we have moved to do is to provide 

direct access to physiotherapists, for example, which will allow 

patients to go directly to a physiotherapist, which will, first of 

all, provide easier accessibility but should also generate some 

savings in the sense that they don't have to go through a 

physician to get a referral to a physiotherapist. 

 

We have also established the rural initiatives fund of $10 

million.  And so district boards, when they're doing their needs 

assessment and their analysis of what the needs are, if more 

rehab services is shown as a need in a community that is of a 

priority nature, some of that funding could be channelled into 

that kind of direction. 

 

We also increased home care in community-based services by 

3.5 million, and some of those services are used with respect to 

the rehab area as well.  So there hasn't been a reduction in 

services; if anything, there's been a fairly substantial increase in 

the services that potentially could be available to the 

community. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  The proposed 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act, Bill No. 56, places a top 

priority for spending on rehabilitation, followed by replacing 

wage loss and then repayment for pain and suffering.  Yet your 

budget actually reduces the amount on spending. 

 

As you were describing, there are some places where you 

expect it to have savings to keep rehabilitation services at the 

proper level.  How will your department assist the 

government's goal of placing the priority on rehabilitation for 

auto insurance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, just once again, there have 

not been reductions in rehab services.  If anything, there's been 

an increase in rehab services.  And there is a potential for 

greater services if it's identified as a need within a district 

through the rural health initiatives fund of $10 million. 

 

As to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, the impacts of 

that legislation aren't reflected in this budget for Health.  

However, the Department of Health and SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) are having discussions and meetings on 

how to enhance programing with respect to The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act and what we can do in the rehab area 

with respect to that particular legislation. 

 

Now when that programing is put together, that would 

be increased funding that the Department of Health needs and 

would receive from SGI. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The budget for long-term care 

services, as you said, is going up 3.7 or 8 million dollars.  How 

will that additional funding be spent? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The money that was put into long-term 

care is for the purposes of maintaining the status quo and I 

think almost completely goes into collective agreements with 

the long-term care sector employees. 

 

Now the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission, if you haven't received a copy of "A Closer 

Look" which is a publication by them, is very useful in 

determining where the long-term care system will be heading. 

 

They did a very extensive report that indicates a number of 

things -- that the system, for example, presently does not 

necessarily meet the needs of the high priority cases as quickly 

as it should.  Because what was happening is that institution by 

institution, patients would be admitted to the institution.  So 

heavy care patients were sometimes being overlooked by the 

institutions. 

 

And what they've done in some of the districts, and I know that 

we will be urging all the districts to do this, is looking at a 

district-wide priority system where there's one list.  And when 

an institution has a vacancy open, the person at the top of that 

list goes in. 

 

So hopefully through health district boards we can coordinate 

that kind of service.  And that was on the recommendation of 

the Health Services Utilization and Research Commission, and 

that is in the process of being implemented. 

 

They have also stated that most level 2 clients, for example, can 

live independently with support from home care, and therefore 

suggested and were urging us to enhance home care funding, 

which we did, which we have done once again this year. 

 

They are doing or there will be, in conjunction with district 

boards, a long-term plan put in place for long-term care within 

the concept of a district.  What we need to do is use the beds 

that we have there more effectively.  Their title, for example, 

on this is: fewer beds, better priority system needed in 

Saskatchewan's long-term care sector. 

 

So the Department of Health, in conjunction with the district 

health board, in conjunction with the district health board and 

the utilization commission will be implementing some of these 

recommendations.  And I have an extra copy here which I'll 

send over to you. 

 

But there will be long-term plans for the long-term care sector 

in every district, and that's the game that we are . . . that's the 

plan that we are moving towards. 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

The purpose is, is to use home care and community-based 

services as much as we can; use the beds there that we have as 

effectively as we can; and make sure that those people with the 

greatest needs are looked after first. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for that.  Does this budget 

include capital spending for long-term care facilities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, there is some long-term care capital 

funding, and I'll just go through the list with you. 

 

The La Ronge hospital will be an integrated facility, so there 

will be some long-term care in there.  And this hospital was 

considered a priority because, as the member will recall, the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, because of complaints that 

were coming out some time ago, had investigated that situation 

and recommended that there be new hospital construction in La 

Ronge and that it was fairly urgent.  You may or may not recall 

that, but it came about two or three years ago, I guess -- maybe 

three years ago now, the investigation took place. 

 

The other long-term care facility that is being constructed is at 

the Foyer at Gravelbourg, and that became a fairly urgent 

matter because the fire regulations were being breached in there 

and there was some . . . a great deal of concern being expressed 

-- not a hospital, a long-term care facility. 

 

Moose Jaw and P.A. (Prince Albert) are the other two areas 

where there will be money go into capital for long-term care 

because in both Moose Jaw and P.A. we have moved from two 

hospitals to one; and in order to do that, there is certain 

construction that has to take place in order to accommodate 

moving from two hospitals to one hospital.  So in both of those 

cities we have funding for long-term care renovations or capital 

construction. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could you give me the amounts that will be 

going in this budget into those cities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- These are estimates.  And in '94-95 the 

La Ronge integrated facility is 5 million; Gravelbourg Foyer is 

4 million; Moose Jaw is 9.6 million; Prince Albert is 2.2 

million.  But I must indicate these are estimates and that is only 

what will be paid in '94-95. 

 

The total cost, in the same order, is La Ronge, 14 million; 

Gravelbourg, 8.5 million; Moose Jaw, 23.5 million; and Prince 

Albert, 9 million.  The provincial share is a portion of that, 

because there is always a sharing from the local communities. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The budget for home-based and 

community service has gone up $3.8 million which is an 

increase of 7 per cent.  Your government invented the wellness 

model of health care and has placed the emphasis on 

community-based health care, as you've described for us.  How 

has this increase in spending made it 

possible to reduce spending in acute and long-term care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The acute care funding, as you know, has 

been decreased by 2.8 per cent this year, and in the year before 

and the year before that, approximately 2.5 each year, on the 

average.  That comes to approximately $46 million.  So with a 

50 per cent increase in home care, over a period of three years, 

we have been able to deal with patients much more in the home 

than the way they were dealt with in the past, and there's been 

much more of a move to day surgery. 

 

Now all those savings in the acute care sector have not just 

been realized in shorter hospital stays, but there have been 

administrative cuts in the acute care sector as well, and other 

reorganization in hospitals themselves, you know, in terms of 

looking for savings.  We've been urging health boards to look 

for savings as much as they can in other areas, as opposed to 

simply moving . . . shorter hospital stays and so on. 

 

So there has been a saving of some $46 million. 

 

Now that's in actual dollars.  Of course as we know, the health 

care system, the rate of inflation has been 7 or 8 per cent on 

average in the past and it's been as much as 10 or 13 per cent.  

And in provinces where reductions weren't put in initially, the 

years that we were reducing, those increases were there.  So 

even though we've reduced it by 2.8 per cent, if you take the 

inflation rate into consideration, it's a larger reduction. 

 

So there's been a tremendous amount achieved by home care in 

this regard.  But there's more that can be done by home care -- 

much, much more.  We increased it over a period of three years 

by -- what was the percentage? -- $14 million, almost 50 per 

cent over a period of three years. 

 

We did it in this staged fashion in order for home care to be 

able to develop its programs gradually as opposed to getting the 

50 per cent in the first year, for example.  We were concerned 

that they may not be able to cope with that large of an increase 

and get the programs in place and make them effective enough.  

So it was done over a period of time and we'll continue to move 

in that direction as we evolve more services to the community. 

 

The other provinces are following suit now.  We're witnessing 

this across Canada in terms of developing more 

community-based services, more home care, looking after 

people as much as we possibly can in their homes instead of in 

an institution, not just because it's more cost-effective, but also 

because in many cases it's a better quality of care because 

they're better off in their homes instead of being in a facility.  

And many patients are indicating that they prefer, for example, 

to stay in their home if that is possible. 

 

So there have been savings generated, but we have done it very 

slowly unlike some other jurisdictions that have cut the health 

care budget much, much, 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

much greater in a shorter period of time.  We have attempted to 

do this over a longer period of time, to do it more slowly, to do 

it with a plan, to do it with a direction that's being set out; and 

to nevertheless make the system more affordable, make it more 

efficient, and still maintain quality services. 

 

And I think when health reform has been much more complete 

than it is right now that we will see a definite improvement in 

the quality of services because we'll be able to concentrate on 

delivering more appropriate services in our community and in 

our homes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, the rural health initiatives 

fund is the funding allocated to implement the new rural health 

board concept.  Is that correct?  How will the money devoted to 

that fund be spent? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There has been 7 million that has already 

been allocated to the districts.  And the purpose of this money 

is to make sure that services are available and programing as 

necessary for the residents of the district.  It was allocated on a 

population basis to the various districts. 

 

There's another 3 million that's available for province-wide 

initiatives.  And as needs are identified by districts and any 

suggestions come forward as to what sort of programing is 

required in a particular area, the department will move to make 

this funding available for the district boards. 

 

It's to help them to enhance services in their districts, to make 

sure that the needs of the population are being met, and to put 

in . . . It could amount, for example, to enhanced emergency 

response or it could be palliative care . . . well palliative has 

already been built into the budget.  Home renal dialysis, for 

example; a home renal dialysis program in the district.  If it's 

needed. 

 

So a needs assessment has to be done.  And if that's the kind of 

program that would be valuable in that particular district 

because there are people who need it and would access it, then 

they should present their suggestions and their 

recommendations to the Department of Health, and that's what 

that 3 million will be spent for. 

 

The palliative care is in the present budget, is it not?  That was 

my mistake; I'm sorry.  As you are aware, the Government of 

Saskatchewan has announced a province-wide palliative care 

program, which will be the first of its kind.  And there is 

already funding allocated in the district budgets to set up a 

palliative care program in their district and in each of the 

communities. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So the palliative care funding is separate 

from the rural health initiatives fund.  Okay. 

 

What is the difference between the health organizations and 

services subprogram and the rural health initiatives 

subprogram? 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, the health organizations and 

services are a number of third-party organizations that get 

funding from government.  For example, Camp Easter Seal, 

Continuing Nursing Education, Saskatchewan Alzheimer 

Association, Canadian Blood Agency, Personal Care Home 

Assessment, Canadian Transplant -- I'm not reading them all 

out -- but Canadian Transplant society, Catholic Health 

organization, Lions Eye Bank of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan 

Health-Care Auxiliaries Association, and so on.  It's a whole 

list of other organizations that receive funding from 

government. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could I have a copy of that list? 

 

The Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation is receiving an increase 

of two and a half million, which is an increase of 15 per cent.  

How will the additional funding be spent?  What programs, 

what equipment, what maintenance? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, in the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Foundation we have, as I'm sure you are aware, expanded the 

breast cancer screening program so it covers the entire 

province, and that is some $432,000.  Now women anywhere in 

the province, because we do have some mobile units for farther 

regions, can access breast cancer screening. 

 

There has been some capital equipment replacement funding 

which is 1.79 million and that is for expensive radiation therapy 

equipment for the cancer foundation's clinics.  This funding, I 

should point out, is part of the multimillion 7.9 million funding 

package that I announced on December 14, 1993.  The money 

will be used to buy four pieces of specialized radiation therapy 

equipment for the foundation's clinics in Regina and Saskatoon.  

This equipment was long overdue and our government has 

steadily been attempting to upgrade the therapy equipment.  So 

there is a $7.9 million funding package and this is 1.79 million 

in this budget applied towards that package. 

 

There was an in-scope salary adjustment of 112,000 and 

increased drug costs of 380,000 that were funded to the 

Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation also found some 

efficiencies of 200,000 for a net increase of 2 million 514 or 

15.54 per cent.  And of course the reason for that is that our 

government understands the priority that Saskatchewan people 

put on cancer treatment. 

 

And the members opposite there are shaking their head in the 

Tory bench.  The fact is is they never put this equipment in 

when they were in government, and I can remember asking for 

them to do it and it just wasn't forthcoming. 

 

But our government considers this a priority because we know 

Saskatchewan people, when they're facing the need for cancer 

treatment, are very anxious and we want to make sure that our 

equipment is updated.  There's still more that has to be done, 

but we're 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

steadily working away at trying to solve some of the problems 

that were brought to our attention by the cancer foundation 

when we took over government. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- The Provincial Auditor expressed some 

concerns about the members of the foundation.  Two have not 

been appointed as stipulated in the Act.  Three members 

continued in office beyond the period allowed in the Act.  I'm 

sure the minister responsible was aware of these concerns. 

 

Who represents the Saskatchewan division of the Canadian 

Cancer Society, and why has the member from the 

Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Cancer Society not 

been formally appointed and has only been allowed to sit in the 

meetings as a non-voting member? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm advised by my officials that because 

of the health reform that there was . . . they were holding back 

on making new appointments until we saw exactly how the 

cancer foundation fit into the picture.  And it's also my 

understanding that they have been processing names for this 

appointment but there's been some paper backlog, but that it's 

on its way at this point.  So I think the matter has been taken 

care of. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How does your department supervise and 

monitor the operations of district health boards?  What 

procedures are in place to share information, prevent duplicated 

effort, ensure value for money for all spending, and direct their 

efforts? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Structurally, the Department of Health 

has set up consulting teams for each district.  So we have a 

consulting team for a particular district and they work with the 

district on a regular basis -- virtually daily, is it not? -- on a 

daily basis with training and financing, and they share 

information with the district and require the district to share 

information with us. 

 

If there is something that we feel we need a report on, the 

consulting team will ask for a report and the district will 

provide it.  So there is a constant contact between the district 

board and the department consulting team.  So they're working 

together through this period of transition. 

 

The district boards have also . . . are required to be accountable 

to their districts.  And I outlined at the beginning of Health 

estimates a number of ways that that accountability is required. 

 

They're asked also to implement standards of care in service 

delivery.  The standards that have been set out, for example, are 

articulated in legislation that's there -- Hospital Standards Act 

and regulations, Housing and Special-Care Homes Act and 

regulations, The Ambulance Act and regulations, home care 

policy manuals, and so on.  So there's a whole range of 

standards and regulations that were in place before health 

reform and are still in place today, that district boards have to 

meet. 

And so they consult with us if they have any difficulty in 

implementing some of the regulations and we check to make 

sure that the regulations and legislation is being fulfilled, and to 

make sure that there's an adequate level of service throughout 

the province in all areas where the standards are stipulated. 

 

And as I pointed out, there is the accountability of district 

health boards to their district with public health meetings, and 

the need at one of these meetings to table an annual . . . a 

budget and a plan for the next fiscal year, as well as to report 

on the health status of the population. 

 

So there's information not just going between district and 

government, but also from district to the population and the 

citizens of the district, getting their input into the process as 

well.  I feel very positive about that development because, as 

you know, hospital boards in the past and other health care 

boards have not had to have public meetings.  In fact one of the 

criticisms I used to receive as opposition Health critic all the 

time was that people couldn't access information from 

hospitals. 

 

And so this is an attempt to remedy that and make sure that 

information is available to the public and for the public to have 

some input.  And I think that that's a positive development for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

(1545) 

 

The board also has to provide the Minister of Health in advance 

of each fiscal year with a detailed estimate expenditures of the 

board and the sources of any revenues and estimated revenue -- 

for example, from donations or whatever -- and the details of 

any proposed services or activities. 

 

So the district boards have to submit to the minister an 

indication of its expenditures and its revenues in advance of 

each fiscal year.  They also have to report on an annual basis to 

the minister on the board's services and activities and their 

costs and provide audited financial statements.  The minister 

may request from time to time continued separate reporting on 

a quarterly basis -- health outcome measurements, for example.  

Because one of the goals of health reform is not simply to 

deliver a health service but to look at health outcomes. 

 

Now the concept of looking at health outcomes has existed in 

the health care sector before but has not really been 

implemented by governments.  We have simply funded on the 

basis of the level of funding that was provided the year before 

and increased it and increased it. 

 

We are now asking people to look at population needs and 

health outcomes so that we target our money to those people 

who have the greatest need and those locations in the province 

where there is the greatest need.  And we look at whether or not 

the health care funding is resulting in healthier people and 

healthier communities.  That's what outcomes are all about. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

So the boards will be asked to communicate with us on health 

outcome measurements and improvement in the health of 

district residents.  That's very important because we want to 

make sure that our funding is being targeted to services that are 

resulting in healthier people.  So there's a great . . . I could go 

on at length but I know the member will have more questions 

so . . . I can, however, offer to provide you with more 

information on that whole area. 

 

But there is a mechanism for a lot of input between government 

and districts and district and the public, and in fact on a 

quarterly basis, my senior officials and myself and the 

Associate Minister of Health meet with the district boards, the 

chair, and the CEOs (chief executive officer) of the district 

board.  The Health department officials at the senior level meet 

with them on an even more frequent basis.  And then we have 

our consulting teams that are in constant contact with them, 

virtually on a daily basis.  So there is a real structure for this 

kind of input amongst all the players in the system. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Madam Minister, I'd be interested in any 

information that you can give to me to outline that process, as 

you outlined it. 

 

You speak of the district health boards being accountable to the 

public.  In what way are they accountable except in handing 

information on?  What if the public is not satisfied with the job 

that that district board is doing?  In what way are they 

accountable to them there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well clearly if the public is not satisfied 

with the way the district board is handling it, that will be 

brought to our attention and we will take a look at the matter 

and see if there's some way of it being resolved.  Where any 

local person has a complaint about what the district board is 

doing, first of all they should go to the district board.  And if 

they're not satisfied with the communications with the district 

board then they should contact the Department of Health or 

people in my office, and we will take a look at the situation and 

see what the problem is and whether there is anything that we 

can do about it.  That's the way we are going to handle it during 

this transition period. 

 

Ultimately, however, the boards will move to election, and then 

they will be accountable through the election process.  

However, that still . . . there will still be problems.  And there 

again, the proper method is to go to the district board, try and 

get it resolved through the district board, and if that doesn't 

work, to contact the Department of Health and we'll work with 

the district board.  Because elections will not solve a lot of the 

problems that will come up in a district because people don't 

necessarily like the decisions that . . . if it doesn't go their way, 

they may not like the decision.  And maybe it wasn't a good 

decision, but maybe it was.  And so the Department of Health 

would then take a look at that, to see whether there's something 

that can be done. 

 

In the past, in the past with hospital boards, for 

example, what would happen if somebody didn't like 

something that happened in a hospital?  They would complain 

to the hospital board, and if they felt dissatisfied, they 

complained to the government.  So it hasn't changed in that 

regard. 

 

If anything has changed, we're making it more accountable 

because now these boards have to open up their books; they 

have to open up their process; they have to provide information 

-- they couldn't even get the information before -- now the 

boards have to provide the information to the public.  And there 

will be the election process to also increase that accountability 

that much more. 

 

So the Minister of Health of course is ultimately responsible for 

all provincial standards and for monitoring the district boards 

and making sure that the district boards implement provincial 

standards.  That's the ultimate responsibility of the Minister of 

Health and the Department of Health, and that responsibility 

remains there. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- We are looking forward to those elections.  

Describe the spending, please, for the district health board 

officials.  What was the total spending and what type of fee or 

stipend is paid to board officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  We do not have an audited 

figure of how much has been spent at this point, but we're 

trying to get that information together. 

 

There were certain rates that were established in conjunction 

with government remuneration for jobs of this responsibility.  

Some of the boards implemented those rates.  They were 

maximum rates.  Some chose to forego some of the funding but 

others have taken the full amount, so it varies from district to 

district is what I am saying. 

 

For health district boards the chairperson gets $235 per diem 

and a member gets $155 per diem.  There's a retainer for the 

chair of 5,000.  And in Regina and Saskatoon, because of their 

huge budgets, which are approximately 250 million, you have 

the chairperson getting 525 per diem and a member getting 300 

per diem, with a retainer for the chair of 10,000.  But as I 

pointed out, it's my understanding that these rates have not 

necessarily been invoked in each and every district. 

 

I don't know what the total cost is at this point.  I have asked 

the Department of Health to monitor it and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations to monitor it, and look at 

ways that we can ensure that the costs are maintained. 

 

We have to remember, when we look at municipal employees' 

remuneration and school board trustees' remuneration, that 

these health budgets are in some cases bigger than the 

municipal budgets in that particular area.  These are large 

budgets, particularly in Regina and Saskatoon and some of the 

other cities in the province. 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

They are providing a very comprehensive range of services, not 

just hospitals. In the past you would have a hospital board and 

all they would be doing was administering the hospital.  They 

will be administering all the hospitals, special care homes, 

home care, public health, mental health, addictions counselling, 

and all sorts of other programing within the district.  So it's 

quite different, the level of responsibility that the boards are 

taking on and their mandate. 

 

And during this transition I am not sure just how much time is 

being spent on the transition in terms of coordinating and 

integrating.  There's a lot of work going into getting the system 

organized because they're not simply walking in and taking 

over a hospital.  They have to coordinate all the services, they 

have to develop a plan; they are being asked to consult with the 

community; they're being asked to have public meetings with 

the community. 

 

They are doing much, much, much more than the board 

officials of the other 400 boards did because their responsibility 

is so much more comprehensive.  Now in the past it was a 

million dollars, or close to a million in terms of per diems for 

the 400 boards, plus expenses -- meals and travelling expenses.  

And I don't know what the total cost was of the past 400 boards 

because we don't know what the full extent of their costs were. 

 

And that is without having to do the kind of coordination and 

integration and planning and public consultation that we're 

asking these board members to do in order to move through the 

transition in terms of health reform. 

 

I have asked the Department of Health and SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) to keep 

the cost down as much as possible and to do what they can to 

make sure those costs are kept down, but I don't have a sum at 

this point as to exactly how much it is and whether or not we 

can make any sort of a comparison. 

 

I don't have that information but I am hoping that we will be 

able to provide more information to the legislature in the 

months to come on that issue.  Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- A per diem of $150 per day seems like a lot 

of money to spend for a board.  In fact, you say some boards . . 

. are there some boards that don't take any per diems?  Is it 

possible you would be able to attract interested and informed 

citizens to sit on those boards and do that work which you have 

outlined as being very rigorous work, if the per diem were 

halved or eliminated?  Are there people who would be willing 

to do this work?  And also, are the board officials allowed 

expense allowance beyond this per diem? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, I want to point out that these 

rates are maximum rates.  Some boards have taken less.  

Boards also have the right to set expenses at the government 

rate, and there again it's the same 

scenario -- some boards set it at the government rate, some less. 

 

Now we have been told by the president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations, who is a rural member, 

that reducing this compensation would not be advisable.  The 

reason being that we are requiring farmers and small-business 

people and professional people to take time off work to do this 

work. 

 

I'm just corrected here -- the chairman of SAHO, not the 

president.  That this compensation in some cases is hardly 

adequate at $155 a day to get a lawyer or professional person or 

a farmer or a small-business person to take off a day or two, 

and maybe several in the course of a month, to do this work.  

So that point of view has been raised to us. 

 

However, there has also been the point that we shouldn't be 

compensating people who are already on a fixed salary to do 

this work.  And that's one of the issues that we're taking a look 

at right now and having discussions with SAHO and board 

members and others. 

 

So this is a flexible thing.  We are looking at the issue as to 

whether or not this is fair for a farmer or a small-business man 

to take a day off, and sometimes it's at very crucial times; or 

whether somebody on fixed income should be getting a per 

diem on top of it.  It's one of the things that's under review. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 

Vote 36 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials, to the deliberations this afternoon.  

A couple questions that just came my way, basically through a 

phone call this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, what process does the department go through in 

determining an applicant's application for assistance under 

Social Services?  And what avenue do they follow up to 

determine whether or not individuals are . . . one of the major 

concerns I guess that continues to be raised is the people that 

may or may not be deriving income on the side and never 

claiming the income, possibly just working on a cash basis for 

small amounts.  In some cases that can be fairly large unless . . 

. although I would suspect that if anyone, especially a farmer or 

businessman isn't going to want to pay out a fairly large wage 

without having some form of tax incentive created through it or 

derived from it. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what I'd like to know is, number one, what 

process does a person follow in applying?  And what format 

does the department have in place right now to follow up on 

applicants to make sure that the individuals who are receiving 

assistance actually deserve it and are people that certainly fall 

within the 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

guidelines and have no other source of income; therefore they 

have come to the department looking for assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Initially an applicant has to, on a prescribed form, make an 

application for social assistance on one side of the form.  I 

believe you flip it over, and then you make a declaration -- 

which is a sworn declaration, which is sworn to and notarized 

-- identifying your income, your expenses, your assets.  And 

then there are verifications required, verifications for income, 

rent.  We also then do computer matches with Health, UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission) and so on.  That's 

basically the process. 

 

The theory of course is that when you sign a declaration 

indicating that that is your situation, then you swear to those 

circumstances . . . is it notary or commissioner of oaths, I guess 

-- commissioner of oaths, which the workers are.  Then that is 

considered to have a legal status as the declaration of your 

circumstances. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, if a person finds that they've 

contacted a representative from Social Services and they feel 

that they don't seem to be getting anywhere, they may feel that 

they're not being represented fairly or that their claim has been . 

. . I guess one Social Services counsellor might say no, you 

don't have a claim coming or you're not eligible.  Is there is 

another format that people can approach or go through to try 

and bring out the concerns they have and the fact that they've 

come with a legitimate request for some assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- There are essentially three levels of 

appeal that people have; basically, they can appeal if they're not 

satisfied.  They can appeal to the local regional director, they 

can appeal to the local appeal committee, and also to the 

provincial appeal committee. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, one of the questions I guess that 

continually arises is people on social assistance or on very 

minimal income that come for social assistance, if they have 

some income, generally it seems to me that if they've got even 

a certain number of hours in, should they if they require . . . 

And under social assistance they would be . . . Let's say a 

family of four would receive an allotment, and I'm guessing at 

numbers right now because I don't have them all in my head, 

but say around 1,150 a month, but they can find a job that for 

part of the month that would maybe pay them $400.  And in a 

lot of cases, generally speaking, once you get some kind of 

revenue and looks like it's almost full-time employment, you're 

discontinued or cut off of social assistance. 

 

Is the department looking at any way of supplementing rather 

than forcing these people just to not look for work at all, 

because $400 a month isn't a substantial amount to even try to 

exist on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, actually there are approximately 

5,500 people, our clients who are on 

assistance, were working either full or part time and having 

their assistance being . . . or having their income being 

supplemented by assistance, which is consistent with what I 

think the notion of your question was. 

 

You're talking about the wage exemption provision which 

allows people to keep a certain amount of money before they 

start losing . . . before they start losing that money, as a 

financial incentive to being better off working than you are on 

assistance. 

 

Also the Family Income Plan which is a tool that interests the 

federal government in the federal reform initiatives and which 

interests some other provinces in terms of a tool.  The Family 

Income Plan is designed to supplement low income, working 

families, again I think consistent with what you're 

recommending. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One other question, Mr. Minister, and before I 

turn it over to my colleague.  A call I just received about an 

individual looking for work, had an opportunity for work in 

Manitoba, and by the time he was able to get over to the job 

opportunity, the job went elsewhere.  The feeling was also, if 

he would have taken the job, with the minimal amount and 

housing . . . Since he was living in Saskatchewan, he came 

back and applied for social assistance, and at the present time 

has been turned down. 

 

Now when the department is viewing a situation where a 

person has applied for a job, possibly a job is available, and yet 

at $5 an hour -- and I'm not exactly sure how many hours this 

person may have been able to work, whether it was an 

eight-hour day or what -- but just at the end of the day, there 

wasn't a lot left to try and commute back and forth to Brandon 

to find a place to stay through the week. 

 

Is there any avenue a person could pursue, or does the 

department do whatever it can to help people get on their feet 

and get involved in a job, versus just staying on social 

assistance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all, what we try to do on a 

general basis, is to explore with any of our clients their ability, 

their interest in pursuing education, training, employment 

options.  And then of course in the case like you're talking 

about, which might include a position in another province, with 

a confirmation that there is a job there that that person can go 

to, we often through special needs, provide the person with a 

bus ticket and meals and means to get there to take on a 

specific job, and at times even specific boots or clothing that 

might be required if it's an outside job in the winter and so on, 

to take the position.  So we can provide special needs around 

transportation or clothing, or so on, to a confirmed job. 

 

I might say though, I think you raise a good point in terms of 

interprovincial opportunities.  This, I think, is something we've 

sort of worked out with other jurisdictions and we try -- if 

people go to a confirmed job in another province -- we try and . 

. . and they've been on assistance say in Saskatchewan, we try 

and 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

establish them on their first month in, say, Alberta or Manitoba.  

And then if they require additional support once they're 

working there, then they can go in there and see about 

additional support. 

 

And this works the same way if people come here.  It's kind of 

the interprovincial agreement that we have. 

 

But I think that this makes the federal income review reform 

initiative very timely and important to look at this kind of 

consideration, particularly with some high unemployment rate 

areas where people may have to be doing more interprovincial 

travel.  And so I think that we clearly have that issue on the 

agenda for our federal-provincial discussions. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

guess the last time you and I was visiting we got into probably 

more of a debate than a question-and-answer period.  And I, in 

thinking about it afterwards, decided that maybe I would try to 

get into a question-and-answer scenario rather than a debate. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He realized that he was right and you 

were wrong. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes, my colleague says never worry about the 

fact that I was right and you were wrong all the time. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Minister, one of the two, three things that I 

wanted to clear up before we go into some of the more general 

questions and that was, as I said, I got the impression from you 

that you felt that I was down on anyone that was on social 

assistance.  And I think you got the impression from me that I 

didn't believe anybody was trustworthy and all that sort of 

thing. 

 

Well I never was and never will be against people who need 

assistance.  I go back a few years and I can remember being 

what is called poor today.  So I do understand. 

 

The other thing we talked about, and you said something to the 

effect that we can't have it both ways.  Well I think what I was 

trying to suggest to you, Mr. Minister, was that we could get 

closer to having it both ways if we were able to clean up the 

errors and the abuses that maybe were out there, and then we'd 

have more money or more assistance to give to those who 

probably could use a bit more.  And some of the people in your 

department, as I mentioned, Mr. Minister, agrees with what I 

am saying because they talked to me about it. 

 

And that brings me up to another question.  You asked if I 

would release the letters that I had, to you, and I have to 

suggest, Mr. Minister, that there's one that I maybe will and can 

if I get permission.  The others, I gave my word that I wouldn't 

do that.  And that also brought up, I think, something you said 

about making it awfully difficult in your job when we get these 

kinds of information and can't follow it up, and I appreciate 

your position because I'm in the same position. 

 

The other thing . . . Oh yes, Mr. Minister, I would like to thank 

you for sending over the answers to the global questions which 

will help us expedite our visit tonight.  And what I did then 

after thinking over, I made a list, a general list of the questions 

that I wanted to ask you, and so that we could get into what this 

is supposed to be, is a question-and-answer period. 

 

So I know you're going to want to come back at me a little bit 

so before I ask the first question, I'll let you respond, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well thank you very much, to the hon. 

member.  What I would say is, where I would suggest we leave 

it is that we both agree that we are responsible to ensure that 

there's a proper accountability for expenditures of taxpayers' 

money.  And I suppose where we disagreed up to this point is 

whether your administration or our administration -- who was 

the most accountable?  But I think in the final analysis we'll let 

the Provincial Auditor decide that in his next report, whether 

he's satisfied that we've got the proper controls. 

 

I also appreciate you clarifying your position.  I think we both 

agree that it's important to respect and to enhance the dignity of 

those people who are on assistance at this point in time, and 

that what they really need are meaningful jobs and 

opportunities to provide for their families and to become 

financially independent; and that it's our responsibility to work 

together to try and ensure that that happens. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  Make 

sure that just before we get into what might be construed as a 

love-in here, I would like to agree with you, sir, that thank 

goodness -- thank goodness -- the majority of those folks are 

honest.  Because if we had something like, I think you told me, 

a little over 82,000 people and if they weren't honest, most of 

them, you and I both would be in a pretty tough spot.  So now 

that the amenities are over, Mr. Minister, I would you to get 

your flak jacket on and get your hard hat and all those things. 

 

I would like to go into your computer report that you were kind 

enough to send over, Mr. Minister, and I would like to . . . and 

I've gone over a few of the questions and the ones I want to ask 

you about.  On page 1, the department spent over $6,000 on 

what is called printer cartridges and ribbons.  Now this seems 

like a lot for just a common stationery supply.  Can you 

provide us with more detail about how many of those were 

purchased? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I'm sorry.  I didn't hear exactly what you 

wanted to know -- how many of what were purchased? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- On page 1, you spent $6,000 on printer 

cartridges and ribbons.  Could you tell me how many of each of 

those were . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I'm advised that we don't have 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

the actual number, but that's for the entire computer system of 

the department and that most of those are recycled and used 

again.  So I'm not able to answer that question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, that's 

probably something you could later on send over, if you could.  

Yes. 

 

And maybe this next question would be the same thing.  On 

page 3, over $8,000 was spent on laser cartridges.  I'd like to 

know how many of them were purchased and the cost per unit.  

And I'm wondering if those, they must . . . the printer cartridge 

and the laser cartridge I suspect are different.  I'm not much of 

a computer person, so are they two different kind of cartridges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- To answer your question, they're about 

$100 each, so $6,000.  But we'll provide you with the 

information, same on your last question, and a description of 

the differences of the two systems, and provide them in the 

next day or so, if that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, on pages 1, 3 and 5, 

there was 4,000 spent on keyboard drawers, and that seems like 

a lot for a common piece of furniture.  Could you also let me 

know how many of those and were they all new, or did you 

replace existing keyboard drawers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I am advised these are ergonomic 

drawers which fit onto the desks and sort of slide out so that 

they're at the proper height and so on, so they don't provide 

long-term strain on necks and joints and backs and so on, and 

so mainly for health reasons.  We have 400 computer terminals, 

so we're adding some of these as we can afford them. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I did 

ask if they were all new or were you replacing old ones? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, they're all new. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Also on page 3, 

you spent $3,731.72 on WordPerfect.  Mr. Minister, don't you 

get a WordPerfect in a package?  Was this an upgrade?  And 

how many copies of the site licence did you purchase for the 

same price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First of all, we recently upgraded the 

program from a 5.0 to a 5.1 program, which is a better program 

and allows us to do more with it.  And you have to buy a 

package for each computer.  In other words, due to copyright 

laws and so on, you have to do that with each one. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister.  I 

was kind of thinking that's what you were doing with this and I 

just wanted to get it clarified. 

 

You also spent over $6,000 on headsets . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

notice here that you have spent over $6,000 on headsets.  And 

how many were purchased? 

 And are these being used throughout the whole department, or 

just in a specific area such as processing claims? 

 

And we recognize the value for reducing stress, but would you 

not say they're something of a luxury item?  And I've noticed 

that very few, if any, other departments use them.  Have you 

just purchased these lately, or is this something in your 

upgrading system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, these headsets are part of the 

ergonomic furniture used primarily by people who spend a lot 

of time on the phone in the social assistance program and who 

have to have their hands free to work on the keyboard.  That's 

the main reason we've purchased those. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, Mr. 

Minister.  I guess that's acceptable. 

 

On page 5, you spent, between two different line items, over 

$16,000 on common computer office fixtures, and that's like 

anti-glare screens, anti-static wipers, more keyboard holders, 

power bars, mouse pads, etc.  Did the department not have 

these items before?  And it seems to me that a lot of them 

would ordinarily come with a computer package.  And were 

they all new or were they replacements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- No, these are new purchases and these 

are of course part of the whole system that is having to be 

purchased everywhere where this technology is being used.  

We did not have these items before, and without these aids 

there would be new associated health problems, because people 

are spending long hours at the terminals. 

 

And they're also part of the requirements under occupational 

health and safety for the amount of time that's being spent with 

this new technology.  So it's a new system that we're adapting, 

evolving as we can reasonably afford to develop the integrated 

system. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Then I'm to 

assume, Mr. Minister, that you probably had no choice but you 

had to buy that in order to upgrade and also meet the 

requirements in the health. 

 

There's one other thing in the computer package that you gave 

me that -- I don't know what page it would be on; it would be 

second last page -- and the fourth item down, there was 

46,852.95 spent.  And in the tendered it says: yes-no.  And 

further down there's another one that says yes, and that's for 

30,000.  Both of those are to increase productivity.  Could you 

explain the yes-no part there, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- I'm advised that likely a portion of the 

purchase was too small to tender.  But we'll get the breakdown 

and explain those two areas to you in the next day or so, if 

that's okay. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister.  I'm 

going to leave the computer part for 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

now.  And I thank you for sending the information so we could 

just go through and find what we wanted to talk about and get 

it. 

 

And the other global questions, I'd like to ask you . . . I'm 

looking through your . . . the ministerial assistants.  And it 

seems to me that you have five.  Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, I have three ministerial assistants 

and three secretaries in my ministerial office. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay.  Then, Mr. Minister, can you explain 

why in this package that you sent me I have five ministerial 

assistants listed here plus a secretary?  And I'll just go through 

it with you, and maybe there's a reason for it or maybe you 

could help us get it figured out. 

 

On page 35 we see ministerial assistant 4, James W. Balfour; 

ministerial assistant E, Judith Bergen.  Then we find a secretary 

on 36, but we also find another ministerial assistant 2, Karen 

LaRocque; and on page 37 I find ministerial assistant C, Sarah 

McLean; and further down the page, ministerial assistant 2, 

Carolyn Rebeyka.  Could you explain what . . . you say you 

have three; there's five listed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, all of the names that you mentioned 

were for the previous minister.  I believe you have a copy of . . 

. In my case currently, Julia Puff is my chief of staff; 

ministerial assistants: 1006, Beverley Cardinal, and Murray 

Gross -- those are the three assistants, ministerial assistants.  

Shirley Richardson, Beverley Hewson, and Gloria Kups are the 

secretaries in the office.  So six in total. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Then, Mr. Minister, 

could you tell me what happened to those other people that are 

not now your ministerial assistants?  What did they do? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- They have left for other opportunities, so 

I'm not aware of where they are.  So sorry, I can't answer that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, am I then to 

assume they were not discharged as far as you know?  Or the 

previous minister moved them out before you came along? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- As far as I know they've gone to other 

positions elsewhere. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Welcome, Mr. Minister, and your officials 

this afternoon. 

 

First of all, I'd like to ask you some general administration 

questions.  The total budget for the department is increasing by 

$43 million, which is an increase of 9 per cent.  That's a 

considerable increase and I would expect this has meant some 

considerable changes in operations in your department.  What 

benefit will the people of Saskatchewan receive as a result of 

this increased spending, and what is the source of this 

additional spending?  And what other 

programs were sacrificed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well first of all let me say that we have a 

detailed set of objectives, goals, and work plan we'd be happy 

to send over to you, if you like.  As you know, I've shared a lot 

of information, our strategic plan and what not, with your 

leader in the past. 

 

But to answer your question, the majority of the increase has 

been due to federal changes, changes in the unemployment 

insurance program last year. There will be new costs related to 

the recent federal budget and to the decision last year with 

regard to financial services to treaty families off reserve. 

 

In terms of what programs may be affected negatively, there 

was also some enhanced program support, which results . . . 

some of that money results in or is directed to, for example, the 

new money, new funds, to the family and youth plan; new 

money towards family violence and primary prevention 

services for families; new money for . . . Included in there is 

the strategy, the 1.7 million strategy -- going home, staying 

home; new infant day care spaces; and new family law 

initiatives, that is, the additional support to the Legal Aid 

Commission.  Those are enhanced supports . . . enhanced 

initiatives, in addition to the two major reasons that I indicated 

before. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Page 4 of the budget speech says: 

 

 Last year, almost $18 million was saved by making common 

sense changes to the day to day operations of government. 

 

 This year, we will save an additional $12 million. 

 

That was the quote. 

 

Could you please tell me where your department made savings 

last year, and where you intend to make savings this year?  

What was the decision process used to identify those savings?  

Were outside consultants used, efficiency audits performed, or 

any other method of identifying costing measures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First of all, in terms of how we make 

decisions, we've not used outside consultants.  Most of our 

analysis is internal. It's ongoing, involving the regions in any 

ways in which we can save money and do things more 

efficiently. 

 

Over the two years I believe the savings will be approximately 

$220,000, and most of that comes from downsizes in the 

management system. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Your total staff has been enlarged by about 

59 full-time equivalent positions, but that's an overall total.  

How many employees have been hired in your department 

through the Public Service Commission in the past year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First of all, all of the hiring goes through 

the Public Service Commission.  It's a large department and all 

the positions are hired in that way. 



May 9, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

You mentioned the 59 positions -- they were added due to the 

workload increases I talked of earlier and the 30 verification 

officers. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Were all of these positions advertised 

publicly and where are the new positions to be located? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- In the last year, because it's a big 

department, we had some 500 new hirings or replacements of 

vacant positions.  And we will, if it's okay, we'll send you over 

a computer list of all of those individuals, which includes 

where they are located.  If that's okay. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Were they all advertised publicly, all 

positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Virtually all of them were hired through 

competition.  There may have been a very, very small 

percentage through bumping and this sort of thing, but the 

answer to your question is essentially yes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How many of these newly hired employees 

are classified as in scope; how many are in the M & P 

(management and professional), and which is out of scope, you 

know, out of the scope of the union? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Virtually all the hirings on this list are in 

scope.  We only have, I believe, 161 out-of-scope positions in 

the entire department of about 2,000 employees.  So 98, 99 per 

cent on the list that you'll get are in-scope employees. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So how many of those would have been out 

of scope?  How many would there have been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- We'll give you the list which indicates 

that.  We can count them up here, but we're estimating about 

10. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I'm assuming that this list then would 

include a complete list of the transfers including employee 

name, department, old classification or title, new classification 

or title, and salary change if any.  And that would be fine if you 

would include that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- As I say, we'll send this over to you, but 

in a sense, the headings are -- to answer your question -- 

employee name, the working title, the class title, the work 

location, the reason for termination, and the date and the salary 

and the subvote. 

 

In terms of where they came from, we would have to go over 

each one and sort of look it up; that is not on the computer 

printout here.  But we, you know, you may . . . I'm not sure 

how important that is.  You may want to  . . . if you want to 

follow up, feel free to do that, but I don't have that on computer 

printout. 

Mrs. Bergman: -- We'll follow up then if we need further 

information.  Did your department abolish any positions or 

terminate any staff in this last budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, in terms of deletions, we had four 

positions deleted due to early retirement, and seven positions 

deleted due to restructuring.  And these were all management 

positions, not field. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Could I have the same details on those as we 

were speaking of in the last question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Yes, we'll send that over. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Now I'd like to move to some of the 

subvotes.  How many people are receiving social assistance 

today, and could you provide a breakdown of recipients by 

community, by age group, and by native, non-native descent?  

And I know it's asking a lot, but I intend to use the data. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- That's several questions there.  I'll try to 

answer them as best I can.  We have just under 40,000 clients 

or 82,000 people in total.  And we could send you over a 

breakdown of socio-economic demographics.  Would by region 

be okay?  We don't have them by community.  We're not 

designed to have it that way.  If by region would be okay, we 

could send those over.  And then if you had any specific 

questions within each region, I'd be very happy to, or the 

officials, to sit down with you. 

 

We have the number by treaty, and we also have an estimate of 

the constitutional status for other people.  And we could send 

that information over.  In fact I'm advised that virtually all of 

that information, or most of it, is in our quarterly statistical 

report which I could send over right now, if that's okay. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  The budget shows an increase 

of $37.6 million or an increase of 14 per cent in SAP (Social 

Assistance Plan).  Does this increase match the increase in 

demand?  And how much of this increase is an adjustment for 

inflation, and how much is for new clients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- The increase is totally related to volume.  

We have added . . . there is no factored increase for inflation at 

all in the 1994-95 budget. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- How many families will this affect, and 

what is the per capita increase among recipients? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- There were no benefit increases . . . there 

are no benefit increases in the budget; there's volume increases.  

And secondly, the number of families in the data around 

families is in that document that I gave you in terms of the 

breakdown of the different constellations and so on.  And I 

might add just to clarify, that is as of December '93. So we can 

provide you with the next one which will be a little more 

current, yes. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- In contrast to that increase, the Family 

Income Plan is decreasing by 3.5 million or 39 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 1994 

per cent.  I've spoken to quite a number of people who feel that 

in recent years this program has not been adequately 

advertised, or clients have not been given sufficient knowledge 

of the Family Income Plan, which to me seems, because it is a 

hedge against going on welfare, it seems there's some difficulty 

in why it's fallen so far. 

 

How does this decrease affect your clients?  Does it mean more 

people are on welfare when they don't get involved in the 

Family Income Plan?  Are there other programs or other 

sources for clients to turn to besides SAP then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- First of all, let me say that the Family 

Income Plan is a program that we're very proud of in terms of 

that being an important tool to complement and support the 

incomes of working families. 

 

And I might add that the federal minister, Mr. Axworthy, likes 

that particular model, and a number of other provinces are 

looking at modelling that particular program as well. 

 

So while we're proud of that as a tool, I would say that the 

program was badly neglected for many years and that there 

were no increases put into the program, so consequently the 

number of beneficiaries continue to fall because people . . . 

there wasn't enough money in the program to provide the 

additional support people needed. 

 

Your relationship between that and the assistance program is 

right.  More people, in fact, went onto assistance instead of 

being on the Family Income Plan. 

 

Now that is a problem and a program that we're discussing with 

the federal government in terms of an enhanced Family Income 

Plan.  The reality has been is that there just hasn't been enough 

money put into that over the years and we're trying to play 

catch-up as best we can. 

 

We had a modest increase last year, as you recall, and we are 

hopeful that we will be able to negotiate some kind of an 

agreement with the federal government on that plan. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- It seems ironic though that there is a 39 per 

cent decrease in a plan that you see as very valuable, and I don't 

understand why this program was chosen to cut so deeply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well I couldn't agree with you more.  It is 

very ironic that we have this program here, which other 

provinces are trying to model and the federal government likes.  

But the reality is, due to the federal offloading, the unilateral 

federal offloading, we just have not been able . . . we've had to 

increase the budget to take care of the volume which has 

strapped our ability to enhance the programs and tools in a way 

that we would like to. 

 

So I agree with you -- it is very ironic.  Now if you 

could help me convince Mr. Axworthy and the federal 

government to reverse the treaty family offload, that would be 

$20 million there that we could put some of that into the 

Family Income Plan.  I agree with you. 

 

If you could help me get the federal government to reverse the 

$40 million they've taken out of the UIC program in the last 

federal budget, which is going to have an impact of 6 to 7 or $8 

million in terms of this year's budget, then we could enhance 

the Family Income Plan, which I would love to do.  So I seek 

your support in helping us in those negotiations. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- So you're saying that the drop in this 

program was redirected to the SAP program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- No, we haven't consciously redirected 

money from the Family Income Plan to assistance at all.  But 

what I'm saying is that there was no new money put into the 

Family Income Plan for so many years that what happened is 

that people had to sort of return to the SAP program in order to 

get their benefits.  Last year we actually had more money in the 

Family Income Plan than was used, but we would love to 

enhance it if we were able to do that. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- I guess that's what I brought up first, that 

there is a sense amongst those who've worked in this area for 

years that in . . . For instance, last year when you didn't even 

use all the money in the program, that this program has been 

neglected even though it is, as you say, an admirable and 

imitable program, there seems to have been a fall-off in its . . . 

that doesn't seem always directly related to the money, in what 

you're saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Pringle: -- Well again, I mean I agree with you.  The 

problem is that the new money to support people on assistance 

had to go into the SAP program.  We didn't have the money to 

put into the FIP (Family Income Plan) program, so the FIP 

benefits are actually lower.  If people just got FIP, it's not 

enough to live on, so they're required to get the support from 

the SAP program. 

 

Now again I need your support.  I need your support to 

negotiate with the federal government either to enhance the 

Family Income Plan or to reverse some of the offloading, the 

major offloading that has been done in the last year, including 

in the recent federal budget, which takes away from our ability 

to enhance the family income program.  So I agree with you, 

but we require federal support to reverse the offloading in order 

to enhance the program. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


