




















































Hansard: May 02, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1953 

 May 2, 1994 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that the Assembly 

may be pleased to cause the government to immediately 

investigate and offer changes to the trial procedures for child 

sex offenders. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Excuse me for my 

tardiness, I was just taking a look at the group that I was going 

to be introducing.  And we have in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, 56 grade 5 students.  And these students come from 

Martensville.  And I want to welcome them here this afternoon.  

I hope they've had a pleasant trip so far, an enjoyable 

afternoon.  And I'll be meeting them for pictures and for drinks 

later on this afternoon. 

 

They are accompanied by chaperons Linda Antaya and Sylvia 

Maximuk, and teachers Ms. Brenda Olson, Ms. Sue McQuen, 

and a Mr. Jim Golding.  And I notice that my colleague from 

Moosomin said, hey, that's Jim up there.  He is from Langbank 

originally apparently.  And just to let you know, Jim, he did say 

that they hated to see you go.  But I guess their loss is 

Martensville's gain. 

 

And so I'd like all members, Mr. Speaker, to help me welcome 

these folks from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Forestry Week 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to note that today 

marks the beginning of National Forestry Week.  This is 

sponsored by the Canadian Forestry Association, and the main 

purpose of the week is to increase public awareness of the 

importance of Canada's forests. 

 

The National Forestry Week begins with Arbour Day, which is 

today.  And as you know, Mr. Speaker, Arbour Day has been 

recognized in North America for over a hundred years.  For 

over a hundred years children have been tidying up school 

grounds and planting trees.  In this way they have been helping 

with our environment. 

 

There is another significant fact about National Forestry Week, 

or Arbour Day today, Mr. Speaker, as today marks the 50th 

birthday of Smokey the Bear.  For 

50 years, Smokey the Bear has been huffing and puffing and 

sniffing the air and advising people that carelessness causes 

forest fires. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, at a ceremony in P.A. (Prince Albert), 

Smokey's birthday will be honoured . . . or Smokey will be 

honoured by a birthday, and the forestry association poster 

contest winners will be announced and a very special tree will 

be planted.  It will be the 200 millionth tree that has been 

planted in Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is the 

significance of recognizing the importance of our forests today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Tourism in Lloydminster 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm both 

happy and proud to announce to the Assembly that tourism is 

thriving in Lloydminster.  In fact according to the tourism and 

convention authority, last year's total should double, both in 

visitors and economically. 

 

In 1993 the economic impact of visitors to Lloydminster 

reached a conservative estimate of $38 million.  Already this 

year the number of inquiries about Lloydminster has doubled, 

giving a relatively good outlook for an even better year in 

1994.  The inquiries are both from individuals and groups and 

range from economic development, business tourism, and 

tourism and conventions.  There has also been a noticeable 

improvement in the number of national and bi-provincial 

convention organizations inquiring about holding their 

functions in Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that this is good news for the 

city of Lloydminster; however this is also good news for the 

rest of Saskatchewan as well because any rise in tourism is a 

boost to the province as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mental Health Week 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

announce to the Assembly that the week of May 2 has been 

officially named Mental Health Week.  It's a week to recognize 

the dedication and tireless efforts of all those working in this 

field and to increase public awareness of the serious issues 

around mental health. 

 

Also in recognition of Mental Health Week I would like to 

inform the Assembly about a new partnership between 

SaskPower and the Saskatchewan division, mental health 

association.  The partnership which was announced today 

creates a five 

_year program to reduce the number of adolescent suicides in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On average 150 lives are claimed each year by suicide; 50 of 

these are adolescents.  It is a fact that suicide ranks second in 

cause of death for adolescents. 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

This program will help develop local resources and train 

volunteers in communities province-wide.  It will also include 

an education aspect for the public to raise awareness of the 

problem of suicide and introduce ways to deal with and help 

solve this tragedy. 

 

The program will proceed in stages over the next five years.  

The stages include: volunteer recruitment, training, establishing 

local support organizations, and helping to educate and raise 

public awareness. 

 

This program complements Saskatchewan Health's current 

programs in this area, and, Mr. Speaker, a good announcement 

to begin Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Surgery Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

privilege once more to be able to continue on the process of 

participatory democracy in the province by allowing the 

residents of this province to ask direct questions of members 

opposite -- the government members, the cabinet members. 

 

This question comes from Neil from Regina, Mr. Speaker.  And 

he asks:  why are people like my mother waiting for critical 

surgeries such as bypass surgery for several months?  My 

mother has been waiting for this surgery since November 1993.  

The government has no money for these procedures yet can 

find plenty of money for abortions.  This is hypocritical. 

 

And that comes from Neil. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to mention to the person who wrote the letter that with 

respect to surgery that is needed, the physician priorizes 

patients as to the level of their need and the urgency of their 

need.  And if this particular individual needs surgery 

immediately, then she should get in touch with her physician, 

because when there is an emergency that is seen as an 

emergency by the physician, the surgery can be performed.  It's 

a question of the medical profession priorizing it. 

 

And I would suggest in a situation like this, they can either 

contact my office, we will then put them through the 

Department of Health to see if there's a problem in the system 

or whether it's a question of the physician priorizing.  But if the 

person needs surgery and it's urgent, they will have access to 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Vehicle Insurance Premiums 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question 

comes from Peter C. Giesbrecht from Swift Current, and it 

deals with SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance):  I want to know why insurance 

premiums have increased 10 to 12 per cent on car registrations 

for people who have had a no-fault driving record.  Why does 

the government always punish the innocent?  This business of 

no-fault insurance, why is it legislation just to protect the 

purse-strings of SGI?  Why doesn't it reduce the rates of the 

vehicle operators that have a no-fault record also; and why 

doesn't SGI allow competition, as in Alberta? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, in regards to the latter 

statement on competition, I think the member from across 

probably wants to go back in 1946 when 88 per cent, you 

know, of the people did not have insurance in Saskatchewan.  

And I know that when they were in charge of SGI they tried to . 

. . they spent over a million dollars alone on trying to privatize 

SGI.  And our approach was to try and come out with a 

program that was fair to the people of Saskatchewan, and in 

that sense we established the personal injury protection plan. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that indeed a lot of people will look at the 

90 per cent coverage on loss of income.  And of course the 

home-makers at $400 a week on child care benefits, seniors 

who are discriminated against even in law at the present time, 

will now be able to get, you know, money for life if 

permanently injured, Mr. Speaker.  So that there's a lot of good 

aspects to the program that need to be looked at and I feel, you 

know, confident that a lot of people are supporting it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Costs of Health Boards and Commissions 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The next question 

comes from Annie Hruska from Gerald, close to Saltcoats.  

How much is it costing us to administer all those health boards 

and provincial health councils?  I certainly don't agree with 

spending all that money on Garf Stevenson's appointment to 

the one-man commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well I don't have the details of those 

particular costs.  In fact we have been asking the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations to monitor the costs that 

are being charged. 

 

I do know that the health boards that . . . the 30 health boards 

that replaced the 400 boards will also be taking on other 

responsibilities beyond the hospital and home care.  They will 

be taking on public health and mental health; they will be 

taking on addiction services and a whole range of services.  So 

the mandate that they have is much broader even than the 

boards that were in place. 

 

They are doing a considerable amount of work in putting 

together the reintegration of health care services and the 

coordinating of health care services. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

It's my understanding that they have managed to keep their 

costs generally under control.  However I don't have the 

specific details of that at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Violent Crime 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

question is to the Premier, and the question comes from Donald 

Richardson from Hanley.  And he says: Mr. Premier, when are 

you going to crack down on violent crime, and also make the 

criminal pay?  Why not bring back the death penalty for certain 

homicides? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well the whole justice system is of 

course very concerned about violent crime -- the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police), the prosecutors, the federal people 

-- and the matter is just constantly receiving their attention; 

that's what they're primarily in business for.  And we're, I think, 

doing the job to a satisfactory level in this province because I 

think the incidence of violent crime here compares favourably 

to most other parts of Canada. 

 

So far as the death penalty is concerned, that of course is a 

matter for the federal parliament and nothing we in this 

legislature can do can affect that very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Nursing Home Beds 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This question comes 

from Anita Nordahl from Moosomin: Mr. Premier, when is 

your government going to provide more low-rental housing for 

persons over 50, and more nursing home beds or suitable 

alternatives for those people who need them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the issue of 

nursing home beds, there has been a study that was done by the 

Health Services Utilization and Research Commission that says 

that the problem with nursing home beds is not a problem of 

supply, it's a problem of priorizing.  They made the statement 

in their report that level 2 people should be kept in their home 

as much as possible through the use of home care and that we 

should get in the heavier care patients more quickly. 

 

The reason why they weren't getting in quickly is by 

institution-by-institution people were making the decision.  

There was no priority list, for example, on a district basis.  

Oftentimes heavy care patients would be overlooked for 

patients that didn't require as much care. 

 

We are now asking district boards to look at a priority list 

whereby heavy care patients get the first priority.  We are 

developing home care programs to keep more people in their 

homes as long as possible.  And we are looking at upgrading 

through the new Personal Care Homes Act that was brought 

into force in '91, the personal care homes that are out there, and 

are 

encouraging people to set up personal care homes wherever 

that's appropriate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for SGI.  Mr. Minister, two weeks 

ago I asked you to tell the legislature how much money you 

were spending on your SGI no-fault insurance scheme in 

advertising.  The Minister of Economic Development took 

notice on your behalf.  I wonder if you have that information 

today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, the information in regards to 

the expenditure, I think it's over $150,000 in the public 

education side of it.  My information so far is that we will be . . 

. we are providing good information and feedback from the 

public and a lot of people are asking questions. 

 

The 1-800 number is becoming very useful, where individuals 

can be phoning us up.  And also there was an information 

pamphlet that has gone down to the local households and we're 

getting good response on that.  So I think a lot of people are 

very, very happy about the information that is being provided 

out there to the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was hoping 

that you were getting your advertising at half price, because 

with your advertising you're only telling half of the story. 

 

Mr. Minister, the president of the bar association wanted to 

provide the other side of the story in a debate with you, but you 

chickened out on that.  So I guess we'll have to do it here in the 

legislature. 

 

I sent you over a copy of some actual cases that were sent to 

me by the Yorkton bar association.  The first example refers to 

an impaired driver who was totally at fault when he hit a 

16-year-old high school student.  That teenage girl wound up in 

a body cast for six weeks and with a five per cent permanent 

disability.  Under no-fault insurance the bar association 

estimates that the impaired driver would end up with $16,000 

more, while the teenage girl would end up with $34,000 less 

than under the current system. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you explain to me why this is fair and why 

this type of example is not being used in your advertising 

campaign? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, the members from across 

always have analysis out there.  Now they've got, you know, 

some analysis from some person, you know, out in Yorkton.  

And I will look at the analysis to see how accurate it is, first of 

all. 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

And in regards to youth, I mean they have been discriminated 

against in the existing system and in this case we'll be 

providing up to $13,000 a year for people who are going to 

school.  So I think in this sense, Mr. Speaker, and even when 

they are hurt and they are hurt for a prolonged period, we will 

then take the average industrial wage of a person, if we cannot 

find his wage scale, in a long run if that person is a permanent 

injury. 

 

So I think that in many ways, you know, the youth of this 

province will be helped by this program; and it will be, I think, 

looked forward to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  That's our 

point.  And that's why we have a concern about this. 

 

Mr. Minister, I also provided you with another real-life 

example that we don't see in your advertising.  A grade 11 

student was injured by another driver who was at fault.  She 

was totally disabled for two months but recovered in time to 

attend school in the fall.  Under the current system this teenage 

girl won a settlement of between 40 and $50,000.  Under your 

new no-fault scheme she would have been entitled to just over 

$1,000 in loss of income and would have had no opportunity to 

challenge that settlement. 

 

Mr. Minister, why do you want to bring in a system that 

penalizes young people who have little or no income, even 

when they're not at fault? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I mean when somebody is at 

fault and that type of thing, for example, our system does not 

look at people in single vehicle accidents and when they run 

into a deer or something like that.  Our existing system fails to 

recognize that. 

 

Our new system, you know, will recognize both fault and 

no-fault in regards to providing, you know, half a million 

dollars worth of benefits on rehabilitation for the young person.  

And I think that's a lot better than the 10,000 that is available 

right now. 

 

And overall, I'd like to say in regards to the legal side of the 

argument, I was listening to the statement by the paraplegic 

association where about 2 out of 10 people get covered in the 

court cases, which means 80 per cent of the people who are 

hurt are being left out. 

 

And I think it's very important for us to be able to cover, you 

know, all the people of the province who are hurt, basically 

because whether you are at fault in a system there are 

sometimes people that have to be taken care of at home, you 

know, such as children, if you are an adult; and I think this 

system is a fairer system that we were able to come out with 

through the consultation process that we have had. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You're correct 

when you say that 80 per cent of the people don't end up in 

court because they're satisfied with the current system, so why 

are you changing it for the 20 per cent?  Under your scheme it's 

going to be the 80 per cent who are going to be dissatisfied. 

 

Mr. Minister, both of the examples raise a fundamental 

problem with your no-fault scheme.  People with little or no 

income, such as high school students, are going to receive little 

or no compensation even when they receive serious injuries and 

are not at fault.  Meanwhile someone with a high income stands 

to receive a great deal of compensation even if they are at fault, 

and even if they were drunk at the time of the accident. 

 

Mr. Minister, does this seem fair to you?  Why is it fair that an 

impaired driver with a high income receives more 

compensation than a responsible high school student with no 

income? 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: -- In regards to impaired drivers, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that a person has to recognize that the same 

law applies.  I mean if they have the deductible right now on 

the vehicle, they have to pay that.  I think that in many cases 

the insurance premiums go up in regards to the people if they 

are they convicted, you know, in law.  And so that's the nature 

of the situation; it still stands today with this new program. 

 

Now I think that in regards to your 80 per cent statement, I 

think you're misrepresenting the paraplegic association.  I think 

the paraplegic association is saying that 20 per cent of our 

people are taken care of in this situation and 80 per cent are not 

and that they feel that the 80 per cent in this new system, we 

will now have coverage for a 100 per cent of the people.  

There'll be a half-million dollars on rehabilitation. 

 

And I might add, that right now on rehabilitation, on part II 

benefits we're spending about five and half million.  And we 

will be spending about 25 million with the new program, as 

well as 5 million on loss of income if the person had income.  

And we're going to be spending about 25 million in regards to 

income.  So I would say, Mr. Speaker, that indeed the benefits 

far outweigh, you know, the negative criticism that we have 

been getting so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Health Board Decision Making 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

afternoon is for the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, your 

government made a decision to pursue health reform in 

Saskatchewan, and you did give local people huge 

responsibilities.  They've been asked to evaluate services, cope 

with budget cuts, and implement some very difficult policy 

decisions handed down by the Department of Health. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

Madam Minister, now that you have delivered your plan and 

your budget to the district boards, do they have the power to 

make whatever changes they deem necessary to meet those 

budgets?  Do you trust them, in other words, to set the spending 

priorities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, within the 

context of the global funding, the boards will have the right to 

move funds in a manner that's appropriate with health reform 

and appropriate with the goals of health reform. 

 

We are, however, asking that funds not be moved from 

community-based services into institutional services.  And the 

funds can flow the other way, for example, but they can't flow 

back into the institutional services.  And that is because one of 

the goals of health reform is to improve and enhance 

community-based services and to enlarge the services that are 

provided in the community. 

 

So boards will have flexibility within the context of the global 

funding formula.  However, they will be required to meet 

provincial standards, to provide adequate health care 

throughout their district.  They will be required to meet any 

policies or guidelines that are there, established by the 

government for the purposes of making sure that we have a 

uniform health system with high quality health care throughout 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Over the last 

few weeks the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' 

Union), the Public Service Commission, and your Department 

of Health got together behind closed doors and made an 

agreement which says to district health boards that, thou shalt 

inherit employees of the Department of Health, lock, stock, and 

barrel. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, what happened is you hammered out 

the terms of this agreement without any representation at all 

from the health boards themselves.  If you trust local district 

boards to deliver bad news, to cut services and even close 

hospitals, why didn't you trust them enough to bring them into 

the negotiations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, the Associate Minister of 

Health and the Department of Health and SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) and the 

unions have all been dealing at a common table with respect to 

what is going to happen with the devolution of employees in 

health reform. 

 

Now what is taking place in the Department of Health is that a 

number of employees such as public health employees will be 

devolved to the districts.  There is certainly merit, Mr. Speaker, 

in making sure that these employees have continuity in their 

employment and also making sure that we use their skills and 

expertise.  So there is a desire to provide some security for 

employees. 

But it is certainly my understanding that there have been 

ongoing discussions on these issues for months amongst the 

Department of Health, SAHO, the employees, and the 

Associate Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, what you're really saying is that the local health 

boards don't have a choice.  In fact a contract has already been 

signed between the Public Service Commission, between the 

SGEU and the Department of Health. 

 

You inked an agreement, Madam Minister, on terms of transfer 

of more than 1,000 employees from the Public Service 

Commission into the hands of the district health boards.  And 

the fact that you've done this would imply that the district 

health boards authorized you to do that and that you have the 

full support of the Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations and the district health boards. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you specifically regarding this 

agreement which is signed: did you get the approval of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations and local 

boards to enter these negotiations?  Did they agree that you 

should negotiate the deal on their behalf? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well I will have to take notice on that 

particular question because the Associate Minister of Health 

has been dealing with that aspect of health reform.  It is 

certainly my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that SAHO has been 

part of these discussions and SAHO represents the district 

boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Madam Minister, you've signed an 

agreement with employees that commits local boards to pay 

their salaries, their benefits, honour their seniority, and assume 

their pension liabilities.  You've committed local boards to 

accept your terms of transfer of employees, terms agreed to by 

the unions at negotiations which excluded the new employers. 

 

And I think this shows, and you may agree, absolutely little or 

no respect for the local decision makers.  It means that what 

your government has done is to tie the hands of the health 

boards to reduce costs or negotiate with the staff that they will 

inherit. 

 

Madam Minister, what if the local boards can't afford the deal 

that you've signed? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, I think if 

the member opposite is suggesting that the employees of the 

Department of Health and the employees of health institutions 

should have no security is absolutely . . . like if that's her 

position, she should state it, because I think that's wrong.  I 

think these employees do need security.  It has to be worked 

out in such a manner that their security is retained. 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

The health boards are adequately funded to meet these kind of 

contingencies.  They can meet these kind of contingencies.  

This will not be a problem for them.  It will be part of their 

funding. 

 

Now for a member who spoke out against the principle of local 

control by voting against all of our health reform initiatives in 

this legislature, who now stands up and expounds on the need 

for local control, I think that she is being entirely inconsistent 

in her approach.  And I think for her to suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that employees should not have security and their contract 

should simply be wiped out is wrong, but it's obviously the 

Liberal approach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, you are the one that has been expounding about local 

control.  You've tried to throw aside your responsibilities by 

having the local health boards accept responsibility for 

everything that's been handed down by the Department of 

Health.  I asked you a specific question and I would very much 

appreciate an answer.  What if the local boards cannot afford 

the deal that you've signed in this contract? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

local control, we have never said that employees will be fired 

left, right, and centre, that their contracts will be destroyed; we 

have never said that health boards will be able to spend money 

willy-nilly on things that are irrelevant in the name of local 

control. 

 

Now if the member opposite is suggesting that local control 

means that all Department of Health employees should be at 

risk, then I'm suggesting her position is wrong.  I do think there 

has to be security for employees.  I have stated already to the 

member that the health care budget this year recognizes this 

devolution -- it's built in -- and local boards will be funded to 

meet these contract and employee responsibilities.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Crow Benefit 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My 

question now is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, 

recent events over the last few weeks have shown again how 

Saskatchewan farmers end up paying the price for labour 

unrest, labour disputes in the grain handling system and the 

transportation sector.  The Wheat Pool has been without a 

contract, as you're aware, for some time now, and they've also 

had a strike vote taken and the threat of a full 

_scale strike increases with each passing day. 

 

Mr. Minister, we would like to see some action -- action taken 

by you before the grain system grinds to a halt, the grain 

transportation system.  And, Mr. Minister, I believe you know 

what the solution is and I want you to listen carefully. 

Will you ask the federal government to begin paying the Crow 

benefit to the producer so that Saskatchewan farmers can take 

their own destiny in their hands and make arrangements on 

their own, and so Saskatchewan farmers are not at the mercy of 

any Wheat Pool labour dispute that might be around the 

corner?  Will you stand up for Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 

Minister, and do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, again it's hard 

to understand where the official opposition is coming from with 

a statement like that.  Obviously there is a problem with the 

grain moving.  I have written letters to both the union, to the 

Wheat Pool, and to the federal government, and attended the 

meeting in Saskatoon where all the players were involved and 

I've certainly been expressing our concern that the grain moves. 

 

We do not have control over that system jurisdictionally.  

Paying the Crow to the farmers I don't think makes one bit of 

difference to the dispute.  If the railroads are shut down and the 

grain is not moving out of here, I don't think it matters a whole 

lot how the payment is paid, to farmers or the railroads.  If 

there's no grain moving, there's no grain moving.  And I think 

that's a total red herring to the issue at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

New Page 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I wish to inform the 

Assembly that Lilia Kusiak will be assisting as page for the 

remainder of the session.  The members will remember Lilia.  

She served as a page in our Assembly last year and she is 

replacing Troy Davies who has taken on another job, a summer 

job somewhere else.  Lilia, will you please stand. 

 

Hon. Members: hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly I would move: 

 

 That the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for the 

Legislative Assembly, being subvotes LG01 to LG06 of vote 

21, for the Provincial Auditor, being vote no. 28, be 

withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

Leave granted. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 8 -- An Act 

respecting Fisheries be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to be able to talk in second reading 

in adjourned debates on this Bill No. 8 regarding fisheries, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think at the outset I would have to say that we would agree 

that the intent of the Bill is good in general respects.  And the 

reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is that it replaces the previous 

federal Bill that was regulating fisheries in this province.  And 

essentially the mechanisms that were employed at that time was 

that everything had to go through the feds.  And as you know, 

Mr. Speaker, that did mean an added layer of bureaucracy; that 

did mean a lot more red tape, and it did mean that decisions 

made were very often delayed in their coming back as 

decisions that was good for Saskatchewan. 

 

So from that perspective I think what this Bill is trying to do is 

to repatriate the fisheries legislation to Saskatchewan.  And, 

like I said, Mr. Speaker, that is a rather positive step.  And I 

notice that the Premier reacts immediately when I use the word 

repatriate, as I suppose it brings back some memories that 

would probably rather be forgotten at this stage. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, before I get carried away and 

pronounce the Bill good, there are certain several areas that we 

feel that the Bill could be improved upon.  And we will be 

asking questions of that nature and to that effect when we have 

that opportunity later on in the session in the Committee of the 

Whole, because we do believe that more consultation could 

have been done. 

 

Now I know that the members opposite will say to us, and the 

minister will say, that they did consult extensively.  But I 

believe, as is very often the case, Mr. Speaker, and as for 

example, The Labour Standards Act and some of the other 

legislation before the House at this particular time . . . also we 

have those ministers being accused of doing a lot of 

consultation but there's a big difference between meaningful 

and real consultation where people doing the consulting will 

actually listen and adhere and accept some of the advice that is 

being given, rather than asking the questions and then going on 

the bent that you were directed on in the first place.  So it's a 

matter of the minister, in several instances at least, not having 

listened. 

Now in particular, we have received some extensive concerns 

from the Saskatchewan Outfitters Association .  Now the 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association by and large will support 

this legislation, and quite frankly, if they are the ones that are 

supporting the legislation then far be it from us to oppose -- 

other than to bring forward some of that organization's 

concerns that they have even though they support the Bill in its 

large measure. 

 

They believe, for example, that this Bill is negative in tone, Mr. 

Speaker, that it puts too much emphasis, for example, on 

enforcement and punishment and not enough emphasis on 

positive fisheries policy. 

 

So it's also felt by outfitters that many of the areas of the Bill 

are potentially in conflict with the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  And that's a serious charge and one that the 

government, I believe, and the minister in particular in this 

case, has the obligation to investigate and make sure that in fact 

and indeed that is not the case. 

 

The Bill also, Mr. Speaker, in the opinion of the outfitters 

association, creates a number of situations of legal reverse onus 

-- reverse onus on outfitters and other fishers.  And although 

reverse onus is not necessarily bad in some instances, it is 

however, Mr. Speaker, the premiss of being presumed innocent 

until proven guilty, in those instances has been removed.  And 

again I would just simply say that the government should show 

some caution before getting into this questionable legal area. 

 

Another concern, Mr. Speaker, that we want to address in the 

Committee of the Whole from the outfitters association, is that 

they fear that they may be held liable for their clients' actions -- 

clients' actions that may have been, in certain circumstances at 

least, beyond the outfitters' control.  But because of the action 

of some of their clients the outfitters then may indeed be held 

liable for that.  And that is a concern that they have and I think 

that it is a legitimate concern that we will be bringing up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now another concern -- and this seems to be a trend in some of 

the other legislation, particularly from this minister -- is the 

sweeping powers that it gives to fisheries officers, in many 

cases going beyond the powers normally given and allowed to 

normal police officers. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, it is virtually silent on the issue of 

training for officers on topics such as the search-and-seizure 

law.  There's no real, concerted effort to make sure that 

top-notch training is indeed available for the officers.  It does 

not say that it may not be given, but certainly it will be given in 

passing as opposed to being part of the legislation.  And 

certainly we should make sure that these powers given to these 

officers, that there will not be that potential for an abuse of 

these kinds of powers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There's another issue that the Act is silent on and that is the 

issue of privately owned lakes or other fishing resources that do 

not fall under the direct authority of 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

the minister or the Act itself.  This again is a great concern of 

the outfitters which so far the government has chosen to ignore.  

And again during the Committee of the Whole we will be 

questioning the minister on this particular aspect. 

 

There's another concern that has been expressed to me, and that 

is the simply sweeping powers of discretion of the minister, 

Mr. Speaker, on everything from the conditions and the 

granting of licences to the actions of officers and then all the 

way to the management of lakes. 

 

(1415) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, any time such powers of discretion are 

granted to a minister, one has to wonder how they impact on 

the rule of law.  If the minister can, willy-nilly on the spur of 

the moment, make a decision, a discretion call, how is that 

going to relate to the rule of law? 

 

And one has to wonder also, Mr. Speaker, how . . . and what 

recourse citizens will have from arbitrary decisions made by 

the minister.  And one must also wonder if the minister will be 

at all constrained to consult with the people affected. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I have to emphasize the concern that 

has been expressed to me and the concern is this: that the issues 

that I've raised so far are not being addressed by this Bill as 

they should be. 

 

Now time and again this session, Mr. Speaker, and last session, 

we have seen the government extend its power of discretion at 

the expense of the rights of ordinary citizens.  We have seen 

them becoming more intrusive, intruding upon more and more 

into the rights of individuals and into the administration of 

private boards and organizations. 

 

So the question that could be raised, not by the outfitters' 

association but myself at this stage, is where will this 

empire-building of the government stop?  It's a legitimate 

question I think that must be asked.  Why does the government, 

for example, feel such compulsion to extend its control on the 

everyday, day-to-day life of its citizens? 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, that this Bill is 

reminiscent of the series of assaults on the rights of citizens and 

on the rule of the law that we saw over the last past years, 

particularly the last session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we could take a look . . . and I won't take up the time of 

the Assembly, but I remember Bill 3 particularly, to amend The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act which allows 

government employees to enter private property without a 

search warrant. 

 

Or Bill 14, An Act to amend The Child and Family Services 

Act, allowing the minister to 

divulge personal records to the public, Mr. Speaker.  Or Bill 13, 

An Act to amend The Adoption Act, allowing the minister to 

forbid a court of law from hearing or receiving evidence held 

by a government employee, that might be relevant to the proper 

determining of a person's innocence or guilt.  Bill 10, for 

example, was An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, 

allowing a minister to retroactively increase taxes on oil, gas, 

or mining companies. 

 

And the litany of these examples could go on, Mr. Speaker, 

which I believe is a direct government assault on the very 

foundations of a democratic society. 

 

So again I say, ministerial discretion used conscientiously can 

be of some benefit.  But at the same time it can, and very often 

is, a dangerous tool to be used by the government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the issues that have 

been raised by concerned people to me, and some of the issues 

that I have come upon and some of the concerns.  And so by 

the few comments that I've made so far this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, I give notice to the minister that these are the points 

that we will be discussing in Committee of the Whole.  And I 

certainly hope that the minister and his officials will come here 

prepared so that we can take care of this matter judiciously. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was just going to say, Mr. Speaker, before I was abruptly 

concluded there, that as far as we're concerned we have no 

problem with this Bill now going to Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 58 -- An Act 

respecting Representation in the Legislative Assembly be now 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 

 

The Chair: -- At this time I would ask the Minister of 

Agriculture to please introduce the officials who have joined us 

here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I have with 

me Terry Scott, the assistant deputy minister; and I have Rick 

Armstrong and Peter Rempel directly behind me. 

 

Clause 1 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, a few 

questions just before we proceed through the Bill. 

 

I understand that what the Act intends to do is to expand 

protection for farm animals.  Presently the present Act I believe 

currently gives protection to cattle, horses, pigs, and poultry.  

And we're quite well aware of the changes that have been 

taking place in agriculture across this province and the way 

farmers have diversified and the number of other species that 

farmers are into raising now for production, such as ostriches. 

 

And one of the major problems that still continues to arise is 

the harassment that animals face in light of dogs or neighbours' 

dogs or dogs that aren't being controlled by the neighbours.  

And if I understand correctly, this Act is going to address some 

of those concerns. 

 

(1430) 

 

The amendments expand the list of protected animals to include 

all farm animals where a justice of the peace can issue an order 

to destroy a dog that has attacked a protected animal.  It 

increases the fine for failing to carry out an order from 20 to 

$100.  The Act increases the summary convictions penalties in 

part III of the Act, where a person is found guilty of an offence 

or where a person fails to carry out a provision of the 

regulations, the minimum fine is increased from 25 to 100, the 

maximum increased from 500 to a thousand. 

 

I have just a few short questions.  I understand the fact that the 

Bill is expanding protection to more farm produce and farm 

animals that are used for farm production.  Mr. Minister, I 

guess a couple of questions I'd like to pose immediately: why 

are you making the amendments at this time, and were there 

any requests from specific groups regarding the amendments 

brought to your attention?  Is that why you're making it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, the requests came 

mainly from sheep producers in the province who were covered 

. . . the sheep were covered under a separate Act which was 

repealed, and left the sheep producers, who have the largest 

problem with dogs of any of the livestock producers . . . And at 

meetings that I've had with different sheep producers, they have 

definitely wanted protection for sheep. 

 

And although we haven't had problems with some of the new 

livestock; as you pointed out, we have elk and fallow deer and 

ostriches and wild boar and so on -- so at the same time we're 

opening up the Act, we wanted to make it inclusive of all 

farm-produced livestock. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So as you've indicated, Mr. Minister, this Act 

certainly has been brought to the forefront because of the 

problem that sheep producers are having, but is including all 

livestock now, as I was discussing earlier.  And I just wanted to 

clarify that. 

Section 15(5) is amended.  Why has the fine for failing to carry 

out a court order to destroy a dog increased from 20 to $100?  

First of all, who would that fine be applied to?  And why such a 

significant increase in that fine?  And what would be the 

reasoning for that type of a fine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The old Act 

was passed in 1972, and I guess $100 was probably a more 

appropriate fine.  This would be a fine that would apply to 

somebody who had a justice of the peace order the dog 

destroyed and not carry out that order. 

 

I think the reasons are obvious.  With the livestock industry, 

some of the high prices of livestock damaged by dogs can be in 

the thousands of dollars; and failing to carry out an order and 

being fined $20 might not solve the problem if it again results 

in large damage to agriculture producers. 

 

So I think it's simply a matter of trying to bring the fine in line 

with similar situations.  And with over 20 years since the Act 

has been updated, that that was thought to be appropriate level 

of fine. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So, Mr. Minister, what you're saying is the fine 

would be levelled against the owner of the dog that was found 

to be disturbing the livestock at the time. 

 

How many orders for failing to destroy a dog were given out 

during the last fiscal year?  Do you have any information on 

that?  And secondly, how much revenue was collected from 

these fines in the last fiscal year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- In the past fiscal year, apparently 

there were no orders to destroy dogs or no fines levied. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, is this a major problem?  I realize 

that we do have complaints from time to time.  And does the 

department envision that there's going to be a number of 

problems or complaints being brought to light?  The fact that 

we're changing the Act now, so we're including more animals, 

is this going to bring a number of additional cases to the 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we don't anticipate any major 

problems in this area, and certainly in my communication with 

sheep producers they were concerned about this legislation.  

Certainly there may be isolated incidents that we have to deal 

with.  We certainly don't anticipate . . . it hasn't been a large 

problem in the past nor do we anticipate huge problems in the 

future.  But in those isolated incidents where it does occur, we 

feel we should be equipped to properly deal with it. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I note in section 18 there are a couple of fine 

limits set there.  The minimum fine for committing offences is 

increasing from 25 to $100, the maximum going from 500 to 

1,000.  Again I would wonder . . . I would suggest that the fines 

seem to be fairly 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

substantial; they've gone up dramatically. 

 

What determines what the fine will be?  I gather from the fines 

as we're laying them out there, there's no if's, and's or but's.  It's 

moving from 25 to $100 and that's what the fine will be if 

you're charged. And who determines what the fines are?  Is this 

just the department and why would we have such a dramatic 

increase in these fine levels? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- These are the fines that would be 

levied against a dog owner in a situation where the dog did 

damage to livestock.  The movement upwards of the fines is 

basically to keep pace with present times and inflation. Going 

from a maximum of 500 to 1,000 is just a doubling, and that 

probably wouldn't account for inflation in the past 22 years 

since this Act has been redone. 

 

The fine levels will be determined by a judge; this will be a 

court and the judge will presumably assign an appropriate fine 

compared to the damage and the problem that was created. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, as I indicated a few moments earlier 

on the other increase in fines from 20 to $100, regarding the 

fines here that we're talking of, have there been any significant 

fines handed out in the last year, or are there any significant 

increases projected for the new year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, we did not have any fines 

assessed in this past fiscal year and we don't anticipate it to be a 

problem.  I think most often neighbours are able to work out 

their problems over dogs; but again given the value of some of 

the livestock, we certainly want to be prepared if isolated 

instances do arise. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Who administers the collection of these fines, or 

this fine revenue, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The fines would be assigned by 

and collected by a court, so a judge would determine the fines 

and the money would go into the general revenues. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Is the municipality held accountable or 

responsible for any of these fines or collection of these fines, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, they are not. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting Agrologists 

 

The Chair: -- If the minister could introduce the new official 

that has joined us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chair.  Joining us from 

the Department of Justice, Susan Amrud. 

Clause 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support 

this Bill with respect and pleasure. 

 

The agrologists are the professionals whose energies are 

directed to the maintenance and improvement of all aspects of 

the food producing and processing industries.  They have 

served this province well and their self-regulating Act is a 

credit to their integrity as professionals. 

 

I note that it was in Saskatchewan that those who had taken 

advanced training in the many facets of agriculture first 

recognized the value of forming a professional organization 

and which subsequently spread to all the provinces. 

 

The key change contained in the new Act represents the fair 

and conscientious way that agrologists view themselves as part 

of the food industry.  Here they have asked for a 

minister-appointed member to their council to strengthen the 

links with legislation and regulations.  It must be the intention 

of the government to make this a two-way communication 

since agrologists have so much to contribute when new 

concerns are addressed by this legislature. 

 

In closing, I wish to congratulate the agrologists who will be 

holding their annual meeting in Yorkton on May 20 and 21 and 

their national federation, the Agricultural Institute of Canada, 

which will meet in Regina July 10 to 14. 

 

I have one question I would like to put to the minister at this 

time.  What will be the process for selecting the province's 

appointee to the council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The government position will be 

appointed by order in council.  It can be anybody from the 

public and obviously it will be done with consultation with 

different agricultural groups and with the SIA (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Agrologists). 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, it's our 

understanding that this Bill was essentially drafted by the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists.  We've had discussion 

with them on a number of occasions.  And I'm wondering, just 

from our discussion and a question, has your department 

inserted or deleted anything from what the agrologists were 

basically looking for in the Bill?  Have you changed any areas 

of the Bill, that we should be aware of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- No, the member is absolutely right.  

This was drafted by the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists.  

We certainly looked at it as a government to see that it 

complied with other professional Acts that we have.  But we 

found it to be very much in order and, other than some minor 

suggestions for change, it is basically the Bill as was drafted by 

the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, in section 8 we notice that the institute's council 

provides for two forms of representation for the government.  

And one was just addressed by the member from Regina North 

West where the Lieutenant Governor in Council would make a 

recommendation. 

 

There is however an additional provision that is less often used, 

and that's for the deputy minister of your department to sit as an 

ex officio member of the council.  We're wondering, why was 

it felt that this additional representation was needed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, my understanding is that the 

deputy minister used to be a member of the council and is now 

an ex officio member of the council, and that was again at the 

request of the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Now you had indicated just a few moments ago 

that one member of the council would be an individual who 

must be actively involved in farming, if I understand correctly.  

And this selection will be made . . . actually I guess this 

selection will be made by the council, if I understand correctly; 

that your selection, of the selection by the Lieutenant Governor 

or executive arm of government, will be made in consultation 

with, but the council will be selecting a member.  And I'm 

wondering, will the council have sole discretion as to the 

appointment of this member?  Or will there be consultation 

with various agricultural organizations to select this person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, that refers to 

the elected members of the board.  The members are elected by 

the Saskatchewan Institute of Agrologists.  And this simply 

stipulates that one of the members that they elect has to be 

actively engaged in farming, so that they do have one member 

on the board who is actively engaged in farming. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, under 

section 15(2) the council is given quite a lengthy time, five 

months to be exact, to notify members of by-laws which have 

been passed. Yet under section 15(3) there is also the normal 

provision that failure to comply with the notification provision 

does not invalidate the by-laws.  And I'm just wondering if 

there is any kind of penalty that the council would incur for 

failure to meet the notification provision. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, my understanding is 

this is a fairly common provision to professional Acts.  It just 

allows them to mail out their by-laws with their regular mailing 

so they don't have to do extra mailings to get the by-laws out.  

And again my understanding is that's fairly common amongst 

the professional Acts. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank 

you.  Under section 15, we notice that it contains the normal 

provision that the minister shall have final approval over the 

institute's by-laws.  As we've asked with other legislation like 

this, are there any circumstances where the minister or you 

yourself would withhold approval for a by-law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, there may be circumstances 

where a minister might withhold consent; would be in a 

situation where the by-law was not within the authority of the 

institute to make with regards to the Act or one that was 

deemed not to be in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under sections 24 and 

25, the composition of the professional conduct and discipline 

committees is described.  According to these sections, someone 

sitting on one committee cannot sit on the other.  Why is this?  

We see in the legislation for other professional organizations 

that often these sorts of committees are one and the same.  It 

would seem logical that you would need to have a background 

on the member's offence to be able to make a fair decision 

about discipline. 

 

What is the rationale for doing it this way in this case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I'm told that again this is common 

to all professional Acts, that some of the old Acts still do have 

situations where the committees are the same.  But in all the 

new Acts they're being constructed where the committee cannot 

be the same, and we're told that they may not stand up in court 

with the same committee.  So that's the reason for having a 

separate committee, so that justice can clearly be seen to be 

done. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you're saying, Mr. Minister, is that 

possibly other departments will place the same types of 

changes as their Acts are updated and changed. 

 

Under section 26(4), Mr. Minister, the discipline committee is 

exempted from having to follow any legal rules of evidence, so 

presumably it can accept hearsay evidence and the like.  Why is 

it necessary for the committee to have this broad and rather 

unusual leeway, especially since the rest of the committee's 

proceedings appear to be so strictly quasi-judicial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again this is a standard in most 

professional Acts.  The theory is that these committees are not 

courts; they're not legal people, and therefore they are allowed 

to accept whatever evidence they consider is appropriate.  If 

they stray from that, the member always has the option of 

taking him to court and getting his hearing there. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Under section 47, you 

specify the acceptable methods for serving documents.  In other 

legislation you have included fax machines as an acceptable 

method, and you have promoted this as being an important 

reform of bringing the service of documents in the electronic 

age.  I understand that this wasn't included in this case, and I'm 

wondering why you wouldn't allow the fax to 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

be used in this circumstance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Yes, I think the member makes a 

good point.  I'm told that they will be able to use their by-laws 

to modify it if they so desire, but it's not in this particular Act 

that they can use fax. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, just one 

other question has come to my attention.  If a complaint is 

raised against a particular agrologist or against the agrologists, 

who would a person go to?  Let's say it's someone out in the 

field, a person, a farmer, or a farm group and have some 

concerns with some of the information that may have been 

brought to them by an agrologist or the way an agrologist has 

been conducting themselves in the area regarding specific 

crops. 

 

Who would they complain to?  Would they complain to this 

disciplinary committee?  Would they complain to your 

department?  How would they handle some of the concerns 

they may have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- They should complain to the 

Institute of Agrologists, to the organization.  Certainly if they 

complained to the department, we would certainly pass that on 

to the institute. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, just one other question.  If a 

complaint is registered with the agrologists and a person just 

feels that they haven't received an adequate answer, is there an 

avenue, can they come through the Department of Agriculture . 

. . to the department as a follow-up to check and see whether or 

not the complaint was properly adhered to and listened to and 

get a response, a suitable response? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly, as the member opposite 

knows, the department is always wanting to be helpful and we 

would certainly work with somebody who had a complaint to 

be sure that it did get to the SIA and that it was dealt with 

properly. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'd like 

to extend a thank you to the minister and his officials for taking 

the time to be with us to review both The Animal Protection 

Act and The Agrologists Act.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to thank the 

members for their questions and their cooperation and also the 

officials for giving me the brilliant answers.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce the officials 

who have joined us here this afternoon, before we proceed to 

clause-by-clause study. 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I'd 

like to introduce Les Cooke, the associate deputy minister in 

charge of policy and programs.  And behind me, Dave Phillips, 

the manager of fisheries; and Bob Blackwell, the assistant 

deputy minister in charge of management services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Welcome, 

Mr. Minister, and officials.  I wonder if you'd mind explaining, 

Mr. Minister, exactly what the purpose for this amendment is.  

Why was it necessary? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are two purposes to 

the amendment of this Act.  One is to clarify the regulatory role 

of the department with respect to fisheries which was 

previously regulated by the federal Fisheries Act. The other is 

to put in place the legal authority to establish, by discussion 

and future regulation, the financial sureties for mine 

decommissioning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'd like to deal 

first with clause 3 of the Bill which deals with section 18 of the 

Act.  It talks about a body of water.  I wonder if you'd mind 

explaining for the purposes of this Bill exactly what you mean 

by a body of water.  How long, how wide, how deep?  Just 

exactly what. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in the definition section of 

the Act, it describes the bodies of water: 

 

 . . . means (the) water which is above the surface of land and 

in a river, stream, lake, creek, spring, ravine, coulee, canyon, 

lagoon, swamp, marsh or other watercourse or body of water; 

 

Generally rivers, streams, lakes. 

 

There'll be a House amendment coming forward later on to 

clarify the fact that it does not include small bodies of water 

enclosed by private lands.  There were some concerns 

expressed about that but we'll be introducing that amendment at 

the end of the discussion. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, because indeed 

a number of people did have some concerns that it might be 

dealing with sloughs, it might be dealing with their dugouts, 

their sewage lagoons, or whatever it might be -- so there was 

some concerns about this. 

 

I wonder if you'd mind explaining what you see as the concern 

or the problem with altering the course or cause of . . . alter or 

cause to be altered the configuration of the bed.  Now what I'm 

thinking of here is if an RM (rural municipality) is building a 

road, obviously if they're going through a creek they're going to 

alter the bed of the road.  What impact is this going to have on 

RMs? 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Because I received a phone call from an RM that was 

concerned about this piece of legislation, about this section of 

the Act and how it was going to impact on RMs when it came 

time to build roads; or he also . . . this person also mentioned 

putting in a rock crossing on a creek.  I know this person was 

from down in the south-west in Val Marie country; and I've 

hunted in that area and I cross a river out in the community 

pastures and I don't know whether it's natural or not, but there's 

sure a lot of rocks in the bottom of that crossing. 

 

So what impact is it going to have if the RM wants to build a 

rock crossing across a creek rather than putting a road, and a 

bridge in, etc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question.  

The intent of the change is not to have any impact on the 

present permitting system that's there for RMs.  But what it's 

there to do is in cases where fish habitat might be affected, that 

in fact there would be an opportunity to make sure that the fish 

habitat is restored if it has to be disturbed, or preferably not to 

be disturbed if possible.  But the permitting system is intended 

not to change in any way the way in which RMs have done 

their traditional business. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I'm hoping the 

RMs can take that as a confirmation that they will be allowed 

to carry on. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think I'll wait on that, on your amendment to 

discuss it.  I was interested in . . . Well we might as well do it 

now. 

 

It talks about wholly within a piece of property owned by one 

individual.  I'm wondering, if you have a body of water, say on 

an Indian reserve, will this -- either the Act or the amendment 

that you will propose -- have any impact on those waters? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The land in the circumstances which you 

describe, or water in that area, would not be affected as long as 

it wasn't part of a water system that flowed out from that 

private land you described.  So smaller bodies of water that 

were not part of a lake system would be outside of the 

jurisdiction of this Act, but bodies where the water flowed from 

that private land would be subject to the condition of the Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Have you 

discussed this with the Minister of Justice in dealing with 

reserves?  Because there are some constitutional questions as to 

who has rights and who doesn't have rights within the 

boundaries of the reserve, and the land, air, and water within 

that boundary.  Have you discussed any of those aspects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  The House 

amendment has been drafted in consultation with Justice to 

consider the important questions with respect to water 

movement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  But have you 

considered it in respect to Indian reserves 

and the constitutional rights they may have? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This issue has been discussed with Justice 

more in relation to The Fisheries Act which is coming later, 

which is again a response to the fact that the federal 

government is vacating part of this turf to us.  So the issue you 

raise has been discussed with Justice in relation to The 

Fisheries Act but it is applicable also to this amendment which 

is in this particular Act because of the application to the 

particular Act within which it is. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Will this Act 

have jurisdiction on Indian reserves?  I'm thinking of the 

situation now of the gaming Act in Saskatchewan, which the 

natives are contesting as not having jurisdiction within their 

boundaries of their reserves.  Will this Act have jurisdiction 

within the boundaries of the Indian reserves? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This Act is equally applicable to Indian 

reserves as it is to other private lands. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Is it equally 

applicable as the gaming regulations and gaming Act are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't have constitutional experts with me 

with respect to the gaming industry, but I've been assured by 

my officials that all the considerations of the application of this 

Act to Indian lands has been considered in the drafting of the 

Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I bring it up 

because I think we need to be conscious, with the expanding 

role that the natives are playing in our society and the 

expanding role of the jurisdictions they're seeking to gain, as to 

how legislation is going to impact in those areas.  I think it's 

very important that we be conscious of those kind of things. 

 

Mr. Minister, how will this clause affect cottage owners around 

various bodies of water?  I know that some cottage owners like 

to remove vegetation from in front of their property so that they 

can have a better swimming area.  And I'm not sure whether 

they do this with anyone's permission or not, but it does 

happen. 

 

What impact will this piece of legislation have on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There has been a permitting system with 

respect to the issue you raise as well as for our RM 

applications, and this revision of the Act includes no change in 

those provisions.  The same permitting system that was there 

before will continue to apply. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay thank you, Mr. Minister.  If there's 

no change to it, well then I'm sure cottage owners are aware of 

what the rules are and have been up till now existing with them, 

whether they're happy with them or not. 

 

Mr. Minister, we'll go on to the second part of the Bill, dealing 

with the reclamations and decommissioning 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

of mines.  You talk about bringing some changes through 

regulations; in particular, I would suspect that will deal with the 

fees that may be assessed and the time frames.  Could you give 

us some indication of what your thoughts are along that line, or 

what is going to happen, unless you happen to have the 

regulations handy and able to present them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Just to clarify the role of the amendments 

to the Act.  The amendments will not be describing a fee 

structure but rather putting in place the capacity to establish 

regulations to establish financial sureties.  These are financial 

instruments that the mining companies would make available to 

ensure that money is available to do environmental clean-ups at 

the time of decommissioning, whether that's the disposition of 

tailings from mines or whatever might be part of their mining 

ventures. 

 

The reason the regulations are not presently available is 

because we have with the mining industry a cooperative 

discussion going on.  There are four subcommittees looking at 

the issues of what financial instruments are most appropriate, 

that serve both the needs of the mining industry and the people 

of Saskatchewan; what the time frame should be within which 

these should be put in place. 

 

This consultation process will go on, and when we have the 

report back from the committees that are working, we expect 

by June we'll be able to outline the details of what's been 

worked out cooperatively with the mining sector. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's good 

to hear that you're working with the mining industry on this, 

because obviously they're one of the major players that are 

going to be dealing with this. 

 

Who else might be affected, other than the mining industry on 

this?  I'm thinking now of petroleum production.  Because I 

know that there are a number of orphan sites scattered across 

this province from old drilling sites that it's difficult to find an 

owner for today, and yet decommissioning is a serious 

problem, particularly if it's sitting on private land and the 

farmer is responsible for this.  He had nothing to do with it 

perhaps.  He didn't drill the oil well, but somebody is left 

holding the bill for it.  Will this have any impact on that type of 

a situation? 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't want to answer this at too great a 

length, but there are really three phases of preventing the 

circumstance you describe for the farmer who might find him 

or herself with the problem that they're left holding.  One is to 

have the best management in the field now with respect to that 

issue.  Secondly, it is to make sure that in . . . 

 

I should preface my remarks by saying that this Act does not 

deal with that question; this Act deals with mines.  But just to 

say that, in the parallel you use, the object is to not leave the 

Saskatchewan people in the circumstance where they would be 

holding the bag as 

the farmer is now; in fact to provide a mechanism by which this 

by-product of mining is dealt with at the point in which mining 

discontinues; to put the money aside while active mining is 

going on so it's available through an instrument that the mining 

companies would choose, within the range of those acceptable 

options that will be worked out with them, so that at the time of 

decommissioning there will be enough money there to ensure 

that that can happen. 

 

On the question you ask about the farmers, again, with the oil 

fields on their property, we'll be working over the next year in 

consultation on the contaminated-site liability legislation to 

determine a pathway to determine who's responsible and to 

help resolve that to the best of our ability. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When you 

talk of a financial surety and you also mention environmental 

clean-up, now these funds that will be available, are they for 

the decommissioning and reclamation, or if there's an 

environmental problem between start-up and decommissioning, 

will those funds be used for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The day-to-day environmental 

management of a mine site is the responsibility of the mining 

company, and our department's monitoring of that will 

determine that if something is not being done properly 

currently, it will be done properly.  The object of the financial 

surety is to provide the best estimate of an amount of money 

that will ensure that should the mine in operation cease 

operation and that there are elements of, as I say, the 

by-product of the mining operation that need to be dealt with at 

the time of the decommissioning, that there are funds in place 

to do that. 

 

I think the question you ask deals with the activity of the 

mining company while it's functioning, and their day-to-day 

management has to look after those clean-ups as they go if 

there were a spill or that kind of difficulty. 

 

This is for the post-mining phase when a mine is being 

decommissioned that there is money available for that purpose.  

The best estimate in the writing of the regulation will, I 

presume, also include something at the edges for possible 

contaminants that might have been accumulating over the life 

of the mine.  But to make sure that that site can be reclaimed to 

its original purpose before the mining company is granted a 

release from the site. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  When this 

financial vehicle is being set up, I believe you said that the 

mining companies will be able to choose within an area what 

suits them.  Who controls those funds and who benefits from, 

say the interest being collected off of those funds if there is 

money put aside in a particular account? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The intent of this legislation is simply to 

make sure that the companies set aside an amount of money 

accessible to the people of Saskatchewan at a time when it may 

need to be called 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

upon. 

 

So it needs to be . . . not knowing the names of all the financial 

instruments that are around, but the notion of bonding, the 

notion of irrevocable letters of credit, I've heard names like that 

thrown around with respect to this issue.  That financiers could 

tell you more about it than I can, but that these are funds that 

belong to the company to which we have guaranteed access in 

the event that they have to be called upon. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  So you would 

actually . . . while the company would have control of that 

vehicle, you would have a claim on it such that they would not 

be able to dispose of it in any way, shape, or form.  And they 

would continue to benefit from any interest which may accrue 

on those funds.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes.  The purpose of the regulation is to . . 

. the consultation on the regulation is to establish what the 

appropriate amount of money is that guarantees Saskatchewan 

people that we will not be left paying for a clean-up activity 

that was the responsibility of a mining company.  But having 

established that amount, then the manner in which the company 

manages those funds is their concern, as long as we have 

guaranteed access to it if we need it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay.  Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What 

happens in the case of where a company becomes insolvent and 

there are other creditors who are seeking access to funds?  

What mechanisms will be in place to ensure that those funds 

are available for any decommissioning; or will an attachment 

be able to be put on them by other creditors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The purpose of establishing these funds 

and the way the wording is . . . I've used the surety funding.  

This money has to be in an instrument that is guaranteed to be 

accessible to the province of Saskatchewan, so that it cannot be 

money that it would in any way be put at risk in the event of a 

financial failure.  It has to be a financial instrument that is 

guaranteed accessible to us in the event of a failure, which 

might be one of the reasons why a company may, midstream, 

discontinue operations.  So the money has to be in an 

instrument that guarantees access by the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would the company be able to pledge 

those funds for any other purpose; or are they solely for the 

purpose of the decommissioning and reclamation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- These funds have to be exclusively 

available for the purpose of reclamation.  They cannot be at 

risk for any other purpose. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, what would happen in the 

case of a federally regulated corporation?  What jurisdictions 

will the province have in those particular kinds of situations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This authority is an authority that we have 

under our Act and it applies equally to 

federally regulated companies as it does to provincial 

companies.  This is an Act that applies to any mining activity 

going on in the province. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not sure if this is going 

to be the situation or not, but if there's a federally . . . controlled 

by the government, a Crown corporation in mining, will this 

legislation still be relevant in those particular cases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What kind of 

time frames are you looking at for this legislation?  I'm from 

the south-east corner so I'm familiar with the coal mining 

operations at Estevan where there is a substantial 

environmental, obvious environmental impact. 

 

Now when you have that kind of an industry, are they going to 

be expected to come up with the money immediately to deal 

with any old mine sites?  Is there a time frame over which that 

is going to be implemented?  And if so, what kind of a time 

frame? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The discussions that are taking place, 

which hopefully will conclude this summer, will be . . . the 

present understanding I have is that there will be . . . the last 

discussions I was involved in, it was a three- to four-year time 

frame within which the companies will be able to put the 

financial instruments in place.  So during that period of time 

they would be making their assessments and coming into 

compliance with the regulations that they've helped us draw. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, thinking again of the 

coalfields, if you're looking at a three- to four-year time frame 

to put your financial instruments into place, if those 

instruments are expected to cover all of the cost of reclamation 

and decommissioning, you have a very major amount of 

money.  And I'm sure that those coal companies, unless 

SaskPower is going to pay them a lot more for their coal, do 

not have the financial wherewithal to put that kind of money up 

in three to four years. 

 

So if they can't do that, what kind of a frame are you looking 

at?  Are you going to be able to put in a certain amount of 

money every year over the expected lifetime of the mine, or 

how is that going to work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the coal industry is a good 

example of how I think a sound mining exercise does function.  

The coal industry's very comfortable with the approach we've 

taken. 

 

The coal industry is now doing their reclamation as they mine.  

And so the amount of money that would be required to be put 

in place in the surety funding mechanism would simply be the 

funds required to clean up that which is disturbed during any 

particular mining phase.  So that if you looked out in the 

coalfields now and took a snapshot of that which is disturbed 

and placed a financial value on restoring that amount of 

disturbance to its natural condition, 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

that would be the estimated value of the surety that would be 

put in place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what about past 

operations?  Some of these coalmines, I believe, go back into 

the 1930s and perhaps earlier than that.  Will this legislation 

have any direct impact on that?  Will the companies that may 

still own that property be expected to provide funds for 

reclamation in those areas? 

 

That area has been decommissioned; it's no longer used as a 

coalmine.  I'm not sure if you can use the term 

decommissioning in that sense because they simply just moved 

over to another spot.  But they're no longer mining there. 

 

Now will funds be put in place for the reclamation of those 

sites, or are those past and will not be impacted on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, for a company that's 

presently in operation, those past sites would become part of 

their complete plan. 

 

For sites that are the result of mining companies no longer in 

operation, that will become part of that larger discussion of 

contaminated-sites liability that we will be pursuing in the next 

year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would 

suspect that while the names may have changed, there's been a 

direct progression to the coal companies that are operating 

there now to the ones that were there before.  That I know of, 

very few of them became insolvent and moved . . . were no 

longer in existence.  They may have sold out to another 

company.  In that particular case, will the company that is 

presently there operating be responsible for those mine sites 

from 50 years ago? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  My officials advise 

me that if there's a direct-descendant relationship operating 

within the same mining permit, that this will be covered within 

this Act, and other provisions would be then pursued with 

respect to the contaminated-site liability that would apply to 

sites that didn't have that connection. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  In the 

case of the coalmines, when you're looking at setting up your 

financial vehicle for the reclamation and decommissioning, will 

the funds available cover the total costs of the 

decommissioning and reclamation?  Will that include both 

current operations since the Act comes into place plus going 

back, if there's a direct lineage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, isn't this going to tie up a 

very, very large amount of capital that these corporations 

would normally use in their day-to-day operations?  I'm sure 

that even if we took SaskPower as 

an example, which had a hundred million dollar profit, give or 

take some; but if you took all of the impacts that SaskPower 

has across this province, all the holes that are dug for their 

power poles, you have a very serious amount of environmental 

impact. 

 

Now how is a corporation to come up with the full amount of 

the reclamation and decommissioning costs without in a very 

serious way increasing the cost of the product that they're 

selling? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it would be my belief that 

for a private sector company the need to clean up something 

already incurred, the need to clean up a past activity, would 

already be listed as a liability in their present accounting 

system.  So that the companies would within their own 

financial statements already be needing to provide for that. 

 

We need to ensure that it's understood that it has access to that 

amount of capital that is necessary.  And that could be through 

a letter of credit or a bond or whatever instruments come to be 

agreed upon as acceptable instruments.  But that there won't be 

idle cash sitting around doing nothing.  It will be an asset of the 

company which it can use, but it has to have guaranteed access 

by us in the event that there is a shut-down. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, while it is an asset of 

the corporation if it's in the bank or the bond or whatever it is, 

if they can't pledge it as a security some place, it's of no value 

to them other than the interest that they can collect off of it. 

 

You mentioned that the reclamations and decommissioning will 

already have been built into the products that they're selling.  If 

I look at the situation down at Estevan and area with the coal 

mining, there is some reclamation being done.  The overburden 

is taken off the mine and the coal is harvested below it.  The 

overburden is stacked off to the side.  Now as the mining 

equipment moves along and moves to the side, some of that 

overburden is then dumped into the first trench.  But that first 

trench, the overburden sits above the surface. 

 

Now it's rounded off and smoothed off and there's some grass 

planted on it.  But it is not returned to the original 

environmental state.  So if you're going to reclaim that dirt, that 

overburden that's removed, there's an added cost built into that.  

It's going to have to be transported over to the other edge of the 

property, and that may be a mile, or maybe more in some cases, 

to return everything to its original environmental state.  And 

just returning the rest of the land to the original environmental 

state is going to be a significant cost because you're going to 

have to strip the topsoil off, the black dirt, to spread it back on 

again. 

 

What kind of an impact have you assessed that this will have 

on a corporation such as SaskPower which is obviously going 

to have to pay more for the coal that it's buying from these 

companies who are going to have to reclaim this property? 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- As I said earlier, the mining companies 

that are involved in coal mining are already using appropriate 

practices, so reclamation is going on as part of their mining 

exercise. 

 

The detail of whether or not there can be a slight hump over 

here and a slight hollow a mile away is a detail the department 

would have to answer.  I suspect that it would be more 

environmentally acceptable to have a slightly different contour 

at the end of the day than to be hauling too many hills for a 

mile.  But that would be a detail I would leave up to the 

department in setting out final decommissioning plans with the 

coal mining companies. 

 

I can say again that the coal mining companies are very 

comfortable with the procedure we're using, with the time 

frames within which we're allowing for the financial sureties to 

be put in place, and to the general framework within which 

they're functioning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then 

you're not going to be returning a site to its original 

environmental state. Is that the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We as a species alter many, many things in 

the carrying out of our daily business of living.  And it would 

be difficult to define an identical state.  The importance is that 

an area be restored to a similar productivity to that which it was 

before it was disturbed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, at some point in 

time, perhaps down the road, somebody will be in a court of 

law trying to explain what this Bill was supposed to do.  And 

they will quote you in saying, an original environmental state. 

 

On that environmental tour that we took with the Environment 

Committee, there were a number of people who came forward.  

And they wanted specifically a return to the original state the 

property was in before someone touched it, before a mining 

company came on site. They wanted it returned to exactly that 

state again. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, when you say that, some people are going to 

take you at your word on that, that it is to be returned to the 

exact same state that it was in before.  And if you're going to 

leave a 50-foot pile of overburden on one end of the property 

and a 50-foot hole on the other end of the property, that's not 

returning it to the original state. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think you have to make that clear, that your 

intention is not to return it to the original state, but to an 

environmentally acceptable state. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I hope anybody making future reference to 

this debate will refer to the Act and not to your or my 

interpretation of the words as I try to explain to you what it 

means.  Essentially since what you are asking is unachievable, I 

have to agree with you.  I could not return a cultivated field on 

my farm to the state at which it was before it was cultivated, 

because that system will be . . . because I don't know what it 

was exactly and it's impossible to return it identically to the 

same ecological state.  It is certainly hopefully possible to 

return it to a similar condition. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  We agree 

on that point that you can't return it to the original state.  But 

there are a number of people around this province who would 

like indeed that very thing to happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, when you're tying up this large amount of capital 

for the reclamation and the decommissioning, will that need for 

the capital be put in place in the first three to four years, was 

the time frame you had quoted, that total amount needed?  Or 

will that money come in then over a period of time as the 

operation of the mine takes place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the amount will be in 

place.  And if then there is ongoing work that is done in the 

course of mining that reduces that liability, then that amount 

could be reduced.  But the amount necessary at the time, four 

years from now, to decommission activities as they presently 

exist will be in place in four years. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. And how 

about the ongoing operations of the mine?  As the coal 

companies in Estevan continue to remove the overburden, 

extract the coal, they are having an impact on a greater amount 

of property.  Will that fund increase then as they continue their 

operation?  Or if you take an underground mine as they sink 

shaft and run stoke, will they then have to put more money into 

the operation, or are we talking simply about the surface of a 

mine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The requirement for funding will be that 

required to restore the agreed-upon condition on the surface, 

and presumably if there were a hazard in some shallow 

underground activity, that as well.  But that the public interest 

is protected and that that which has to be done in 

decommissioning for public safety and restoring the 

environment will be covered at any given time. 

 

That amount will be a rolling amount of money that might 

increase during some particular phase and decrease during 

another, so that should decommissioning need to occur at any 

moment on that time scale, there would be sufficient funds in a 

guaranteed access position to deal with that issue. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. In a deep shaft 

mine, as the mining material is taken out and the ore is 

extracted from it, will that remaining compound, whatever kind 

of rock it might be, be returned to the mine or will it be allowed 

to remain on the surface, or what will happen in those 

particular circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I should qualify an earlier comment when 

I spoke about four years.  As I said earlier, the discussion, last 

time I was updated on it, was intending to put these instruments 

in place in the 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

three- to four-year range.  Those discussions are part of a 

regulatory detail discussion that's going on, as is the discussion 

that you're now raising. 

 

But in brief, the intent of the amount of surety that we can put 

in place would be an amount which would either manage in 

perpetuity, a particular environmental risk resulting from 

mining and leaving an amount of tailings somewhere, or the 

amount of money required to possibly put it back into a cavern, 

if that was a logical alternative.  So that a proper environmental 

protection is guaranteed to the people of Saskatchewan by the 

amount of money that is allocated there. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Well while I 

don't disagree with the need to reclaim these sites, I am 

concerned as to the amount of money that it is going to cost to 

do this.  And I can see that there will be a substantial increase 

in the costs for certain corporations to operate because they 

have to put this commissioning money up front. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do you determine just what amount of bond 

or fund will be necessary to decommission and to reclaim a 

mine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- As I stated a minute ago, what the 

regulations will outline is . . . what the regulations will outline 

is the method of calculating the amount of money that will be 

necessary to manage in perpetuity an environmental risk; or to 

restore, as you suggested, some of these risks into the original 

mining caverns in that event.  So that there will be procedures 

put in place to calculate the money necessary to restore that site 

to an acceptable environmental condition or to manage it in 

perpetuity so that there is no risk to the environment or to 

humans. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What will 

happen to those sites that we have around the province to which 

there is no longer an owner or a corporation that the 

government can go to to say, this is how much fund is needed 

for the reclamation of this site?  An owner no longer exists.  

What responsibilities will the government have in those cases, 

if the mining companies are going to be decommissioning and 

reclaiming the sites that they are currently operating, or that 

they currently own even if they're not operating; what will 

happen to those sites where there is no one left that's 

responsible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The short answer is that is outside the 

jurisdiction of this Act, if we wanted to restrict the discussion 

to this Act. 

 

The longer answer is that, having said that, there are two 

approaches.  We will be again pursuing discussion of a 

contaminated-site liability legislation in the next year, we will 

be discussing what that legislation should look like that deals 

with the very question you raised. 

 

There has been a small program, accessible by the 

provinces, put out by the federal government on contaminated 

site clean-up for orphaned sites, which we have the capacity to 

apply in certain areas -- one to actually physically do work for 

orphaned sites, and the second is to develop new technologies 

to deal with some of these contaminated sites. 

 

So we will continue to work with the federal government to see 

if we cannot establish resources to begin to clean some of those 

up, but our contaminated-site liability legislation will also help 

determine a path by which we approach the management of 

those sites. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  What kind of 

dollars are we looking at, say, for an underground gold mine, 

one in which you're not concerned about say, radiation and 

those types of concerns that the general public thinks of when 

we talk about northern mining, particularly in the uranium 

industry, but a hard-rock mine dealing with a metal like gold or 

copper or something along that line. What kind of dollar figures 

are you looking at for a reclamation and decommissioning? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- My officials inform me that for a small 

gold mine operation that meets your kind of conditions, that is, 

managing the disposition of their materials as they go, that it 

could be as little as a few hundred thousand dollars. 

 

One of the examples of the first application of this principle 

was in the McArthur River underground exploration program 

where there wasn't a major radiation component.  There the 

amount was $500,000. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  You 

mentioned $500,000 for the exploration.  Now just what did 

this entail?  Was this sinking a shaft, or was this drilling, say, a 

3-inch or a 4-inch hole to determine what the ore body was 

below?  Just what was involved in this operation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- In that case the surety included an amount 

to deal with the surface buildings related to the sinking of a 

shaft and the treatment of drilling materials to do exploratory 

drilling and the treatment of water that might have entered the 

shaft during the process of drilling. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will 

allow our Liberal colleagues to ask you a few questions now.  

Thank you. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

welcome your officials here this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, we are all concerned with the additional rules and 

regulations that must be accepted if in fact Saskatchewan is to 

become environmentally sustainable.  Everyone must cooperate 

and carry the added costs that will inevitably result from 

improved and changed practices; however, the imposition of 

regulations must also be reasonable and appropriate to the 

problem being resolved. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

Today I'd like to question the minister and his officials about 

the intent of the Bill.  My first question is related to the new 

section 18.1.  We find in reading this amendment that good 

intentions seem to have been run away with by language which 

attempts to plug every possible loophole that might occur.  It is 

to the point that there is more than a risk that the management 

procedures that are required on a day-to-day basis for farm and 

ranch management can be stymied. 

 

In particular, the extension of the wording to include as well as 

rivers and streams where of course the free flow of waters must 

be regulated, the Bill goes on to include "marsh or other 

watercourse or body of water."  It seems that this broad 

description includes backwaters and marshes from irrigation 

systems, dugouts, temporary overflows brought on by ice 

build-up, or overnight beaver dams and the like.  These can all 

be considered bodies of water.  Surely it was never intended 

that a farmer could not relieve flooding of his or her barnyard 

without a permit. 

 

The amendment goes further to suggest that one could not mow 

the banks of a ditch or dredge out the weedy end of a dugout 

without first consulting with some government official who 

may or may not understand the circumstances of the procedure 

and may or may not appear until the damage has been done.  

This strikes us as a case where neither the carrot nor the stick 

has been used, but rather a club is proposed where common 

sense would be more appropriate. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you please advise this House if the 

scenarios I presented are in fact possible under your amended 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I've asked the Clerk, and 

apparently you've been . . . forwarded to you is a copy of a 

House amendment to deal with the concerns that you raise.  

These concerns were raised to us, and the House amendment . . 

. it was not the intent to have the kind of scenario you described 

to become reality for anyone.  And the House amendment, 

which has been forwarded to you, of the amended Bill deals 

with those questions and makes sure that common sense will 

prevail. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you for clarifying that. 

 

The explanatory notes that accompanied this Bill indicated that 

this new section -- and I don't have it in front of me right now 

-- is intended to authorize activities relating to fish habitat and 

fish-bearing waters, yet those words do not appear in the Bill 

itself. 

 

Would not a more precise definition that uses those words 

eliminate the potential for this amendment to go further than 

you intended?  In fact are you saying this amendment covers 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member asks a 

reasonable question which has been discussed by the officials 

in carrying this forward.  The use of that language was avoided 

because of the federal 

responsibility for fisheries.  So to make it sure that we would 

not have it interfered with, but using other language to make 

sure that the proper regulatory capacity was there to deal with 

the fact of fish-bearing waters. 

 

And the new amendment which has been forwarded ensures 

that that will not be applied in a fashion which will be 

disruptive to farmers or municipalities or other private owners. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Regarding the permit you refer 

to in the section, how will that permit be obtained?  Could you 

please explain for me where one would go to apply for such a 

permit, who will approve it, what it will cost, and what the 

criteria for it will be for judging the merits of permit 

applications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the fisheries branch issues 

those permits.  They issue them now, and the procedure would 

remain exactly the same after the passage of this amendment as 

it was before, that the fisheries branch has issued their permits 

in the past and will continue to do so. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- And that includes the cost of the permits? 

 

Mr. Minister, with respect to another part of this legislation, the 

proposed amendments to section 38(1), you are taking steps to 

ensure the province is not stuck with the costs of cleaning up 

decommissioned mine sites, and you were speaking with my 

Conservative colleagues about that. 

 

Responsible mining companies in this province do not have 

any difficulty with accepting their responsibility to the 

environment.  Some of them, however, have expressed concern 

that you will require them to post performance bonds worth 

millions of dollars where instead they could assign non-cash 

assets that would not impinge on their operating revenues. 

 

In the absence of clearly defined financial assurances that you 

will seek from these mining companies, and considering that 

you previously indicated that your officials will be consulting 

with mining companies to ensure this type of security 

instrument that is required is acceptable to the mining industry, 

what have those consultations yielded so far in terms of what 

security instrument is most desirable to the players in the 

mining industry?  I'm not sure when you were discussing it if 

you covered that end of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials are looking at 

a full menu of potential financial instruments.  Both are 

bringing their needs to the table.  We are bringing the need for 

absolute certainty of access to the funds, and the mining 

companies are bringing their wish that it be the least intrusive 

instrument into their operations.  So there is . . . the mutual 

need is recognized, and the mining industry's working 

cooperatively with our department in defining what those 

particular instruments will be. 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  And I do have the 

House amendment here.  I thank you for your answers to the 

questions. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  The 

minister thought he was rid of me for the day, but I'm back 

again. 

 

Mr. Minister, you came up with the figure of $500,000 for the 

McArthur River test sites and approximately 2 to $300,000 for 

a small mining site.  What kind of numbers would we be 

looking at for a major operation such as the coal mining at 

Estevan or some of the other uranium mines up North? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This is a number, Mr. Chairman, that 

would be probably inappropriate speculation, because in giving 

mining companies the go-ahead to mine, they have to file 

decommissioning plans.  And depending on the nature of those 

decommissioning plans and the appropriateness of those, there 

needs to be an assessment done of the costs required to carry 

out those decommissioning plans. 

 

So there is an orderly process that will determine what the 

number is, and it's certainly conceivable that some of those 

numbers could be of a significant size, which is the reason why 

we are working cooperatively with the mining sector. 

 

They acknowledge that the public ought not to be vulnerable 

for paying those kinds of expenses.  They acknowledge that it's 

important for them to cooperate in this kind of a process.  And 

what we are committed to is, in working out the detail with 

them, that the protection of the Saskatchewan public from those 

costs will be in place, the protection of the environment will be 

appropriate because of the decommissioning plans that will be 

approved, and that we will have a common agreement on the 

nature of those amounts and the quality of that work to reach 

the goals I just described. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  With a 

new site it's certainly understandable that that decommissioning 

cost would be built into the process, and therefore it's 

reasonably not that difficult to determine what those costs 

would be.  But when you have an old site, how do you 

determine what the costs are? 

 

Surely you must have made those determinations because there 

are a number of older mines around the province that are still 

operating, and those decommissioning costs will have to be 

determined. 

 

Now when you're planning this legislation, I would suspect -- 

or at least I would hope -- that you would have made the 

determination as to what the cost will be for one of these older 

sites.  Or is it going to be a situation where each one will be site 

specific, the costs for the older mines? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- This is . . . the issue the member 

opposite raises is an important one because it identifies that 

operations in the past were not required before proceeding to 

file decommissioning plans.  So what the purpose of the time 

frame that's being discussed, that's in the three- to four-year 

vicinity, is, in addition to providing an opportunity to put the 

financial instruments in place, is to in fact determine the 

decommissioning plan that the company wishes to follow so 

that the appropriate amount of financial instrument can be 

determined. 

 

So this, under this legislation at this time, companies will now 

-- that are in existence without decommissioning plans -- will 

have an opportunity over the next number of years to develop 

those plans and to put the financial instruments in place to 

provide for that decommissioning. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  When 

we're talking of reclamation of sites, who sets the standards and 

the regulations as to what the reclamations will entail?  Is it you 

and your department, or is it in consultation with the mining 

industry?  How and what is determined to be the proper 

reclamations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The process that's used is a cooperative 

process that, if it's in the southern municipalities, would 

involve the municipalities there, the mining company and the 

department, to work out interactively an appropriate protective 

mechanism.  And if it were in the North, it would be with the 

northern peoples as we've demonstrated through the approval 

of some new mining activities over the last year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- So the department is sitting at the table.  

The northern people, or in the southern half of the province, the 

municipalities, and the mining company. 

 

Now what is the starting point going to be?  Is it going to be, as 

we discussed earlier, a return to its original state?  And we 

determined that that can't be done.  So will you be starting at 

some point somewhat less than the original state, and what will 

be acceptable?  What are the guidelines here?  What is the 

measure? 

 

Obviously with this legislation, simply the mining and the 

leaving of the tailings of the overburden on the surface is at one 

end and the complete restoration at the other.  So what is in 

between?  Where is that determination made in between as to 

what the proper amount of reclamation will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I think, as we identified in the discussion 

earlier with respect to the coalmining industry, that the same 

principles would apply, that we would want to re-establish 

areas that have been disturbed to an acceptable environmental 

productive state. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  A good, 

acceptable environmental state.  But who makes that 

determination?  And once that determination is made, what 

rights of appeal does 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1973 

anyone have on that determination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The government is, in these circumstances, 

the representative of the people of the province and we will 

ensure that appropriate environmental standards are met.  But 

the people of the province will also have an opportunity to 

review the decommissioning plans and make sure they're 

acceptable to them.  All of us want to protect the earth on 

which we live.  We want to have it remain in a productive state 

for our children.  And so the public of the province will have an 

opportunity to review these kinds of plans to make sure that 

they're acceptable in their minds as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Now I believe you said that the 

government will set the standards and that the people will then 

be able to review the site after the reclamation has taken place.  

How will these people be chosen?  Or is it simply John Q. 

Public decides to go up North on a fishing trip and to review 

the reclamation of a certain mine site there, and it's acceptable 

if he likes it and it's not acceptable if he doesn't?  How are these 

people chosen that will be doing these reviews? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in a process where a new, 

major project was being undertaken, the environmental impact 

process would be the initiation where, along with a proposal for 

a project, a proponent would put forward an environmental 

impact statement which would include all of the things 

including decommissioning plans. 

 

In this case, where we're beginning halfway with projects 

already underway, again the proponent will have to respond to 

established departmental guidelines and establish a 

decommissioning plan. 

 

Because at this point it's not known for sure whether the 

decommissioning plan may be subjected to environmental 

impact assessment or not, what we will commit is that their 

decommissioning plans will be reviewed by the department for 

compliance with our standards and will be therefore also 

available to the public for review, so that the public can 

comment on the decommissioning plan before final approval is 

given by the department for it. 

 

So it kind of would entail the public review process which is at 

the tail-end of present environmental impact assessment 

processes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think what 

we have here is an embryo of a growing bureaucracy, that as 

this Act goes along you're going to have more and more people 

within your department doing these environmental impact 

studies for the decommissioning as it goes on. 

 

Mr. Minister, who is responsible or who will pay if there's a 

change to the regulations?  Now you're going to set out some 

regulations as to the amount of monies needed for 

decommissioning, for a reclamation, but three years down the 

road the rules change, all of a sudden there's not enough money 

in there any more 

-- who's responsible?  And do the corporations, who I would 

suspect are going to be the ones who have to pay at the end of 

the day . . . is there an appeal mechanism in place for them to 

contest those kind of . . . the regulations, the standards that you 

might set, and the review process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The standards that are established for 

mining or any other form of environmental management are 

those standards which the public information establishes.  One 

certainly cannot guarantee that a standard established today 

might not change if something is found out about a health or 

environmental risk resulting from existing standards today, 

even though those have progressed a long way. 

 

It is also equally true that the public should not be left 

accountable to pay for the impacts of any business activity on 

the environment.  The object of good environmental legislation 

is that polluters should pay for the cost of making sure the 

environment is protected. 

 

It is just a matter of good business, now and in the future, for 

the expectation to be with companies to predict environmental 

impact and to manage and design their operations in such a way 

that those operations do not . . . that those operations do not 

have a negative environmental impact or impact on the health 

and safety of the public. 

 

Therefore it is a reasonable assumption that should those 

standards change, even though one may believe they have them 

established firmly today, that the cost of . . . the additional cost 

of meeting a new standard would be a cost allocated to the 

proponent.  The only alternative to that being the taxpayer 

picking up the cost. 

 

A good environmental management assumes that a proponent 

knows their business best, that they can predict the potential 

risk to the environment of their operation if they continually 

review the operations that they're engaged in to minimize 

environmental impacts, so at decommissioning there is a 

minimal cost to ensuring the public environmental good 

management. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Most 

corporations that are dealing with mining in this province -- if 

not all, I should say -- are responsible citizens and are 

concerned about the environmental impact their operations are 

having and do attempt to minimize those impacts.  But my 

concern is with the costs that are going to be built into this 

system, and ultimately the consumer is going to pay for that.  

So I think we need to minimize those costs as much as possible 

and to minimize the amount of bureaucracy and regulation 

needed to enforce this type of an Act. 

 

I would encourage you to carry on with the consultations with 

the mining industry and that the regulations for this Act go 

forward only after consultations and agreement with the mining 

industries.  There's no point in talking to them and consulting 

with them if you don't listen to them and 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

act on their concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I think most people across the province are 

concerned about the environment and are concerned about the 

reclamation of mining sites, but there is a need to do it properly 

and there is a need to be aware of the financial costs that are 

going to be associated both for the corporations and for the 

general public. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, thank you for those comments; I 

agree with them.  It's been my direction as Minister of the 

Environment, I know it's part of the economic development 

plan, that we create as little intrusion as possible, as little 

roadblock as possible to good business by trying to make our 

regulatory system as streamlined as can be. 

 

When I was president of the Canadian Council of Ministers of 

the Environment it also became one of our goals nationally to 

reduce regulatory intrusion to a minimum that protects public 

safety and the public interest. So I concur with you on the goal 

and commit our department to work with the industry in 

achieving that kind of goal. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

(1615) 

 

Clause 3 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to: 

 

 Amend section 18.1 of the Act as being enacted by section 3 

of the printed Bill: 

 

 (a) by renumbering it as subsection 18.1(1); and 

 

 (b) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

  "(2) Subsection (1) does not apply where 

 

   (a) the watercourse or body of water is located wholly 

within the boundaries of land that is 

owned by or in the lawful possession of 

the person carrying out any activity 

mentioned in subsection (1); and 

 

   (b) the surface water of that watercourse or body of 

water does not flow directly or indirectly, 

other than by percolation, into other 

surface water that is not located wholly 

within the boundaries of that land." 

 

That is the amendment which I move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

Clauses 4 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The State of the 

Environment Report Act 

 

The Chair: -- It is the same officials . . . there's one different 

official.  I'll ask the minister to introduce the official who has 

joined the committee for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

Directly behind me is Doug Mazer, the director of sustainable 

land management.  The other officials are the same. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I'd 

like to welcome the new official here this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain the purpose for 

changing this reporting from one year to two year -- what you 

hope to accomplish by this change. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There are several purposes.  One is to 

reduce the cost of publishing reports.  The other is that it is 

difficult within a one-year time frame to come up with full 

reviews that reflect significant change in the environment 

because the environmental changes are modest within a year.  

And so the purpose is to also then put it into greater harmony 

with most other districts in Canada, most of which report on a 

two- to five-year time frame. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I wonder if 

you could give us a breakdown on the other provinces' 

reporting.  How many are two and how many are five, or what's 

the spreads? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we do not have a complete 

list.  If the member opposite continues to have an interest in 

that issue, I can have the officials research that question.  My 

understanding is that Alberta's two, Manitoba's two, the federal 

government's five, the others I don't have information on at the 

moment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  What 

kind of a cost saving are you looking at?  What's the budget for 

this and what kind of a cost saving are you planning with this 

change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the publishing costs are 

about $20,000 but the staff work going into reviewing the 

documents for a report are more significant and I don't have an 

estimate of that; but again, the time for review is limited on the 

shorter time frame and a two-year time frame for reporting is a 

more practical sort of time frame just to logistically get the job 

done. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you were looking 

at mainly cost as being the important factor 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

here, why wouldn't you go to a longer time frame then?  Why 

wouldn't you have looked at the five-year one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I believe there would be public concern if 

we had the reporting too infrequently.  We'll work at the 

two-year time frame.  If this  in fact is in agreement with others 

in the House and if in fact it becomes apparent that a longer 

time frame might be desirable, that certainly could be 

considered in the future. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I was in no means 

giving the intention that I thought a five-year reporting period 

was better; but if cost is your motivating factor here, well then 

you would go for the five-year one. 

 

You suggest that you can't get the proper information in place 

over a year, but I would suspect, Mr. Minister, that if you were 

reporting on a yearly basis, if you were following the trends, 

that you would get a much quicker handle on a situation that 

was developing than you would if you're looking at these 

reports on a two-year or a five-year basis, as far as that goes. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, can you give us some comments on that and 

can you explain in this report exactly what kind of subjects you 

cover and in how much detail do you cover them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the state of environmental 

reporting is not yet a fully defined art.  If I may, the first state 

of the environment report attempted to measure many elements 

of the environment -- the water, wildlife, forests, air, basically 

the elements of the ecology as we know it.  But because change 

is so slow and unmeasurable in such a short period of time, 

there wasn't a lot of purpose in reproducing a document like 

that.  So the second document that was produced actually 

looked at what acceptable indicators would be of 

environmental change.  The second report wasn't a numbers 

document at all but a document looking at ways in which we 

might determine environmental change. 

 

It's conceivable that as we report in future years, that themes 

might be used where one might, for example, focus on air in 

one report, or water, or land, or other breakdowns of 

environmental reporting for the benefit of Saskatchewan 

people.  The exact form of this report is not yet fixed because 

we've had two very different reports in the first two that have 

been published by the province. 

 

So that the intent of environmental reporting is to help people 

understand where we are at with respect to environmental 

management.  We'll continue to review the format in which 

that's done to be most helpful to the people of the province, to 

help understand what the state of the environment is and what 

they personally might do to make it better. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I think when 

the report comes out that it would be important 

that it be done in a standard form, therefore it makes it a lot 

more useful to the general public.  When they pick it up, they 

can compare what happened in the year before.  So I think as 

you proceed with this, I think it's important that you start to use 

a standard format for the production.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much.  That's certainly the 

goal. The time frames, and the way in which that would be 

addressed over time will be evolutionary in the early reports.  

But clearly that's the purpose, is so that we can track our 

performance over time and so the public can see it with us.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Before I move that, I'd like to thank my 

officials for their contribution here.  And I would like to move 

that The State of the Environment Report Act be reported 

without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  I 

would like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in 

today and for working with us on these two particular Bills.  

Thank you. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting Agrologists 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I move that the amendments be now read 

the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 

move that the Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The State of the 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

Environment Report Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1630) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister.  Checking back in Hansard it looks to me that at 

5:02 on April 27 you and I were in a discussion and you were 

saved by the bell at that time.  And it looks as if we're going to 

be short of time again. 

 

Mr. Minister, I was just about finished, and to refresh your 

memory, we were talking about the Bronson forest area and 

that part of the province that was being contemplated being 

sold as a treaty land entitlement settlement.  And I was 

expressing some concerns or passing on to you some of the 

concerns of some of the local folks in other areas of the 

province as well. 

 

And I asked you the question, why were you selling wilderness 

land basically when we are already only about halfway there in 

terms of our protected spaces that we are committed to and that 

your colleague, the minister of Natural Resources, has 

committed to. 

 

So on one hand we find you going around the parks in the 

southern part of the province buying private land to put it into 

the protected spaces part of other parks, and now when we have 

an area that has protected land, you're contemplating selling 

that off.  And that seemed to me to be counter-productive.  

Your response to my question essentially was, well we made a 

commitment under the Blakeney government.  Minister 

Bowerman made a commitment to the folks up in that area, 

either 1980 or '81, and that you are now honouring that 

commitment.  So I think essentially, Mr. Minister, that brings 

us back to where we were when the bell rang on April 27. 

 

Specifically now, as a follow-up question, could you inform me 

as to when Mr. Bowerman made that commitment?  Under 

what conditions did he make that commitment; where did he 

make that commitment?  Could you be a little bit more specific 

on that, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, we don't 

have with us the letter nor the date of the letter, but it was 

written in the early 1980s from Mr. Bowerman.  It was 

pursuant to negotiations that were going on between the 

government and the Thunderchild Band, and those negotiations 

were pursuant to the 1976 formula with respect to the 

unsatisfied treaty land claims. 

And this letter exists and it can be obtained, but I don't have it 

with me today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm familiar with the general aspect of the 

negotiations during that time, Mr. Minister.  Now please 

confirm for me then that it was an agreement entered upon by 

Mr. Bowerman and the Thunderchild Indian Band, and that in 

response and pursuant to those negotiations Mr. Bowerman 

wrote the Thunderchild Band a letter making the commitment.  

What kind of commitment did he make?  Would you be 

specific on that? 

 

Mr. Minister, we could probably facilitate matters if you would 

take it upon yourself and make a commitment here that you 

will give me a copy, or perhaps even table in this legislature, 

the letter where Mr. Bowerman makes that commitment so that 

we have all the information.  Because this is a significant turn 

of events for any government to make and I think we should 

have the material at hand so we can judge the appropriateness 

of your actions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, we'll provide you with a copy of 

that letter, hopefully today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In light of the arrival of the 

Lieutenant Governor, I move we rise and . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, I think we have to for the Lieutenant 

Governor coming.  We've got to move out of committee. 

 

I move we rise, report progress and we'll ask for leave to sit 

later this day. 

 

The Chair: -- The Government Deputy House Leader has 

moved that the committee rise, report progress and ask for 

leave to sit again.  Is that agreed?  Carried. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- . . . the opposition for the interruption 

of their questions.  She's not here; it was a false alarm. 

 

The Chair: -- Yes, is leave granted to return to the Committee 

of Finance?  It is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- My sincere apologies to the 

opposition and ask for leave to resume the proceedings in 

committee. 

 

The Chair: -- Is leave granted?  Agreed. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

finally we get to talk.  As you may know, we are interested in 

talking about vision, objectives, plans, and guidelines for 

government departments. 

 

Recognizing the volume of department estimates yet to be 

considered and the relative size of the Indian and Metis Affairs 

Secretariat, I'll limit the range of my questioning. 



May 2, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

Mr. Minister, what is your vision for this department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chair, and to the member, we are 

moving into the 21st century, and in that century we envision 

Saskatchewan as a community in which all cultural groups 

achieve social equity and live together in harmony. 

 

And in reference to Indian and Metis people within 

Saskatchewan, which are a growing portion of the population, 

our vision is that they will be able to experience and develop 

their own distinctive cultures and participate as full partners in 

the processes and benefits of social and economic development.  

That is our vision and that is the centre-piece of the activities of 

the secretariat. 

 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, how has this 

vision changed during the last few years that have brought us to 

this point? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I think that we have all become very 

much more conscious of the social problems facing Indian and 

Metis people in this province and in this country.  Indeed I 

think it accurate to say that these are social problems which 

dwarf any others that one can think of, because of their severity 

and because of their unhappy consequences and because of 

their relevance to Saskatchewan, considering our 

demographics.  So we have become increasingly conscious of 

the depth and the breadth of those problems. 

 

At the same time we have, as has every other jurisdiction in this 

country, accepted the existence of the inherent right of 

aboriginal people to govern themselves.  That's not something 

that Saskatchewan thought of, so neither the preceding 

government nor our government can take credit for it, but it is 

an idea that grew up and was given voice to in the preparations 

for the Charlottetown round of constitutional negotiations and 

was accepted by public statements made by the premiers of 

each of the provinces and the leaders of the Territories, and by 

the past and the present prime ministers of Canada. 

 

So that is something that is different and has affected the shape 

of the vision as well as the methods by which we begin to 

attack these problems.  All of the jurisdictions in this country 

are approaching these problems within the general framework 

of the inherent right.  And it has this advantage which I think is 

so important: it is involving Indian and Metis and Inuit people 

in a direct way in the resolution of their own problems. 

 

The time when senior governments, if I can use that term, 

"prescribe" what program should be good for Indian and Metis 

people, those times are long gone.  Now we have finally 

realized, even at this late date, that the only way in which 

progress can be made in these areas is to involve the people 

themselves.  That's a difficult question to answer but I try to do 

the best I can in the short time we have available. 

Mrs. Bergman: -- Yes, you did a good job; answered it for me.  

What are the specific public policy objectives that drive your 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- As we see these, the principles are as 

follows.  First of all the principle of equity, by which we mean 

that the government is committed to fairness and inclusiveness 

in our society. 

 

Secondly, cooperation, which is to say that the government will 

work cooperatively with aboriginal people to facilitate their 

goals and their aspirations for their social, economic, and 

cultural development. 

 

Third is the principle of community by which the government 

recognizes and respects the unique cultures of Indian and Metis 

people and their communities within the fabric of the larger 

Saskatchewan community. 

 

Fourth, the principles of openness and accountability by which 

the government will communicate openly with aboriginal 

communities on decisions affecting social and economic 

development in those communities.  All partners involved in 

these joint actions will be accountable for the results achieved 

and the public resources used. 

 

Fifth, of course the principle of affordability, which all of us 

have to live with at every level of government in this nation.  

We are, for our part, committed to living within our means, and 

we must employ what I can describe as efficient approaches to 

achieve the effective delivery of programs and services to 

aboriginal people. 

 

The sixth principle I've already mentioned, the principle of 

self-determination, in which we attempt to maximize 

self-reliance and self-determination of aboriginal peoples in 

balance with our responsibility to the whole community of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me say before I begin, Mr. 

Chairman, that I sincerely hope my mother is not watching this.  

Not a soul is going to believe me when I tell you that the 

Lieutenant Governor is here.  And I therefore move we rise, we 

report progress, and ask for leave to sit later this day. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 4:51 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

Bill No. 22 -- An Act to establish Crown Foundations for 

Saskatchewan Universities 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 1994 

Bill No. 49 -- An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Court of 

Saskatchewan Act, 1988/Une Loi modifiant la 

Loi de 1988 sur le Tribunal de la scurit 

routire de la Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 50 -- An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act to 

provide for Mediation 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 

and to enact certain other provisions 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of 

Economic Development Act, 1993 

Bill No. 6. -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to establish the Tourism Authority 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting Agrologists 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend the State of the Environment 

Report Act 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1995 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:54 p.m. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 

 

The Chair: -- It now being near 5 o'clock, the committee will 

stand recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


