




















































Hansard: February 28, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  477
 February 28, 1994 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: -- According to order the following petitions have 
been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 
read and received. 
 

 By Ms. Lorje, of the Saskatoon Foundation of the City of 
Saskatoon, in the province, praying for an Act respecting 
the Saskatoon Foundation; 

 
 and by Mr. Boyd, of the Full Gospel Bible Institute of the 

town of Eston, in the province, praying for an Act to 
amend the Act of incorporation. 

 
And according to order, another petition has been reviewed 
regarding the RM of Reno, to replace the Cypress Lake road 
signs.  This petition has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 
11(6) and (7) is found to be irregular and cannot be read and 
received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker.  Through you, and to other 
members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce 
in your gallery today, a friend and gentleman from my 
constituency, Mr. Alvin Hewitt. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Board Elections 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Health.  Madam Minister, in today's paper we see 
confirmation of the role politics has played in the 
appointment of district health boards throughout 
Saskatchewan.  It's now clear that this process has been 
tainted by political patronage and if these boards are to have 
the accountability and credibility that they need to work 
effectively, elections must be held. 
 
Mr. Minister, why won't you simply hold the elections this 
fall in conjunction with municipal elections and give the 
health boards the legitimacy the residents of Saskatchewan 
are asking for and demanding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, in terms of the current 
make-up of those Saskatchewan people who are serving on 
the district health boards, the member will know that they 
were all appointed from nominations gathered within their 
districts.  He will know that they represent a balance of age, 
gender, and, if I may say, political background -- a good 
cross-section of the community, Mr. Speaker, each of them 
committed to working to the best interests of 

health care in their district. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 
and I can sit here and argue all day about who is qualified 
and who isn't qualified to sit on these boards.  The point is, 
it's a matter of personal opinion, and that's exactly why we 
need to have elections.  If the local people think the current 
board members are doing a good job, they'll be re-elected; if 
they do not think they're doing a good job, they won't be 
elected.  That's the way it should be, Mr. Minister. 
 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
has passed a resolution calling for the elections to be held 
immediately.  SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) has two resolutions coming to its convention 
next week taking the same position.  Mr. Minister, why don't 
you simply ask the people of Saskatchewan what they would 
like to do and hold the elections as soon as possible and lend 
legitimacy to these elections? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Minister, as the member and all 
members will know, in the history of health care delivery in 
this province there has never been an occasion where health 
care boards have been elected.  Mr. Speaker, I am proud to 
be part of a government that has brought forward this 
innovation in the delivery of health care services, Mr. 
Speaker.  It is clear from the legislation that there will be 
elected health boards in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the question of timing, as the member well knows, is 
not a simple question.  There are a variety of issues that must 
be considered.  As the member will also know, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations has 
passed a unanimous motion seeking delay in the electoral 
process.  Mr. Speaker, we are in the process of working 
through many of the issues that are now before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you 
know full well that the people at SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations) are asking for it all 
right.  And they are all made up of political appointees and 
they are made up of people that were set out on those boards 
by yourself and your department. 
 
One of the reasons that you suggest for the government's 
closure of 52 hospitals was to save money.  It would seem to 
me that the most cost-effective time to hold these elections 
would be this fall at the same time as the municipal elections.  
That is exactly why municipalities want to see elections held 
this fall. 
 
But the minister is saying these elections will be some 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

time later in the spring perhaps, or even later, so residents 
will have to go through the whole election process twice, and 
costs involved with that twice will be mounted. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you really want to save money, if you really 
want to ensure the maximum amount of money directed 
towards the provision of health care instead of administrative 
costs, why don't you go with the most cost-effective option 
and hold the elections this fall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the considerations 
in the health board elections will be cost.  Another very 
important consideration in health board elections will be 
adequate representation within the districts.  Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that adequate representation of communities within 
the districts, we have set out by legislation that the districts 
shall be divided into wards to provide for that appropriate 
representation of communities within a district. 
 
The ward establishment, Mr. Speaker, is not an easy matter.  
It cannot be quickly done.  We don't want to do it wrong; we 
want to do it right the first time, Mr. Speaker.  That's why 
we're working on all the options right now towards the 
election of health boards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, it 
didn't concern your government for wards when it came out 
to setting the boundaries on the commission for MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly).  I don't see why it's 
any concern to you now, Mr. Minister. 
 
Last year when we asked for the extension of the August 17 
deadline for health district formation, you said no.  When we 
asked for an extension to the October 1 deadline for the 
closure of 52 hospitals, you said no.  But now when your 
hand-picked boards come and ask you to delay the operation 
for a little while, or a more lengthy time, you are more than 
happy to oblige them, Mr. Minister. 
 
The extensions were asked for because of the concern of the 
people of Saskatchewan at that time.  The extension you are 
granting is over concern for the political health of the NDP 
(New Democratic Party). 
 
Mr. Minister, isn't that what your wellness program is really 
about -- protecting the political wellness of the NDP rather 
than the real wellness of the Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I think I understand why 
the member opposite and members of his caucus would 
assume that anyone appointed to a position in Saskatchewan 
is political, because we saw 10 years of that kind of 
appointment, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, in the appointment of the health boards, again I 
say to the member, these appointments were made from 
nominations which came from the districts, Mr. Speaker, 
nominations which reflect age, gender and, I may say, all 
political backgrounds. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it rather peculiar that the member 
comes into the House today, accusing all of those who sit on 
health boards in Saskatchewan as being political and political 
appointments, and yet I read in the Leader-Post a quote 
from this very same member, Mr. Speaker, which he says, 
quote: 
 

 To make the general sweeping observation (that health 
boards are controlled by NDP partisans) is even a bit of a 
stretch for me . . . 

 
Well he continues to stretch today here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, in 
today's paper we see how far your government is prepared to 
go to institute your political wellness plan.  We see hospital 
administrators, the people who are responsible for delivering 
quality health care to the Saskatchewan people, afraid to 
speak up against your changes because they're afraid of your 
government.  We see NDP MLAs threatening local 
newspaper owners and credit union managers, telling them to 
come onside or risk the consequences. 
 
Mr. Minister, if all is well with your wellness plan, why do 
you and your NDP MLAs have to bully hospital 
administrators and local residents into supporting these 
changes?  Isn't this indicative of the way the NDP 
government runs, by appointing your supporters to political 
appointments and punishing your detractors with threats and 
coercion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the member persists in 
the notion that those men and women of Saskatchewan who 
are today serving on health boards and serving freely and 
willingly to meet the health care needs of their district, are 
somehow political partisans.  Mr. Speaker, that is simply not 
true, Mr. Speaker.  The member, in the press, outside this 
House, even admits as much himself.  Now in this House he 
seems to take a different tack. 
 
What I think the people of Saskatchewan would appreciate is 
if members opposite would simply begin getting with the 
program and starting to work as Saskatchewan people are in 
the renewal of our health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Firearms Legislation 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 
is to the Minister of Justice, and it has to do with an issue 
that I raised the other day on behalf of  



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

one of my constituents. 
 
Mr. Minister, on April 1 new federal firearms legislation will 
be coming into effect, but to a large extent it will be the 
province -- specifically the chief provincial firearms officer 
-- who will have the task of enforcing this new legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, last Thursday you admitted that the new FAC 
(firearms acquisition certificate) training program is not in 
place.  This delay is going to have a significant negative 
impact on Saskatchewan gun dealers and the Saskatchewan 
tourism industry.  What are you waiting for?  Why are you 
waiting until the last minute to get this program into place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
that question.  I would remind him that with respect to 
firearm acquisition applications that are received up to and 
including March 31 of this year, they will be dealt with under 
the old regime.  They will be dealt with under the old 
training program and the old examination program.  And so 
we will deal with those applications, and we will deal with 
them in a timely way so that we'll try and deal with them all 
by April 1. 
 
With respect to the testing, we're very close to a result.  I 
believe we will be successful in going with the same test we 
have had up till now with a small additional component 
made necessary by the federal law, which has to do with 
knowledge of the federal law.  We don't anticipate that to be 
any major element or any significant change from the way in 
which we've tested in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm sure that there 
is a number of gun owners and potential gun owners around 
this province who will be pleased to hear that you will have 
the FACs all done by April 1 because I'm told that this is 
already running a six-month backlog.  I'm glad you talked 
about the knowledge portion of the test because the province 
is going to be enforcing a number of new firearms 
regulations. 
 
For example, firearms will not be allowed to have more than 
a five-shot magazine.  This is going to make a number of 
hunting rifles in Saskatchewan illegal.  These are existing 
firearms that hunters have already been using for many 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, what steps are you taking to educate gun 
owners about these new regulations?  Or can we expect to 
see hundreds of Saskatchewan hunters arrested next fall for 
carrying the same rifle they've been using for the last 10 or 
20 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well of course, Mr. Speaker, as the 
member well knows, the law in question is a 

 federal law passed by the previous Conservative 
government.  And we are left with the task of trying to adjust 
our system of doing what we have to do in the context of that 
federal law.  We don't make the rules; we just simply have to 
administer the program.  And we're doing so in a way which 
is as considerate of Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan 
hunters, as we possibly can. 
 
We're trying to be as generous as we can and we're trying to 
implement the program in the least painful way possible.  
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the member knows that very 
well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The law is 
indeed a federal law but it's interpreted by the provincial 
chief firearms officer.  And these new regulations, Mr. 
Minister, also stand to have a terrible effect on Saskatchewan 
gun dealers and the Saskatchewan tourism industry.  
Virtually every area of this province will be affected. 
 
On Friday there's going to be a public rally on this issue in 
Preeceville, one of the areas whose economy depends a great 
deal on hunting in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, that's your 
home area.  You know how much the service stations, the 
restaurants, the sporting goods shops, and the hotels depend 
on hunters every fall. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you be attending this meeting on Friday, 
and will you be able to give people at that meeting some 
definitive answers on how the province plans to implement 
these new federal regulations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I want to say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are attempting to administer or to 
implement that law in Saskatchewan in the least painful way 
possible.  And wherever we have discretion as a provincial 
government, we will be exercising that discretion on the side 
of Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan hunters, and indeed 
some of the people that you mentioned in your question. 
 
I will not be personally present in Preeceville on Friday night 
but I will be represented by my deputy minister, Brent 
Cotter, who plans to make a presentation to the meeting.  
And he has been involved personally in the negotiation of 
both the testing and in administering the firearm acquisition 
certificates, so that he'll be able to deal with the questions of 
the people from Preeceville and other parts of the province 
that may have questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Provincial Judges' Salaries 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 
to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, on July 16, 1993, your 
government empowered an independent commission to 
assess the current pay of provincial judges and to make 
binding 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

recommendations as to whether the salaries of those judges 
should be increased. 
 
Mr. Minister, given the fact that your own legislation makes 
the results of the independent commission on judges' salaries 
binding, are we to assume that you were prepared to 
implement the recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I believe the member will know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the matter has yet to be considered and decided 
upon by the government.  Consequently we have made no 
decision and I have certainly no announcements to make to 
the House today. 
 
If she has a follow-up question, I'd be interested in knowing 
what her position is on this question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What the 
people of Saskatchewan and this House are most interested 
in is the government's position, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your government has become famous -- or perhaps a better 
word would be infamous -- for repealing contracts and 
retroactively changing legislation.  You changed the 
contracts of civil servants, taking away their legal recourse.  
You changed GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and 
took away the rights of farmers to sue the government.  You 
passed legislation that gives you the power to retroactively 
change the upgrader deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are the government's plans?  Do you have 
plans to do the same with this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government's plans have not yet been determined and so I'm 
not in a position to announce them during this question 
period, or elsewhere, until the government has made such a 
decision. 
 
I take it by the member's question, however, that she 
personally favours implementation of the award, which 
would result in a retroactive increase for judges in the order 
of 20 per cent.  Considering her position with respect to her 
own salary increase that ought not to be a surprising position, 
but I would like to hear her say just what is her position, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I did not order this 
commission, you did.  And I think I understand the values of 
Saskatchewan people where handshakes mean something, 
people's words mean something, and contracts are supposed 
to mean something, and legislation is supposed to mean 
something. 
 
Mr. Minister, your majority government has enormous 
power and with that power comes responsibility.  Your 
hesitation to implement recommendations leaves the judges 
who agreed to this process out on a limb.  It leaves the three 

individuals who are involved as part of this independent 
commission out on a limb. 
 
If your government, after what I assume was careful 
deliberation, used its power to pass the responsibility of 
reviewing judges' salaries on to an independent commission; 
if your government decided to make the results of that 
commission's review binding; what explanation can you give 
now for not having reached any conclusion about whether or 
not you will implement their recommendations and what 
implications does this have for the work of any future 
commissions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I assume the member, in preparing the 
line of questioning that she's followed today to the effect that 
the judges' awards should be implemented and they should 
get an immediate 20 per cent increase has also involved a 
review of the Act in question, and the member will know 
from her review of the Act that the government is still within 
the time limit set out in the Act for the making of this kind of 
decision.  We don't have to announce a decision yet.  We're 
giving careful consideration to the matter and we will 
announce a position in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- I shall try this once again, Mr. Minister.  
You felt that there was room for those salaries to be 
increased or you would not have agreed to review them, Mr. 
Minister, nor would your Premier have agreed to review 
them.  What you did, Mr. Minister, was to enact legislation 
which would make the recommendations of the independent 
commission binding upon this Assembly -- binding, Mr. 
Minister -- and that means no choice, legal, moral, or ethical, 
but to implement the decision of the commission which your 
own government struck.  Mr. Minister, this is a much larger 
issue than salaries for judges.  It is about the credibility and 
the integrity of your government and the value of legislation 
passed in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you are not prepared to live with the results 
of the commission, why on earth would you enact legislation 
making their recommendations binding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many 
times the member wants to hear my answer.  She must really 
enjoy it because she keeps coming back requiring the same 
one. 
 
I am not in a position to announce the government's decision 
on it yet because the government has not yet made a decision 
on it yet, nor does it have to make a decision by this point in 
time under the statute.  It is still well within the time limits 
and the member must know that.  Now if the member is 
petitioning, as she obviously is, that judges should get a 20 
per cent pay increase, retroactive to 1993, that's fine; we'll 
take that into account in making our final decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

Review of Utility Rates 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, and 
I think over the last few days he's probably waiting for one to 
come his way already. 
 
Mr. Premier, two weeks ago the opposition introduced a Bill 
which when passed will allow for the creation of a legislative 
utilities review committee.  Mr. Premier, I believe it was 
your party that indicated there will be no new taxes, and 
every one of us are aware of the fact that people are tired of 
tax increases.  The Finance minister told us there were no 
new tax increases in this budget and yet, Mr. Speaker, what 
we have seen over the past while is a continuous barrage of 
utility rate increases which I would say Saskatchewan 
taxpayers are saying, that's an indirect form of taxation. 
 
Mr. Premier, SUMA has called for a utility review 
mechanism; SARM has a resolution going to their 
convention calling for a utility review mechanism; the people 
have asked for a utility review mechanism.  Mr. Premier, 
will you give serious consideration to this legislation and 
work with us to ensure that such a committee is created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think in 
helping the government come to a conclusion on this issue, it 
might be helpful if the hon. member from the official 
opposition would tell us why it is that when he was a 
member of the former administration they decided to do 
away with the Public Utilities Review Commission.  Was it 
because, as the member from Rosthern indicated on budget 
day, that the Crown corporations had been put into such 
good shape by the former administration that they didn't need 
a PURC (Public Utilities Review Commission)?  Was that 
the rationale?  Was the rationale because you turned out to 
discover that it was multimillion dollar cost to the taxpayers 
which did not arm the consumers with the equivalent amount 
of dollars and expertise to be able to match the rates that the 
Crowns articulated; was that the reason, or was it both of 
them? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we would be all benefiting if the 
member opposite, who just a few years ago when he was part 
of this decision, would tell us why it is that they did away 
with it and why it is that today he now seeks to have such a 
commission revisited.  Especially in light of the fact that 
Saskatchewan has the lowest basket of utility rates of any 
province in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, over the 
past few months, people have been telling me and my 
colleagues that there needs to be some control and 
accountability over utility rate increases.  On the one hand, 
people have asked for an agency and body to regulate public 
utility rate increases but, on the other hand, they recognize 
the costs associated with creating such a bureaucracy. 

 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have arrived at a suitable 
compromise.  This committee would be made up of members 
of this Assembly who have been elected to represent the 
people who have voted for them and are already paid to take 
care of Saskatchewan residents' best interests. 
 
Mr. Premier, why won't you support us in the concept of 
forming such a committee to review utility rate increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, again I thank the 
hon. member for the question.  But I'm interested about the 
continuing -- I underline this word, continuing -- 
contradictions of the official opposition, the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) Party.  First their contradiction in part was that 
we should have a Public Utilities Review Commission, but 
now we shouldn't.  That's a fundamental contradiction, and 
now they're contradicting themselves, saying yes. 
 
Now his specific question is that we have yet another 
committee of this legislature established.  His argument is 
that the public is fed up with building up extra costs of 
government.  But in contradiction to that position, he says, 
but they're prepared to tolerate yet another committee of this 
legislature. 
 
Well we've got a Crown Corporations Committee.  We have 
a standing committee of this Assembly which is called the 
Crown Corporations, at which the hon. members opposite 
laugh when I suggest to them that what they should do is 
earn their pay, and attend those meetings, and do their job 
there.  That's what we need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate where the Premier's coming from.  But 
unfortunately I must remind the Premier that the Crown 
Corporations Committee has the ability and the 
responsibility of reviewing the Crown corporations; however 
it's two years after the fact, two years in most cases after 
these cases have been brought in place. 
 
In fact, Mr. Premier, what did your party do prior to the 1991 
election?  What was your party's stand?  I'd like to quote . . . 
I quote your democratic reform package: 
 

 . . . all party select committees of the Assembly should be 
used frequently to inquire into substantive public issues 
and government programs. 

 
Mr. Premier, today is your opportunity to demonstrate your 
commitment to expand the role of private members.  Will 
you agree that a legislative utilities review committee would 
be a useful and cost-effective way to regulate utility rate 
increases and expand the role of private members? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I must say to the 
hon. members opposite that I am indeed very proud of the 
spate of reforms which this government has undertaken to 
improve the electoral capacity and accountability . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Name one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Name one -- the hon. member says 
name one.  I could name you several but I'll name you one 
for sure.  Perhaps I don't want to dwell on this but the 
six-month by-election rule which, as painful as it was for me, 
was very painful for you.  We have many of those kinds of 
reforms which have been implemented. 
 
But there is nothing preventing the members of the Crown 
Corporations Committee doing their job.  There's nothing 
preventing even the Conservatives coming and asking about 
these questions, when the officials of the Crown 
Corporations are there, in detail.  Nothing at all. 
 
When they talk about two, three years behind time, the 
member is stuck in a time warp.  That is in the good old bad 
days when you were in office.  That's not the case nowadays.  
The case nowadays is to reform the Crown Corporations 
Committee if any reform is to be required, and to do the job 
there.  It is not to set up yet another bureaucracy and another 
committee of this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 19 -- An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Wascana Centre Act be now introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 
Act, 1984 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality 
Act, 1989 

 
Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 
time at the next sitting. 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By leave, I 
would like to change the representation of the third party on 
the legislative committee. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1430) 

MOTIONS 
 

Name Substitution on Committee 
 
Ms. Haverstock: -- Accordingly, I move, seconded by the 
member of Regina North West: 
 

 That by leave of the Assembly, the name of Mr. 
McPherson be substituted for that of Ms. Haverstock on 
the list of members on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
question no. 34, I request that it be converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: -- Motion for return debate. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, before 
orders of the day, regarding petitions that my colleague from 
Maple Creek submitted on Friday, I believe, and this 
afternoon, we heard from the Clerk's office that they were 
not going to be accepted, and the reasons given were that 
they are photocopies -- and I don't have problems with that, 
Mr. Speaker -- and they are not in the proper form and 
wording of a petition and are thus returned to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and are not being accepted in this Assembly. 
 
My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is to be able to understand 
as House Leader the reasons for these petitions not being 
acceptable, not in proper form, because we have a great deal 
of concern where the people of this province are trying to 
register their concerns to this Assembly, and yet they are 
being turned down on a fairly regular, frequent basis, Mr. 
Speaker.  And we are having a problem addressing this with 
the people of Saskatchewan and getting them to understand 
the complicated machinations within this Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

So I would first of all request of you to have some type of 
documentation which will indicate to us precisely what 
constitutes a legal petition and what changes have to be made 
in order to make this process understandable by the vast 
population out there who simply do not understand what 
goes on here, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 
cooperation and trying to be helpful, I might say to the 
Assembly and to members opposite that when these kinds of 
issues arise as to the wording of a petition, the Clerk's office 
in the past has been very helpful and simply a short meeting 
will probably clarify this matter. 
 
However if it is that the rules of the Assembly don't meet the 
needs of the members, the Rules Committee is meeting at 5 
this afternoon and possibly he could raise the issue there.  
But this has never been a big problem in the past and I'm 
sure if he were to meet with the Clerk, I'm sure this could be 
straightened out very quickly. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have listened to both sides on the point of 
order and I will take them under advisement and bring a 
report back to the House. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Department of 
Economic Development Act, 1993 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 
introduce to you today for second reading, an amendment to 
the existing Department of Economic Development Act, 
1993. 
 
In general terms, Mr. Speaker, the intent is to provide the 
authority to establish a trade development corporation that is 
deemed to be necessary and appropriate for the delivery of 
trade development services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I'm sure you know, Mr. Speaker, our provincial economy 
depends on trade more than almost any other province in 
Canada, and in fact more than most countries, even the 
trading giants of Japan, Germany, and United States.  
Saskatchewan depends on trade to even a greater extent for 
their economic prosperity. 
 
For the Government of Saskatchewan the challenge is to 
provide the best environment possible for our exporters and 
to provide a package of services which can provide effective 
support for their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know our fiscal situation.  We have a 
limited amount of resources available to support the efforts 
of Saskatchewan exporters, and this even more so in light of 
the fact of the billions of dollars of debt left by the previous 
administration. 

The success of our trade development initiatives depends 
upon the ability to focus those resources on key markets and 
sectors which have the potential and capability of providing 
long-term economic growth for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have done this, Mr. Speaker, through restructuring and 
refocusing our Partnership for Renewal economic strategy.  
And over the past year we have worked successfully with a 
number of Saskatchewan exporters to market their products 
outside the border of the province. 
 
To succeed in the long term, we will also need to work in 
partnership with other governmental and non-governmental 
organizations which support the efforts of the Saskatchewan 
exporter. 
 
In consultation with Saskatchewan exporters and export 
development organizations over the past year, Mr. Speaker, 
we have been reviewing our trade development initiatives as 
they pertain to the Partnership for Renewal strategy. 
 
This has included examining options for the structure of the 
trade development operation.  As you know, the 
establishment of a trade development organization is one of 
the initiatives under our economic strategy. 
 
Saskatchewan has targeted as part of its economic renewal 
the increase of non-traditional exports by 10 per cent per 
year to the year 2000.  Partnership for Renewal calls for the 
development of a new trade and marketing development 
organization in partnership with the exporters, first to 
coordinate and manage all provincial government export 
marketing programs and services; and secondly, to ensure 
optimal access to federal programs and services. 
 
Exporters have been asked to identify how government and 
industry can cooperate to meet our export enhancement 
targets by the year 2000.  Consultation with a representative 
group of exporters and others involved in trade development 
in Saskatchewan have identified basic needs and services 
required for exporters and possible alternatives for a new 
organization and the identification of the preferred 
organizational option and structure.  At the end of the day the 
process, Mr. Speaker, the preference, was for the 
establishment of a trade development corporation funded and 
managed jointly by the public and private sector. 
 
To ensure that the government is in a position to participate 
with the private sector in this initiative, I am bringing 
forward this amendment to The Department of Economic 
Development Act which will provide the authority to:  one, 
establish a corporation; secondly, to establish the regulations 
to go with the new corporation; and third, to determine in 
consultation with Saskatchewan exporters the most 
appropriate type of corporation for providing trade 
development services in our trading province. 
 
By taking this action, Mr. Speaker, the government has 
confirmed the importance of trade to the economic 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

development and well-being of our province.  This proposed 
course of action provides industry with the opportunity to 
shape its future direction in partnership with the government. 
 
The proposal, Mr. Speaker, is to amend section 9 of the Act 
as follows: 
 

 (a) by renumbering it as subsection 9(1); 
 
 (b) by adding the following clause after clause (1)(f): 
 
 "(g) subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council and the regulations: 
 
  (i) incorporate a body corporate for the purposes of 

providing trade development services in 
Saskatchewan; and 

 
  (ii) either 
 
   (A) become a member of that corporation; or 
 
   (B) hold shares issued by that corporation where: 
 
   (I) the shares have been issued for nominal 

consideration; and 
   (II) the shares do not entitle the holder to receive 

dividends or to receive the remaining 
property of the corporation on dissolution"; 

 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, to comply with this government 
commitment to openness and accountability 
 

 (c) by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 
 
 "(2) Where the minister incorporates a body corporate and 

either becomes a member of that corporation or holds any 
shares issued by it, the minister shall: 

 
  (a) cause a notice of the incorporation to be published in 

the Gazette; 
 
  (b) lay before the Legislative Assembly a report, in 

accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 
1991, outlining: 

 
   (i) the name of the body corporate; 
   (ii) the reasons for its incorporation; and 
   (iii) whether the minister is a member of that 

corporation or holds any shares". 
 

Mr. Speaker, I'll just review once more what this amendment 
is intended to do.  First, the amendment would give the 
Minister of Economic Development the authority to establish 
a corporation -- should it be deemed necessary and 
appropriate -- for the delivery of the trade development 
services in the province; and that is the intent of government 
at this time.  It would 

also provide the authority to select the corporate instrument 
for the most appropriate in the delivering of services -- 
whether it's under The Business Corporations Act, or The 
Non-Profit Corporations Act, or The Co-operatives Act. 
 
Authority is also given to make regulations setting out the 
parameters, the scope, the mandate, and the objectives of 
such a corporation.  Finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendment 
entitles the minister to be a member of a non-profit 
corporation or cooperative, or to own voting shares of a 
business corporation.  However such shares would carry no 
property interest. 
 
This is a pragmatic and flexible amendment, Mr. Speaker, 
allowing for input from Saskatchewan exporters in order to 
make sure the final structure serves the best needs of our 
trading partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a straightforward piece of legislation that 
can be supported, I believe, by all members interested in the 
developing of our province's ability to compete in today's 
global market.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to a 
constructive debate and a speedy passage of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move second reading of the 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I can understand the importance 
that the government is placing on this Bill that we have 
before us and the fact that they're going to . . . would like to 
amend the Act.  In view of the fact that this province 
certainly is a trading province and a province that has to look 
at different avenues and research new ways of putting our 
product on the market so that people in other parts -- not only 
in other parts of our nation but other parts of the world -- 
would realize what we have to offer.  And we all know, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, that unless we get out and market we'll 
never get anywhere. 
 
And I can see the point the minister I think brought out, the 
fact that due to the economic times, the difficulties, rather 
than creating another bureaucracy -- of tying this in with the 
economic development portfolio that is already there.  And I 
suggest to the minister that that is certainly indeed 
appropriate and we applaud him for that.  We would also ask 
the minister to give a little further consideration to our 
request earlier on this day of the implementation of the 
utilities review committee under the purview of this 
Legislative Assembly because it certainly would be -- as 
we're doing here -- it would be tying something to a process 
that's already in place versus creating another bureaucracy, 
another organization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I would like to review the 
Bill before us in a little further detail before we move 
forward or give the nod or approval to the Bill, and therefore 
I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to Create, Encourage and Facilitate 
Business Opportunities in Saskatchewan through the 

Establishment of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very 
much.  It's my pleasure and I'm pleased to introduce today 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act, that is 
legislation to establish a new provincial economic 
development institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will have heard a great deal of discussion 
about the pros and cons of this new organization and the 
general consensus that the public and business people in the 
province have brought to the table; that is, that there should 
be a wind-down of the SEDCO, Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation and the establishment of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is intended to create and encourage 
and facilitate business opportunities and job creation in 
Saskatchewan through the establishment of a new Crown 
corporation called the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation.  Knowledge of this Bill and the new 
corporation itself is already fairly widespread, given the fact 
that literally hundreds of meetings have been held over the 
past 12 months with business communities, individuals, and 
community groups. 
 
To give you some background, Mr. Speaker, last year this 
process was taken to the public through a consultation 
process by my staff and by individual members of caucus 
and, as a result, a great deal of discussion and debate took 
place.  The subject of these consultations was the 
government's role in economic development and financing, 
with emphasis on how the government would fulfil its role 
and deliver needed services in the province.  These 
consultations culminated in a news conference held in 
Regina December 7, 1993 announcing the winding down of 
SEDCO and the creation of Sask Opps. 
 
As I'm sure you know, Mr. Speaker, SEDCO has been 
working with business in this province for 30 years and has 
been a major player in jobs and industrial and economic 
development.  However, SEDCO's mandate continued to 
expand over the years as it tried to be all things to all people 
and at no time was that more true than in the years of the past 
administration, during the 1980s. 
 
As a result, SEDCO was carrying a heavy, unsustainable 
debt load.  Its assets can't support its debt and its annual 
operating losses are very, very large.  Despite a number of 
cost-cutting and cost-containment measures taken by our 
government and SEDCO's management over the past two 
years, the corporation has continued to severely strain the 
provincial financial and fiscal resources. 
 
Because of the magnitude of its losses and because of the 
perception of a political interference in the corporation in the 
last 10 years, SEDCO's image has deteriorated to the point 
where the corporation 

cannot recover its credibility. 
 
The government believes that the most responsible course of 
action is to wind SEDCO down and we have announced to 
do that.  I want to emphasize the word, wind down, because 
SEDCO is not being shut down; it is being phased out over a 
period of time. 
 
The corporation is not abandoning its clients.  Existing 
commitments will be kept and SEDCO will manage its loan 
assets until the current portfolio is retired.  SEDCO is also 
continuing to make new loans as appropriate until the new 
corporation is up and running. 
 
We believe that the decision to wind SEDCO down is 
appreciated and supported by the vast majority of people in 
the province and, in particular, Main Street, Saskatchewan.  
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say that 
the decision to create a decidedly different economic 
development corporation is also appreciated and supported 
by the vast majority of people and business people in the 
province. 
 
The governments in Saskatchewan have been active in 
economic development going back as far as 1905.  They 
have long supported community development, infrastructure, 
starting with the first municipal power plants here in the 
province. 
 
Many of the pillars of Saskatchewan's economy have been 
the beneficiaries of government's role in business financing.  
From the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in the 1930s to IPSCO 
in the 1950s and the P.A. (Prince Albert) pulp mill in the 
1970s, all had a continuation and an amount of government 
involvement. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what worked then doesn't necessarily 
work now and what worked for SEDCO for many years is 
not what meets the needs of Saskatchewan business today. 
 
In the course of consulting about government role in 
economic development financing, it became clear to us that 
the entire concept needed thinking and rethinking.  Even if 
SEDCO could have wiped its debt slate clean, SEDCO's 
mandate was dated.  It no longer responded to the economic 
development needs of Saskatchewan in the 1990s.  Time and 
time again we have heard that government has been playing 
too broad a role in economic development; but we also heard 
time and time again that there is a need for government to 
assist with project financing. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that government must provide this 
kind of assistance.  There are key philosophical differences 
between the way government and the private sector approach 
business financing. 
 
That is not to say that one way is right and the other is 
wrong.  In fact these different approaches complement one 
another.  For example, the government engages in economic 
development for the good of the taxpayers, and the private 
sector engages in economic development for the good of its 
shareholders.  Both are 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

right ways of doing economic development and joined 
together in length can make an even stronger unit of 
economic development. 
 
The new concept of the role of government in economic 
development is set out in the government's Partnership for 
Renewal and the economic strategy.  It is a partnership with 
the private sector and government. 
 
Government should not, and will not, go it alone.  But it will, 
through a new corporation -- a corporation with a more 
clearly defined economic development mandate -- partner 
with communities and private lenders on a shared-risk basis 
on a limited number of projects.  Priority will be given to 
those projects in a predetermined area of growth. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the broad objectives of 
the Partnership for Renewal was to provide new sources of 
business start-up and expansion capital.  The strategy we 
expected to use was providing provincial financial assistance 
through syndicated economic development investments with 
the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today's Bill, the Act to establish the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, is the beginning of 
the implementation of that strategy.  Today's Bill strengthens 
and supports that strategy because it is the guiding principle 
that has five main points. 
 
First, working with economic development partners; 
secondly, working in partnership with business on 
market-led projects; third, encouraging regional and 
community-led solutions to economic renewal; and fourth, 
establishing clear investment criteria to guide provincial 
economic development; and fifth, focusing support to 
maximize employment opportunities. 
 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation reflects all of 
these principles.  It will focus on businesses and projects 
providing growth opportunities in three key areas. 
 
First, value added manufacturing and processing; secondly, 
export-oriented and import-replacement markets; and third, 
attracting new business to the province of Saskatchewan.  Its 
clients will be active in one or more of the six strategic 
clusters outlined in the Partnership for Renewal -- 
agriculture value added, forestry, minerals, energy, tourism, 
or information technology and communications. 
 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will offer a 
range of financing including, but not limited to, fixed asset 
and inventory lending, fee producing guarantees, and limited 
equity investment. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that the key question in the minds of 
many Saskatchewan people is how will Sask Opportunities 
differ from SEDCO.  I want to stress that there are very, very 
clear differences.  Rather than function as a lender of last 
resorts which had become the role of SEDCO, Sask 
Opportunities Corporation 

will partner with other sources of financing, including banks 
and credit unions or venture capital. 
 
By syndicating deals, the new corporation will share risk 
with others instead of assuming an entire risk.  If the private 
sector financing or the community backing aren't part of the 
project, then Sask Opportunities will not participate. 
 
Another major difference is that the new corporation will 
take direct equity positions in a project.  That means if 
businesses make money or if that business makes money, so 
do the taxpayers through the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation will not 
finance one business to compete with others for a limited 
local market.  As such, its role in the retail service sector will 
be severely curtailed.  Proponents of business in this sector 
will have to have a strong community backing for their 
projects before the new corporation will consider 
participating. 
 
Accountability is another important feature.  In keeping with 
the recommendations made by the Gass Commission, the 
corporation's annual allocation will come from the 
government's Consolidated Fund, will be part of the 
government's regular budget process, and will be subject to 
review by the legislature each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation represents the expressed wish of the vast 
majority of those directly involved in business, finance, and 
economic development in Saskatchewan.  I am confident that 
this corporation will be an effective vehicle for fostering 
economic growth in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of a Bill to 
establish the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, permission to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, members opposite and 
colleagues, for the opportunity to introduce a couple of 
fellows I see up in the balcony up there.  I'm only familiar 
really with the name of one of them, and that's Keith 
Wagner, and I'd like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
welcome Keith and his friend. 
 
Keith is a shining example of what a neighbour is all about; 
he lives half a mile from our place and together we can do 
tremendous things.  And he's also an example of an 
individual who I've taught everything he knows, going back 
a fair amount of time.  But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 
and members, he's also a shining example of what we don't 
see very much in 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

our society any more and that's a young fellow taking over 
the family farm.  And Keith has accepted responsibility of 
the family farm and is doing a commendable job of it under 
tough times. 
 
So Keith, I'll be seeing you a little bit later on and would ask 
all members to help me welcome Keith Wagner to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just a 
few comments before I move adjournment of debate.  As the 
minister has indicated, the government has taken a serious 
look at SEDCO and there's no doubt that over the years 
SEDCO did get involved in a numbers of areas that became 
controversial and possibly areas of where it may have 
exceeded its mandate, and no one I think . . . I don't believe 
anyone is really quizzing that or questioning that. 
 
But the minister indicated that the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation is going to become a corporation 
that is going to work along with . . . And when I hear him 
talking about working along with, it seems to me that 
SEDCO did have some changes in their mandate coming 
where the participation loans program, for example, where 
SEDCO got involved with people, became not only a lender 
but became more involved and participated, rather than 
becoming the total lender in a number of economic 
portfolios. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only problem that I see with the new 
corporation is that it becomes another arm of government, 
and an arm of government that hopefully will be able to have 
greater opportunity to address issues immediately rather than 
later.  And the minister has indicated that the funding that 
will be allocated to Sask Opportunities Corporation will be 
included in the budget on a yearly basis, giving us the ability 
to quiz and question why the money is putting into this 
corporation and what is being done with it. 
 
And I suggest that is appropriate because of one of the 
problems that I have found, having been on Crown 
Corporations for the last period of years, is that the Crown 
Corporations Committee doesn't have the ability to review 
how a corporation works until that corporation brings 
forward its annual report, and that is some time after the 
close of year end.  And by the time the Corporations 
Committee is able to get together, generally we're looking at 
information that's maybe a year and a half to two and a half 
years old.  And the minister is quite well aware of that, as we 
did sit down in Crown Corporations last Thursday and 
reviewed SEDCO and what took place in the year 
1991-1992. 
 
It would seem to me that if these corporations are really 
going to be effective and if the opposition's 

going to play an effective role in addressing the mandate and 
addressing the funding so the taxpayers know exactly what's 
going on, that it would be appropriate for most if not all of 
this information to come to the House as the changes are 
being made, so that duly elected members could indeed 
address the concerns that may be coming from their 
constituents versus, as I indicated, a year and a half or two 
later down the road. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues and I have indicated, we 
certainly want to take a little more in-depth review of the Bill 
to see exactly where it's going, to get a better understanding 
of what the Bill entails. 
 
And at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I start my 
second reading speech, I wonder if I'd have leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, seated in the west 
gallery is my daughter Sacha, who must be having a boring 
day at university to come and listen to her dad give second 
reading speeches.  But I want all members to welcome her 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 
introduce for consideration of the Assembly, An Act to 
amend The Community Bonds Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community economic development is a priority 
under the Partnership for Renewal economic development 
strategy.  As you have heard, the budget document places 
highest priority on job creation and economic development, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government amended The Community Bonds Act in 
1992, Mr. Speaker, incorporating a number of measures as 
part of our commitment to provide prudent government and 
to build on one of Saskatchewan's sense of community and 
the spirit of cooperation.  Those measures included 
strengthening the Community Bond Review Committee and 
the eligibility criteria and making the program accessible to 
cooperatives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are three basic categories of 
amendments required to make the community bond 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

an even stronger and more effective vehicle for community 
economic development.  These categories are as follows.  
First, make regional economic development authorities 
eligible as an incorporating body to form a community bond 
corporation.  Secondly, amend the exemption of the 
Securities Commission process.  And third, housekeeping in 
compliance amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's look at the first category.  One of the many 
initiatives this government has undertaken is to create jobs 
and to have economic renewal in rural Saskatchewan; and to 
do this, the formation of regional economic development 
authorities or REDAs.  You'll recall, Mr. Speaker, that I 
announced this plan last June to enable communities and 
local organizations to form REDAs -- as they are called -- to 
enable municipal government and business organizations and 
other groups to pool their resources for more efficient and 
effective economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December I was pleased to join the local 
representatives in Prince Albert for the announcement that 
the people of Prince Albert area of our province were the 
first region to form a regional economic development 
authority.  I understand more such announcements will be 
taking place in the very near future. 
 
REDAs and community bonds are a perfect fit, Mr. Speaker, 
so it makes sense to amend the community bond legislation 
to allow for the addition of REDAs as an incorporating body.  
The Act already allows rural development corporations to 
form community bond corporations and amendment no. (1) 
will give the same authority to REDAs. 
 
The second category, Mr. Speaker, addresses the issue of the 
conversion of community bonds to project shares at maturity.  
Discussions involving the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission have determined that they will handle this 
process in conjunction with the community bond office.  
This process will ensure that investors are provided all 
information required to make wise investment decisions at 
the time of the maturity of the bond. 
 
A blanket order will be issued by the commission to exempt 
the community bond corporation, those carrying out 
community bond sales or solicitation and transfers, from the 
registration and the prospectus provisions of The Securities 
Act, 1988, provided that they comply with the existing 
procedures under The Community Bonds Act.  The 
community bond office of my department will continue to 
approve and train sales agents and conduct the offering 
memorandum reviews.  Project approvals will continue to be 
provided by the Community Bond Review Committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third item simply applies to housekeeping 
and minor compliance amendments that are required.  In 
1992, Mr. Speaker, when I brought amendments before this 
House, I said at that time it would not be the final review of 
this legislation. 

In keeping with our commitment to the responsive, 
responsible government, it has been reviewed annually to 
fine tune this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm confident that all members of the House 
will work together to ensure speedy passage of these 
measures, to further strengthen the community bond program 
as a means of ensuring the people of Saskatchewan have 
jobs, and to generate economic activity in their communities.  
It is in that spirit I now present the amendments to the 
community bond for second reading.  I so move. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 
listening to the minister, I know I'm not the only one, my 
colleagues and I aren't the only ones in here that are 
interested in the changes that the minister is talking about, as 
a number of rural economic development committees in my 
area certainly have some questions, a number of questions as 
to the role of the REDA corporation that the minister was 
talking about, changing the format. 
 
Some of the concerns they have is what role is this really 
going to mean or what role are they going to have in 
economic development; how are they going to be able to 
coordinate.  I believe the minister was talking about REDAs 
on the basis of taking rural economic development 
corporations, as we know them today, and rolling them into 
larger economic development corporations in our rural areas.  
And I think the concern is: are they going to get too large 
that they won't have the local input and the local involvement 
that the rural economic development corporations have? 
 
We've also seen through the years, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 
the community bonds program has been a program that has 
enjoyed a large portion of success as people around this 
province have shown the goodwill and the commitment to 
doing more for themselves by putting money into 
organizations or corporations and getting involved in trying 
to establish new businesses in the area. 
 
And I think if we just took a moment . . . and I don't have all 
the numbers in front of me and I don't have a list of all the 
communities that have found the community bond 
corporation has been an avenue that has given them the 
opportunity to build and expand businesses. 
 
And I believe the member from Quill Lakes the other day in 
his speech talked about his constituency and a number of the 
communities there and the different small businesses -- some 
of them that have just been started by farmers themselves, 
individual farmers who came up with an idea.  Didn't matter 
whether it was in the agricultural sector or what it was, but 
through their ideas and some enhancement funds through 
Rural Development and through community bonds and even 
through SEDCO, they've got ongoing businesses that are 
providing job opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can also suggest that in my constituency we 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

have seen where two or three people have put an idea 
together, done a lot of research, especially in the area of 
seeding equipment, and set up a little manufacturing plant.  
And this year they're actually as busy as they would really 
want to be in putting out enough pieces of equipment on the 
market-place, and most of that equipment has already been 
sold. 
 
So over the years, community bonds has been an avenue that 
has allowed communities outside of the large urban centres -- 
and certainly the large urban centres have utilized them as 
well -- have allowed smaller communities to as well get into 
the aggressive role of developing and creating economic 
development and job opportunities in their area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Bill . . . I'm sure there are 
many organizations throughout the province would like to 
take a look at the Bill that the minister is introducing today 
as well, so that they can give us, and raise, some of the 
concerns they may have coming from this Bill, so that we 
can -- as we sit here and discuss it in committee -- in the 
future we can bring these questions up with the minister. 
 
Therefore at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Research Council Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to stand 
today to move second reading of The Act to amend The 
Research Council Act, 1994. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of these amendments are threefold.  
First to provide the Saskatchewan Research Council more 
flexibility regarding its board membership.  Secondly to 
recognize SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) as an agent 
of the Crown.  And third to ensure The Research Council Act 
coincides with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991.  These 
amendments are very important to SRC.  First they provide 
SRC with the opportunity to adapt more quickly to the 
industry needs and requirements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the early years of the Saskatchewan 
Research Council this issue was not a concern because the 
research was conducted by the university faculty or staff.  
However as the research focus moved from the pure research 
to applied contract research with commercial application, the 
SRC grew with its own facilities and staff.  Today SRC 
works very closely with its industry clients.  During the 
fiscal year 1992-93, SRC earned 73 per cent of its revenues 
from fee-for-service contract work.  This accomplishment, 
Mr. Speaker, has helped SRC to become recognized by its 
peers as one of the premier applied research and 
development organizations in Canada. 
 
SRC's customers need technology to solve problems, make 
improvements, stay ahead of the competition, and develop 
new markets.  SRC helps them by taking the results of 
research, their own and anyone else's, 

 through a design and demonstration and pilot plant or any 
combination of these; in turn, usable technologies that 
benefit the user. 
 
For example, converting sodium sulphate into other higher 
valued products has saved an industry and many jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan; developed DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 
technology to perform parentage analysis specific to the 
Canadian pure bred cattle industry; help design and produce 
the E-Z-E-EWRAP 1000 plastic wrapper dispenser and 
various other products for small manufacturers; developing 
technology to take ultrasound images and map the amount of 
fat on feed lot cattle so that a farmer or rancher can 
determine before shipping, the sustainability of cattle for 
market. 
 
Or setting up atmospheric monitoring stations in 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba under contract to NASA 
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration), which are 
investigating the Boreas Forest Region.  This work has 
significance to the whole world in understanding the role of 
forest in determining our climate. 
 
These are only a few examples of the work and the assistance 
SRC provides to the Saskatchewan, Canadian, and 
international clients by dedicating itself to bringing 
investment dollars and technology into Saskatchewan to 
enhance our quality of life.  The value of SRC's work and 
benefits to our province has not been recognized to the 
degree it should be. 
 
Recently a private citizen made a commitment of $500,000 
towards a special technological fund.  This fund is called, 
technology in action.  It will assist projects where innovative, 
scientific, and technological solutions are used to improve 
the competitiveness of Saskatchewan enterprises, and protect 
jobs and the environment, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second reason for these amendments is very 
important, because this generous donation to our province is 
dependent on the recognition of SRC as an agent of the 
Crown.  Mr. Speaker, passage of these amendments will help 
ensure the donation by a man who grew up here, and who 
believes in the pioneer spirit that built Saskatchewan, along 
with others, will have the opportunity to invest their funds 
tax free in Saskatchewan to help build our economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, lastly, the third purpose of these 
amendments are to ensure The Research Council Act with 
respect to the tabling of documents is updated to be 
consistent with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully request that all members of the 
Assembly heartily endorse these amendments to The 
Research Council Act, so that the Research Council can 
enhance its role with more representation on its board from 
industry, obtain private donations which will play an 
important role in our economy, and ensure timely reporting 
to the Assembly. 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

I so move second reading of this Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, there's 
no doubt that as a society changes there is lots of room for 
research and development to take place and to have bodies in 
place that can deal with or look ahead to the future, and 
research in an ongoing way is very important and significant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to get into a long dialogue 
regarding the minister's remarks, but I would like to take 
further study or further review the Bill before us.  And 
therefore at this time I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1515) 
 
Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Municipal Employees' 
Superannuation Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipal employees' superannuation plan 
provides pension benefits to municipal employees, school 
board employees, and designated police officers and 
fire-fighters.  Over 900 employers and over 7,300 employees 
participate in the plan.  A nine-member commission 
representing major employers and interest groups oversees 
the plan's operations. 
 
Amendments to The Municipal Employees' Superannuation 
Act are being pursued to integrate the plan more closely with 
the provisions of The Pension Benefits Act, 1992.  With the 
passing of this Bill, a member's spouse will be required to 
receive a pension upon the member's death.  Any excess 
contributions paid by a member can be transferred out of the 
plan or paid to the member upon termination of employment.  
Portability of the pension asset will be enhanced to allow 
members more options upon their termination of 
employment, and provisions will be made to allow for earlier 
payment of a pension asset to a member's spouse upon 
marital breakdown. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, upon the request of the members, 
the Bill enhances the normal form of pension by providing a 
five-year guarantee.  The cost of this improvement will be 
offset by the current surplus in the pension fund.  Interest 
groups such as the Association of School Business Officials, 
the Rural Municipal Administrators' Association, and the 
City of Prince Albert Employees' Pension Committee 
continually desire to improve the plan without impairing the 
future viability of the fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the pension plan are 
prudent.  They include measures to comply with The Pension 
Benefits Act, 1992, and to address the 

changing needs of plan members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act. 
 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I might 
add to Madam Minister that as I was listening to her bring 
forward the reasoning for the movement of this Bill -- the 
introduction of this Bill, pardon me -- I'm made aware of a 
number of concerns that were raised by a number of 
employees, certainly at the municipal level. 
 
And I think what the minister has indicated in her 
introductory remarks is that the Bill is going to alleviate 
some of the fears that people had out there regarding their 
pension plans.  And I think, I believe, as I've heard, if I'm not 
mistaken, it's very positive and I don't know if my colleagues 
and I really will have a lot to raise.  But we would like to at 
least give people an opportunity to review the Bill before we 
get into further and prolonged discussion, to make sure that it 
indeed meets all the concerns and all the questions that have 
been raised have been answered before we would move 
through passage of this Bill. 
 
Therefore at this time I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 
proposed motion by Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 9 -- 
An Act to repeal The Agriculture Development Fund Act be 
now read a second time.. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 
to take a few moments this afternoon to outline some of the 
concerns that the opposition and particularly many, many of 
the farmers of Saskatchewan have with the demise of the 
Agriculture Development Fund, Mr. Speaker.  Simply 
because of the tremendous value that it has exhibited over 
the years to the research and to the development which is so 
important in the progression and the development of our 
agricultural diversification that is so essential in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to dwell on a few of the concerns that we have 
been hearing.  And one of the fundamental concerns is that 
the folks out there in rural Saskatchewan tell me that any 
time they hear of this government trying and anticipating 
making some fundamental changes to agriculture, they get 
very concerned and they get very sceptical as to the direction 
that that change is going to take.  And I would suggest to 
members of this House that most often, more than not, there 
is good reason for that scepticism, Mr. Speaker. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

Because if we take a look at some of the track record of this 
government over the last couple of years, it is almost 
astonishing at the number of programs that they have been 
able to eliminate and directions that they have been able to 
determine that actually, instead of helping and aiding the 
development of agriculture in this province, it has actually 
been detrimental to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the fundamental position that we are taking as an 
opposition to the elimination of the Agriculture Development 
Fund is that it's going to be detrimental to the welfare of 
agriculture simply because of the positive impact that this 
fund has had over the last number of years, I think since 
1985 -- if I'm not right, in that neighbourhood, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has over the last while eliminated many of 
the support programs for agriculture.  It certainly has, as we 
are all aware, not hesitated when it comes to the breaking of 
60,000 farm contracts that the government had had with the 
farmers.  It certainly has not hesitated in closing rural 
hospitals and basically it has not been good for rural 
Saskatchewan, with the agricultural component in particular. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with the premiss then, that instead of 
helping to rebuild or allowing rural Saskatchewan even to 
survive, the NDP are once more on a road helping for the 
demise.  And, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does is just adds to 
the continuum of the hack and slash approach that the 
government has tended to be taken as far as rural 
Saskatchewan is concerned. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of cause, a 
great deal of cause, because we have known that rural 
Saskatchewan has suffered.  Has suffered not only from the 
economic climate at the international level, but it has been 
added to a government . . . and I will give them some credit 
here.  I think, in a way, that government has been trying to 
help rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the message that comes back to me is please, a plea from 
the farmers, leave us alone.  Don't help us any more; we can't 
afford that kind of help.  Because invariably, when a 
program has been established, it is counter-productive.  It is 
counter-productive to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I come back to the fundamental premiss upon which we 
are working with this particular amendment and that is that is 
going to be detrimental and not productive to the well-being 
of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  It's going to add to the 
hacks and the slashes that have been occurring to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know, for example, that this government is now 
intending to enforce a reduction of the MLAs in 
Saskatchewan by eight.  Now, Mr. Speaker, we have no 
problem with that; in fact we have come up with an 
alternative that said that reduction should be even two greater 
than that -- but not all in rural Saskatchewan, not all at the 
expense of rural Saskatchewan. 

And you back-benchers are sitting there and you are 
accepting that.  You're accepting that and your own rural 
constituents are going to be suffering, and yet we don't have 
any voices in the background of the NDP benches saying, 
Mr. Speaker, let's investigate this.  Is this good for rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And that's what this ADF (Agriculture Development Fund) 
as well, Mr. Speaker, because I submit to you that quality 
agriculture is job 1 in Saskatchewan.  We've got half of the 
productive farm land in Canada; half of our population is 
basically still living in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and to members opposite, how goes rural 
Saskatchewan, goes Saskatchewan.  It's fundamental.  It is 
fundamental. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, why reduce the impact of rural 
Saskatchewan?  Why should this impact be felt only in rural 
Saskatchewan?  Because you fellows and gals over there 
know what's going to happen in the next election.  You're not 
going to win one rural seat -- not one rural seat. 
 
Huh, you say, huh.  Your own back-bencher over there saw 
the light the other day and he decided he was going to walk 
over and join the Liberals.  He thought there might be a 
better chance over there to retain his seat.  And by all 
accounts that's not going to do enough for him either. 
 
So I'm just saying to you people, speak up for your 
constituents.  Speak up for those people that have elected 
you.  They're counting on you.  Don't sit back and grin and 
just say well, gee there's nothing I can do, I'm only a 
back-bencher here.  Speak up in caucus.  Defend rural 
Saskatchewan.  That's why you're here, that's why you were 
placed here, and don't allow these kinds of things to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, eight MLAs out of rural Saskatchewan, gone.  
Take a look at the 52 acute care facilities in order to save 
money.  Where are they now?  Gone.  At what cost, Mr. 
Speaker?  At a direct cost to rural Saskatchewan again. 
 
And again I can say to you, speak up.  Don't allow that to 
happen.  We must have savings and we must cut back on 
spending, but not exclusively to the cost of rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else has happened?  Well we know that the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan is gone.  Now that affects 
everybody in Saskatchewan.  That affects not only farmers, 
but where was it headquartered?  Where are the headquarters 
of Saskatchewan Pension Plan?  Kindersley.  Kindersley.  
And the member of Kindersley has been a thorn in the 
government's side, because he's doing a good job for rural 
Saskatchewan.  He is speaking up on behalf of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What about the rural natural gas distributions system, Mr. 
Speaker?  Gone.  Gone.  As is the Agriculture Development 
Fund if we allow this Bill to pass unchallenged. 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

What about the reduced municipal revenue sharing?  Again, 
difficult to maintain the infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan.  
Not that it's not tough on the cities as well, Mr. Speaker, I 
grant you that.  But when you're working from a smaller 
critical mass, when you're working from a smaller base and 
then you take a big chunk out of it, it is much, much more 
difficult yet to maintain any semblance of the types of 
services that rural Saskatchewan needs, in fact demands for a 
quality of life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have elimination of the Crown lease surface rights.  
We have for farmers breeder fees going up by 31 per cent.  
Something that affects many, many farmers as well, Mr. 
Speaker, is the cancellation of the feed grain adjustment 
program followed by the elimination of the interim program, 
red meat production equalization program, Mr. Speaker, that 
so many farmers were depending on. 
 
And while there is somewhat of a justification there, I guess 
the justification is there, but what bothers most of the 
farmers is the alacrity, the speed with which this government 
moved to match the steps that Alberta took when they took 
away their Crow offset program, Mr. Speaker 
 
We have the increased pasture rental fees.  We have the 
cancellation of the livestock cash advance program.  We 
have the cancelled ethanol incentive program.  We have the 
feeder and breeder loan guarantees being capped.  We have 
our Save our Soils program cancelled.  We have the ad 
boards funding is being cancelled.  We have the calf program 
cancelled.  We find that the fuel rebate for farmers has been 
capped. 
 
And we're back to the good old days here, Mr. Speaker, for 
the institution, the reinstitution of purple gas . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member says, right on.  Mr. 
Speaker, I think that is a shame. 
 
Then we know what is happening with the GRIP program, 
the cancellation of the GRIP program.  But, Mr. Speaker, the 
cancellation of the GRIP program begs a question, and I 
address this directly to the Minister of Agriculture.  What are 
you doing as a result of the cancellation of the GRIP 
program?  What has happened over the last two years, Mr. 
Speaker, since that occurred? 
 
And I'll tell you what has happened.  I have a document here.  
It says Agriculture 2000.  This is the government's future 
for Saskatchewan in a nutshell -- Agriculture 2000.  And 
they're proud of it.  The Minister of Economic Development 
says this is the wave of the future. 
 
Well tell me, tell me and the farmers of Saskatchewan what 
Agriculture 2000 is.  I haven't been able to figure this little 
document out here.  This is the future which the greatest 
industry of Saskatchewan is depending on.  And I can't find 
anything here. 
 
(1530) 

 
 
The Minister of Agriculture says, making money.  Well my, 
my.  How are farmers going to be making money with a 
program like that?  What has been established?  I just 
referred here to the cancellation of the GRIP program.  The 
GRIP program has gone.  You've got your happy little 
committee and I'm sure that they are honest people putting 
their best foot forward and trying to be as innovative and 
helpful as possible. 
 
And what are you saying at this stage?  What you're saying 
to me now and to the farmers of Saskatchewan is, well just 
hold on. You have to wait a little while yet because we don't 
really know what we're doing, and we don't really know 
where we're going.  But what we will do, Mr. Speaker -- 
that's what the Minister of Agriculture says -- we will 
continue the consultative program.  We will continue to ask 
what should we do. 
 
It's past that stage, long past that stage, Mr. Minister.  And 
we've got to get our act in gear so that indeed we know what 
the long-term strategy of this province is.  Because, Mr. 
Minister, quite frankly . . . and I'm glad that the Economic 
minister is sitting beside you there and you're taking very 
careful note of what I'm saying, and I hope that this will have 
some fruit in its bearing. 
 
And I say to you two ministers, you come out with a plan, 
the one fellow comes out with a plan that says Agriculture 
2000; and the other one says, we must diversify, get into 
livestock, produce more sheep, produce more lamb, produce 
more beef, produce more hogs.  And what do you do?  The 
day after your announcement -- and I'm speaking a little bit 
figuratively; I'm not quite sure how long -- but the day after 
the announcement you jacked up the energy rates by nine 
and a half per cent, following your previous rate. 
 
And if you know anything about the hog industry and some 
of the other intensive livestock operations in this province, 
you know that energy is a major, major component in the 
input costs.  And yet you're saying, expand, diversify.  And 
yet you're taking the props away.  That's why I say to you 
fellows, don't interfere with the agriculture of this province.  
Get out of the way.  Quit sucking up the funds out of these 
people's pockets that would like to get on with life.  That's 
the least you could do. 
 
It's being, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, counter-productive.  
Many of your actions are being exactly counter-productive to 
what the intent should have been.  That may be what your 
intent really is, but you're not accomplishing the objectives 
that the farmers of this province are looking forward to. 
 
And so we talk about R&D, research and development.  We 
talk about extension services.  There's a whole pool -- as 
you're well aware, Mr. Speaker, being an educator -- there's a 
whole pool of knowledge that can be accessed, that can be 
tapped.  We have a tremendous R&D program at the 
University of Saskatchewan in the School of Agriculture. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

And yet when the farmers wanted to have access to that 
information, we said, all right, we'll give it to you.  And we 
went out into rural Saskatchewan, through rural service 
centres, and we produced -- how many did we produce 
again?  -- 52 rural service centres.  What did you do?  The 
first few months in office you closed nine of them down, 
including the one in Rosthern, Mr. Minister of Agriculture. 
And the folks aren't very happy about that because they 
relied on that. 
 
So what are you trying to do now?  At the expense of rural 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon gets more business.  I guess I don't 
really mind Saskatoon getting the business, but not at the 
expense of Rosthern.  I have to speak for my constituency, 
and that's what I'm doing.  I'm sending you the message that 
I'm hearing.  They're not particularly pleased at that kind of 
counter-productive measures that you are taking. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of pages of that kind of 
thing, because the litany is long.  And the member from 
Churchill Downs is on his knees already, asking me not to 
continue.  The litany is there; the damage is there.  And I will 
resist the temptation to continue on because I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, I have made my point.  I have made my point. 
 
The research and development is important.  The ADF 
(Agriculture Development Fund) funding has been 
important, and I've got tables and books and documents here 
documenting the advantages that ADF has given to the 
farmers over the years -- a long list of them. 
 
Now I'm going to get to the reason, I guess, why I am so very 
disappointed about what's happening here, because I believe 
I can read between the lines.  I know what is happening here. 
 
We have, Mr. Minister . . . and I'm looking right now at the 
annual report for the Saskatchewan Agriculture Development 
Fund for the year 1992-93.  And I can just open it up and 
immediately following the letter of transmittal is the 
minister's message.  That's you, Mr. Minister. Your 
signature's at the bottom here  Yes, you're aware of it.  Right. 
 
And I just want to quote a few passages here, Mr. Speaker, if 
I might, where the minister says: 
 

 The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to the 
future of Saskatchewan's agriculture and food industry 
through research, development and demonstration.  The 
ADF provides farm families and the farm processing 
industries with tools necessary to build a strong future. 

 
You know what, Mr. Minister?  I agree with you.  So do 
most of the farmers of this province.  And you go on and say: 
 

 Farmers, industry and government must work together to 
ensure the future of the Saskatchewan agriculture and food 
industry.  I 

 am confident (you say) that the ADF will play an important 
role in that future. 

 
And what are we doing here today?  We're talking about the 
hack and slash, the demise of the ADF fund.  That's what 
we're talking about and that's what you folks are 
contemplating over here. 
 
The next page you say, and again I quote from the 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Development Fund: 
 

 The Saskatchewan Agriculture Development Fund . . . is a 
vital tool for implementing Saskatchewan-based initiatives 
in food and agriculture research, development and 
demonstration projects. 

 
It is a vital tool, I remind you, Mr. Minister.  These are your 
own words.  No, these aren't your words; these are the words 
of Hartley Furtan, a good friend of mine, I might say, who is 
the chairman of ADF.  And I think that he also must be 
disappointed in the direction that this is taking. 
 
And I can go on, Mr. Minister, to continue to quote, to quote 
these kinds of statements that you are making about ADF, 
about diversification, about its impact on northern 
Saskatchewan in the agri-food sector, different kinds of 
situations like that.  Technology transfer is another issue that 
is talked about in here. 
 
Now I just want to do a little bit of explaining to the people 
who might be interested in this and to the farmers of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, about what the motivation is in this 
government.  Because I know what the minister will do when 
we ask him questions about this in Committee of the Whole.  
He will get up and the first thing that he will tell us is, well 
folks, don't worry, the ADF is not really gone. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's right. 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- So you see, he says, that's right.  I knew 
what he was going to say.  He's going to say it has now been 
embodied in the larger picture of the Department of 
Agriculture and Food.  It's still there.  Oh, mind you, Mr. 
Speaker, it's still there; it's just hidden.  It'll never see the 
light of day.  It will never see the light of day.  So he's going 
to say it's still there, only in a different form.  Only now he's 
going to be chairman of the board instead of the deputy 
minister. 
 
And I can see here by the list of the board itself, you've got 
some pretty good people on this board.  I think they're to be 
commended.  And I could go through the list of the 
members.  I have no problem with the members on this 
board, Mr. Minister. 
 
But you're taking full control of the direction which this 
board is going.  But more importantly, you're taking full 
control of the funding of this board.  To me it's no different 
than what happened in SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission) in Health last year.  The funding 
for SADAC was taken up and it was just embodied in the 
Department of Health and lost in the big picture of the 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

things.  That's what happened there. 
 
Mr. Minister, our concern is that the ADF fund is going to go 
the same route.  That's what we're saying and that's what our 
concern is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you say no.  
You say no. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, during the year -- and this is the year in 
review ending March 31, 1993 -- during the year the 
Treasury Board . . . You know what Treasury Board is?  The 
Treasury Board are you folks sitting in the Treasury Board.  
It's the ministers, and only the key ministers, Mr. Speaker, 
that make up Treasury Board. 
 
During the year Treasury Board withdrew $1.96 million out 
of this fund.  I'm not quite sure where that went, Mr. 
Speaker.  Where did that funding go? -- $1.96 million.  
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we find that in 
1992, $10.6 million was withdrawn by Treasury Board out of 
the unexpended portion of this fund -- $10.6 million. 
 
Now where did it go?  Where did it go?  Where did it go?  I 
don't know. I don't know where it went. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Did it go . . . (inaudible) . . . to put it 
into Agriculture? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, good question.  Did it go into 
Agriculture?  Did it go into some kind of beef-up . . . beef, 
that's probably the wrong terminology.  I don't think it went 
to any beef programs.  But did it go to beef up some kind of 
slush fund?  What are you doing with it?  It went into the 
Consolidated Fund and got lost in the shuffle. 
 
Mr. Minister, I hope I'm wrong.  I hope you will be able to 
persuade me that I'm not seeing this thing quite right and that 
some of the folks that I've talked to are also wrong in their 
perception of what is going on.  But I suspect very strongly, 
Mr. Minister, that these funds are going to be used up for 
something entirely different than what they were intended 
for. 
 
You have said in your own words, your deputy minister has 
said, the Economic Development minister had said that R&D 
is important in this province.  And certainly with the 
possibilities of the biotechnology that is available, with the 
possibility of attracting some of the R&D works and some of 
the R&D folks out of Toronto, out of Ottawa particularly, 
there is big potential there.  And you know that. 
 
Our university has got the room.  We're a low-cost area to 
help develop this kind of R&D.  And yet when it seems as if 
there are opportunities on the horizon, you choose to say, 
well maybe this isn't a priority after all.  Because the 
Minister of Finance has tapped you on the shoulder and said, 
maybe we could use these funds elsewhere; it's not really that 
important.  And we're disappointed in that, Mr. Minister. 
 
And we will be asking you for some extremely concrete, 
solid commitments on your part that the monies that were 
devoted to ADF projects previously are in fact going to 
continue to be there, perhaps even 

 enhanced, and that there will be some solid proof of 
expenditures in the R&D program.  Even though the ADF . . 
. and you're going to win out at the end of the day when we 
come to vote on this. We know that.  But we are still going to 
hold your feet to the fire and make sure that rural 
Saskatchewan does not suffer once again. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to add 
a few words of concern to the information that has been 
provided by the member from Rosthern.  And I want to begin 
by saying that Saskatchewan Agriculture Development Fund 
was begun as a part of a process to enhance the delivery of 
programs for research demonstration projects.  And typical 
of development for processing and technological transfer 
between agencies of research, and research to development -- 
research to development, and to use by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that was done as a result of putting all of 
the research together in Agriculture into one component.  
What happened was that the involvement by the Department 
of Agriculture and Food was one that said should we be 
managing this ourselves or should we allow an arm's-length 
organization to operate this fund.  And in that process, Mr. 
Speaker, the decision was made that it would probably be in 
the best interests of Agriculture to operate this fund at arm's 
length. 
 
Now one of the reasons, I think, -- and it's a very significant 
one -- is that in many cases the public began to think that 
research and development could only take place as an arm of 
government.  Research and development could only take 
place as a part of government, and I believe that in the 
context of what we're looking at in research and development 
we have to go beyond what government can do.  We have to 
go beyond what government can do by itself.  And in this 
area we need to go into those areas, for example, the private 
sector which can provide and input in a very systematic kind 
of a way. 
 
And I believe that what the minister is going to do is he is 
going to jeopardize that involvement by the private industry 
by taking and doing what he's doing to the Ag Development 
Fund.  He is going to say that I am the only one that's going 
to make a decision about this.  He, for example, is the 
ultimate authority in the direction that the board is going to 
take. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I want to say to say to the members of this Assembly 
that I don't believe that he should be doing that.  I think that 
he should give them a mandate to achieve a certain goal.  He 
should give them a mandate to say I am going to go into 
research versus demonstration. 
 
Or he could say I am going to give them a mandate to go into 
technological development in the area of agriculture.  He 
could give them a mandate to go into processing as a tool to 
develop agriculture. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

Give them a mandate to do one, two, three; have a priority of 
all of them.  Say this is first, this is second, and this is third.  
And he could give that board the mandate to do that. 
 
But now what is going to happen is that he is going to be at 
the head of it, and knowing the minister, I think that he is 
reducing the value of the board to provide the direction that 
the province should have in its research and development. 
 
And I think that that is a serious problem.  I think that he has 
already stuck his finger in there so blatantly that he should be 
reprimanded for it.  And I'll point to the fact that in 1992, 
under his authority or the member from Rosetown-Elrose, 
either one of those two ministers decided that 10.6 million 
should be moved out of the Ag Development Fund and put 
into the Consolidated Fund. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, that money had been placed in the 
Agriculture Development Fund as a discussion of this 
Legislative Assembly.  This Legislative Assembly said, on 
budgets prior to 1989 that they would provide funding to the 
Ag Development Fund in a way that it provided a surplus to 
that fund.  And through the years it had developed a $10.6 
million surplus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in that fund the people who were on the board of 
directors could easily take and say the investment 
opportunity that that has provided in revenue will be used for 
project A, project B, project C. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, was exactly what the fund was used 
for.  The interest was designated to research and 
development.  And, Mr. Speaker, the whole fund on an 
annualized basis was in the neighbourhood of $25 million; 
$10 million became a movable capital residual that could be 
used for extraordinary projects that came forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what happened was this minister, this 
government, decided that that fund should be put back into 
the Consolidated Fund and left there and to be used for 
general revenue outside of agriculture, inside of agriculture, 
and for whatever.  And that's the reason, Mr. Speaker, I have 
a lot of questions about why this minister would move the 
role and control of the board of directors into his own 
personal hand. 
 
And I believe it's wrong. I believe it was wrong that he 
moved the $10.6 million out of that fund, and I believe it was 
wrong for him to move the $1.9 million out of the fund last 
year.  Those are all things that he is controlling and 
manipulating the fund with. 
 
And I have heard it from people in the research side of 
agriculture that they have a serious problem with that.  Why 
should the people on the Ag Development Fund board be 
restricted to the concept of the Minister of Agriculture in 
dealing with this issue. 
 
I think they're seriously restricted by this minister.  They 
don't have the opportunity to put the money where they see it 
should be going.  They're the experts.  We have doctors and 
scientists throughout the board, 

 people who have a vision for what Saskatchewan could be.  
And what's happened?  They're curtailed, they're inhibited, 
by the minister being responsible, as the chairman of the 
board or the head of the organization.  Mr. Speaker, I think 
that's wrong. 
 
I think it's wrong because I think the powers . . . As it says in 
the speech that he made last Thursday I believe it was, he 
said that the provisions in this repeal legislation will transfer 
all powers and privilege and duties of ADF to the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food.  That's what it's going to do, and I 
think that's a serious, serious problem. 
 
This minister is deciding that not only will he say that I can 
move $10.6 million out of the fund into the Consolidated 
Fund -- what else is he saying by this?  He is saying that I am 
going to manipulate what these people, as board members, 
are going to be doing in the future.  And I think that's wrong. 
 
I think it was wrong for him to begin that track when he took 
the $10.6 million out.  I think it was wrong for him when he 
took the $1.9 million out.  And it's wrong today, Mr. 
Speaker, because I want to point out what confidence . . . 
what confidence is the private sector going to place in this 
minister to invest in research and economic development in 
this province, given that he has taken away and placed on 
himself all those privileges -- the powers and privileges and 
duties of ADF to the Minister of Agriculture.  And that I see 
as seriously reducing the value of the Agriculture 
Development Fund. 
 
Then I ask the question this way, Mr. Speaker.  Is that really 
the purpose that he has?  Is that really the purpose for which 
he is doing this?  And I would suggest that perhaps it is.  He 
has not said that he is for agriculture development and 
research.  He talks in glowing terms about people doing it.  
But is he going to contribute? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to use some examples of a return on 
the investment in research and development in the canola 
industry, for example.  In research and development, a dollar 
spent, a dollar spent, Mr. Speaker, has returned over $100 
value for every dollar spent in research in the canola 
industry.  And if we wouldn't have had the canola industry in 
1993-94, this province would have a serious, serious problem 
in the grains and oilseeds.  And that's a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canola, next year, is expected to out-produce its production 
this year; more acres next year.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  
Because canola has become an oilseed for household use that 
far surpasses anything anybody every thought could happen.  
And the reason is, Mr. Speaker, that researchers in 
Saskatchewan decided to take it as a priority, put it into 
place, and today we have an oilseed that is used all over 
North America, used in Japan. It's used in southeast Asia 
and, Mr. Speaker, the reason is because research and 
development was done on that project in Saskatchewan to 
provide the basis and the in-depth knowledge and 
understanding of a number of things: 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

how to process it, how to grow it, how to grow the best 
varieties, how to grow the varieties that would be the most 
likely to succeed in the context of Saskatchewan's weather. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, was done in 
Saskatchewan under development by people from 
Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I say to this 
minister he is going to take over that power and that 
authority and that privilege to say, you can't develop this, or 
you can't develop that.  I want to do it on this one. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker?  Is it maybe because his friend or 
something is involved in that research?  Is it going to have an 
economic impact of value to the people of Saskatchewan and 
internationally?  The possibility exists, Mr. Speaker, that the 
answer is no.  And that is the reason why we have a serious 
problem with him taking control of the agenda of this board. 
 
He is going to be in the place where he can manipulate and, 
as I have seen him before, he does that on a continual and 
constant basis.  He does that in the department, he does that 
in . . . and he will do it in this one too, as well, because he 
has said he would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provisions in this repeal legislation will transfer 
all powers, privileges and duties of ADF to the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food under The Department of Agriculture 
Act, and all the properties, Mr. Speaker. All the properties. 
 
That leads me to an interesting point, Mr. Speaker, and the 
point is this.  We have an organization in this province called 
VIDO.  It's called the Veterinary Infectious Diseases 
Organization.  And that organization, Mr. Speaker, has 
developed very specific controls over a number of very 
serious diseases in the livestock industry and I want to just 
point out one.  One of those was a disease that infects calves 
and it's called scours.  And VIDO, the Veterinary Infectious 
Diseases Organization, headquartered in Saskatchewan, 
provided a vaccine within a very short period of time to 
control this. 
 
And what has that done?  That has allowed that vaccine to be 
sold not in Saskatchewan, not in Canada, but all over the 
world.  All over the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if the Agriculture Development Fund would find a cure 
for any kind of a disease, any kind of a fungus that would 
appear on plants, or plants of various varieties, and would 
say they would be able to market that, who would get the 
benefit of that?  Would the scientists who had developed it?  
Would the private organizations who had developed it have 
the opportunity to get the benefit of that development? 
 
It says right in what the Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, what the 
minister said on Thursday.  He said that all powers, 
privileges, and duties of ADF will be in the Minister of 
Agriculture's hand and they become the property belonging 
to Her Majesty in right of the Crown. 

 
 
My question to the minister is this: Is that going to give 
confidence to the investors from private companies in the 
province of Saskatchewan to invest in research in the 
Agriculture Development Fund?  And I would hazard a 
guess the answer is no.  And I believe that he has crossed the 
line on this and I think it's a serious, serious problem. 
 
In development of agriculture in this province . . . I'll just use 
another example.  The research station in Swift Current has 
provided example after example in grain, example after 
example in grass varieties that have come out of the research 
station in Swift Current that have provided millions and 
millions . . . hundreds of millions of dollars of value to the 
people of Saskatchewan.  Not only to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but internationally it has 
provided a benefit to the people on an international basis.  
When people were talking about a little bug that's called the 
sawfly -- cuts off the stem of hollow wheat plants or grain 
plants -- that little bug would crawl up the plant to just above 
the first node and cut it off.  And it would fall over and it was 
devastating.  So what did they do? 
 
Research station in Swift Current started working on that.  
They developed a solid-stem grain variety that would be 
resistant to that.  And what did that do?  It transformed all of 
the breeding programs in wheat alone.  Now it was an asset 
to the society.  But, Mr. Speaker, if that would have been a 
private company willing to put the money out to deliver that 
research and development, this minister would have taken 
that over like he has taken over everything.  He and his 
cabinet officials have taken over everything that they could 
put their finger on -- everything. 
 
Ten point six million dollars you pull out of that fund 
carefully and put it over into the Consolidated Fund.  That's 
one year.  Another year they take 1.9 million, pull it out of 
the fund, and put it into the Consolidated Fund.  Mr. 
Speaker, the people who are on the board of directors made 
those decisions about that fund independent of minister 
activity.  They made that decision to do it on the basis of 
whether it was right for agriculture development in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
They made that decision independently.  I know they made it 
independently, Mr. Speaker, because I was the minister 
responsible for that.  And as the minister responsible for it, I 
did not put that power in my hands to tell them what to do.  
But this minister has taken that power over.  This minister 
has said: I can pull it out of here and put it out of here.  I'll 
transfer the 10.6 million because I think I can do it better 
over here; or I can take this 1.9 million and put it over there. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I think that this 
minister would do the same thing for information, technical 
information.  I'll pull it out of here and use it for the gain of 
the Department of Agriculture -- not for the gain of 
agriculture in this province, but for the Department of 
Agriculture.  And that is where I see, 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Mr. Speaker, that this minister and this government are in 
serious error.  And he's done it over and over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he has said that this is a good organization.  He 
said ADF has research projects with farm organizations, farm 
and industry groups, the University of Saskatchewan, and 
Agriculture Canada. 
 
Now which ones is he going to get rid of when he says, I am 
going to control?  The one, Mr. Speaker, the one that is the 
most important of all of these, because it does not come from 
the tax base of the province of Saskatchewan, is that private 
sector that he is now going to say, I'm shutting the door.  He 
is saying, I'm going to close the door and all of the strategic 
research for agriculture development is going to have to take 
place under my direction because I'm smarter than everybody 
else.  That's what he's saying.  Because he has the power, 
privileges, and all properties will belong to the Department 
of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we've got to go beyond that today.  
People in this province are saying we've got to start 
something new here.  If people want to have development in 
grain, let the people decide where their funding and research 
is going to come from -- let the people decide.  If it's going to 
come in the livestock industry, why not let the livestock 
industry decide how much; why not let the livestock industry 
decide the check-off value, and then let them put that into the 
fund? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this minister is walking very close on that 
issue as well.  He is walking very close to the edge because 
what he is taking away is going to be just as destructive, Mr. 
Speaker, just as destructive as what this is.  And that, Mr. 
Speaker, is very, very serious.  It has the livestock industry 
hanging on its head, Mr. Speaker, and they are very, very 
irritated by it.  That's as serious as this minister is.  And he 
will do exactly with ADF as he has done with the livestock 
industry -- if you don't do it my way, then you're out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I heard a grunt from the other side that 
was telling me that somebody didn't agree.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, why doesn't the livestock industry go to see those 
fellows over there, those men and women who are the 
back-benchers . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- They have. 
 
Mr. Martens: -- Yes, they have, and they have told you very 
firmly that this Minister of Agriculture and Food has stepped 
over the line.  And if he is prepared to step over the line for a 
million dollars, he's going to step over the line in a lot of 
ways, Mr. Speaker, and that's what I'm telling this Assembly.  
This Minister of Agriculture, under the direction of this 
Premier, is stepping over the line.  Now he wants to take all 
the powers, all the privileges, all of the properties and say it 
belongs to the Minister of Agriculture and Food in respect to 
Her Majesty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those funds come from the taxpayers.  They 
aren't the government's.  They are the taxpayers'. 

And, Mr. Speaker, some of them gave those monies out of 
their own volition.  They decided that they were going to do 
this on their own, Mr. Speaker.  And what have we got here?  
We've got a minister who says, I'm going to take all of that 
away.  Is the private sector going to invest with that kind of a 
minister?  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, no. 
 
Is the private sector going to become involved with him 
because they have a confidence in him?  I say no.  Is the 
private sector going to even think about having confidence in 
this minister when on the one hand he says, I'm going to take 
the powers and the privileges, and then on the other hand he 
says, now you come and give me your investment dollars 
from the various chemical companies or the various research 
scientists who want to do research into the livestock, the hog 
industry, or any of those kinds of commodities? 
 
Are they going to have confidence in this minister?  I don't 
think so, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think so.  They have said that 
to us and I am sure they've said it to the people that sit on the 
back benches of the government.  I am sure that they have 
said that to them because they've indicated to us they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the assets are going to be transferred to Her 
Majesty in right of Saskatchewan, and the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food is going to have the power, the right, to 
tell the board of directors of ADF what they're going to do.  
He's going to tell Hoechst Canada what to do.  He's going to 
tell Du Pont what to do.  He's going to tell all of these 
companies across Canada that maybe want to invest in 
Saskatchewan, if you put any money into this I am going to 
take claim to it -- I am going to take claim to it.  And that's 
wrong, Mr. Speaker.  That's wrong. 
 
I noticed -- to put it in so that people will understand -- prior 
to 1982 they had a program under the conservation 
development branch of the Department of Agriculture; they 
had a program for soil conservation.  And you would drive 
down the roads, Mr. Speaker, you'd drive down the road and 
you would see this sign at least six feet high and three feet 
wide, and on that sign would say, research project, soils 
salinity problem, funds donated by Gordon MacMurchy -- 
big letters.  You could see that from almost a quarter of a 
mile away.  And you could see that sign.  Who gave the 
authority to do that?  Mr. MacMurchy -- this was his project. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it wasn't Mr. MacMurchy's project.  Whose 
project was it?  It was the farmer's project, Mr. Speaker.  
They forgot to put the farmer into the right light in that 
project.  What have we got today, Mr. Speaker?  We have a 
Minister of Agriculture who's going to say -- whatever his 
name is -- he's going to say Mr. so-and-so, Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, is the minister responsible for setting 
this project up. 
 
Does the farmer get any credit for it?  No, Mr. Speaker, the 
farmer isn't going to get any credit for it.  Is the board of 
directors going to get any credit for this?  No.  Are the 
companies that are going to do business with ADF going to 
get any credit for it?  No.  It will be 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

Minister of Agriculture and Food, big title across the bottom.  
You just watch and see what happens.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 
the problem. 
 
Isn't Hoechst Canada going to get the credit for the money 
they put in there?  No.  The rights and privileges belong in 
the Department of Agriculture and Food and the minister is 
responsible.  Oh, but he will say, I am defending the rights of 
everybody.  No, Mr. Speaker, he's defending the rights of 
himself only, what he perceives to be in the best interest of 
research and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm going to point out another incident that 
people understand. There's a little black seed that's about the 
size of a pepper kernel and that seed is called borage and that 
plant that grows . . . that is grown in south-east Asia but it's 
also grown around Saskatoon.  And what do they use that 
for, Mr. Speaker?  That little seed is crushed, it's crushed and 
oil is taken out of it and that is to take away the one kind of 
cholesterol that is in the blood stream of the majority of 
people.  It's the bad kind.  There's two kinds, one is good and 
one is bad.  And it's there to take the bad stuff out. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the project for all of this was developed 
when I was the minister responsible for ADF.  Did I know 
what that little black seed was going to be used for?  I was 
told what it was going to be used for.  But these people, these 
people who are on the board of directors of ADF said that is 
a good project, that's a good project. 
 
How many acres do we have of borage around the city of 
Saskatoon today because they have a processing plant there 
to look after it?  And companies like Shaklee buy that 
product from them and use it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what language it's in when they 
sell it?  It's not English -- it's Japanese.  Why?  Because it's a 
market potential driven by a Japanese market. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, did I know anything about borage before I 
went there?  No, sir, I didn't.  But when they told me about it, 
they said this is a good project; we've decided to do it. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason I say to this Minister of 
Agriculture when he thinks he has the complete control and 
the supreme intelligence of the agriculture sector by saying I 
am going to control this, I know what's best, I am going to 
handle this, then Mr. Speaker, he has set himself up for 
failure of agriculture in this province.  That is the reason 
why, Mr. Speaker, I have a serious concern about what this 
Minister of Agriculture is doing to the people of 
Saskatchewan in research and development, technological 
development -- all of those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know considerable of these people who are on 
this board.  I even know the people in the Department of 
Agriculture who are on this board.  You don't find more 
dedicated people than John Buchan; you don't find more 
dedicated people than Terese 

Karwandy.  You don't, Mr. Speaker.  And they are from the 
Department of Agriculture, and I have no problem with them 
being there.  They understand it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what about those people who are on the 
board who are from southern Saskatchewan, north-east 
Saskatchewan, north-west Saskatchewan?  What about those 
people understanding?  There's doctors there; there's 
veterinarians there; there's people who represent large 
provincial and national organizations, and also large national 
companies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I see this as a serious, serious problem, 
that this minister is going to decide, this minister is going to 
decide that he has the authority, he has the power to curtail 
research and development in this province, because he is 
limiting what they will do to what he can think about. 
 
And that's what wrong about this.  Mr. Speaker, I think that 
he is moving in the wrong direction.  The reason that we 
moved it into a Crown corporation to separate itself is so it 
could have its own mandate.  So it could have its own 
mandate for research and development, technological input.  
And, Mr. Speaker, this minister is not doing that.  He is not 
allowing the independence of the board to exist because he 
wants to control it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that isn't good.  That isn't good for 
Saskatchewan.  And I can point out, time after time, 
historical evidence that show that when an individual who is 
in government controls and manipulates the size of the 
dynamic in research, it's doomed for failure -- plain and 
simple, it's doomed for failure. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, under the purview that this does 
not provide an asset or a benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan, I don't think anybody should be supporting it, 
least of all the minister, who says he knows something about 
agriculture.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to have 
a great deal of difficulty supporting this amendment when it 
comes to the floor of this Assembly.  Thank you for your 
time. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again we 
see our government about to destroy a part of our heritage in 
the province of Saskatchewan.  A simple Bill -- I have it in 
my folder under my desk and it's not much bigger than a 
piece of paper -- and it says so much by saying so little.  
Because what it does is wipe out an entire part of our 
agricultural base.  An entire part of our history of 
development of diversification in the agricultural sector is 
being wiped out with a few sentences that simply say that 
they're going to destroy and wipe out the entire process that 
was covered by this Bill. 
 
And that process seems to make us wonder exactly what the 
government is thinking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Because 
on one hand they say in all of their speeches, and their throne 
speech, and all the budgetary processes, that they really want 
to help agriculture and they want to help the farming industry 
in Saskatchewan. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

What they want to do is to have a diversification program 
that will enhance agriculture, and yet on the other hand we 
have in place a structure that has been doing exactly that, 
which the government now wants to wipe out in one fell 
swoop and destroy it all, with no plan to replace it except to 
dump it into the general program of agriculture where it will 
be swallowed up and lost for ever. 
 
If you want to bring emphasis to a particular approach of 
how to solve a problem, it doesn't seem intelligent to me that 
you would bury it in a ton of other kinds of programs; that 
you would try to in fact enhance it by making it more visible, 
that you would in fact bring these issues up front, make them 
the focal point for all of society to see. 
 
And so it makes me wonder why we are destroying this 
entire program rather than using it as a building block to 
enhance the very programs that the government says it wants 
to have as its main focus in its Speech from the Throne and 
in the budget process.  It almost seems that here again we 
may have a situation where somebody else thought of 
something good, put it into place. And the government can't 
live with that; they want to put their own name on it. 
 
And if that were the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and if the 
government in fact needed to do that and they were going to 
come up with an alternate program that would take the place 
of the one we see here, then let them say that and we can go 
along and live with that.  Simply needing to change the name 
and take credit for it is not a problem for me. 
 
If that's what they need to do to help agriculture is to take the 
credit for it and to make sure that their name is stamped on it, 
and that the people of the province will give not only their 
approval to it but their thanks to it and say, you fellows in the 
government did it and it wasn't the past administrations or 
the farmers of the past who developed these programs, I 
could live with that.  I understand politics well enough to 
know that governments need to take some credit. 
 
But there doesn't seem to be an alternative.  We haven't been 
shown any kind of an approach to a building block of this 
nature to go into the very structure that the government says 
it's going to accent, that structure being one of diversification 
and the development of diversification in the agricultural 
industry. 
 
I'll give you a few examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
kinds of things that this program provided in the province, 
and let the people judge for themselves if this is not exactly 
the same things that the government says it wants to do in its 
new initiative which it calls the Agriculture 2000. 
 
We had programs, for example, under the ADF sponsorship 
of flax-seed oil in the concrete preservatives.  Now how 
many people would have realized that you can actually make 
concrete last longer by adding flax-seed oil?  As a farmer 
myself, 

until the research was done and somebody actually proved 
that this was a fact, I didn't know that that was possible or 
that it even made any sense.  But lo and behold, some bright 
fellow decided one day that this could happen. 
 
Maybe it happened by a fluke where somebody spilled some 
flax-seed oil -- linseed oil, I guess it's called.  Probably in the 
old days they used to use it to put on leather to soften it and 
to preserve it.  Maybe one day somebody spilled a jugful into 
the concrete as he was mixing it and said, well it's probably 
wrecked but we might as well keep on using it.  And after he 
poured it and it hardened, it even got better than the other 
stuff he had.  I'm not sure, but I suspect that's how these sort 
of things get happening. 
 
Well the reality is that some researchers decided that seeing 
as how this proposal had been before them, that it should be 
studied and checked out.  People who grow flax-seed would 
certainly benefit if it were true that we could find a new use 
for linseed oil. 
 
A few years ago you may recall that people were saying we 
would have to stop growing flax because there really wasn't 
any practical use for it any more.  Synthetic oil products that 
had been developed and produced through other research 
programs could be made from crude oil a lot cheaper and a 
lot easier. 
 
So the people that grew flax were suddenly starting to say, 
well we need to have some ways of diversifying the uses.  
But there wasn't any place where they could find funding for 
these kinds of projects or to get this kind of research done. 
 
But under the agriculture diversification fund, there was an 
option.  Here was a vehicle.  Here was a mechanism that we 
could put this program under.  And so it was done.  And so it 
was proven that flax-seed oil in fact does do a lot of good to 
help strengthen concrete and make it last for a longer period 
of time.  Thus we have a new preservative that was 
developed out of an old product that was always there.  We 
just didn't know that it would work. 
 
We had canola oil being tested as a dust suppressant.  Now 
who ever would have thought that canola oil could 
effectively be used as a dust suppressant in other grains, of 
course.  It might be thought, well you could put it on the 
ground, it would stop . . . it's oily; it would stop dust.  But 
that's totally impractical.  It is, you know, just a fact of life 
that you couldn't spread that kind of expensive oil on a road 
to stop dust from a road. 
 
But here we have a problem in our edible foods.  In ships, for 
example, the dust gets so thick that people can't work in the 
grain.  This is an actual dust from the grain breaking up to a 
certain extent.  And yet if you put water on it, it's going to 
make it wet and it will get soggy, and it will mould and get 
spoiled.  So you have to have a way to control that dust so 
that you don't destroy the food properties and you don't cause 
the food to either spoil or to make it inedible. 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's found that canola oil is the 
perfect solution.  Not only is it an edible product itself, but it 
does the job very well.  When the idea came about though, 
where was the money to research that to come from?  How 
were we going to find out if canola oil in fact would be 
helpful to suppress dust in edible foods that were to be 
handled in a bulk situation? 
 
We had to have a vehicle to put that to the test where there 
was money available, and the ADF was a fund that was 
available; it was a vehicle that provided that.  And the 
government is taking that vehicle away from us by cancelling 
this Bill.  And when they cancel the Bill and they don't 
provide a new area, then we lose the accent on getting these 
jobs done. 
 
And as I mentioned before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the 
all-important part of this Bill not being taken away, or at 
least having something in place to put in its place.  Now if 
the minister is serious about wanting to get the job done, he 
needs to immediately get to his drawing table.  Maybe he's 
been there. Maybe the fault is that he introduced the 
cancellation of this Bill before he let us know that he has 
something else to put into place. 
 
He should immediately be on his feet to let us know that he 
has something in place that could allow for this 
diversification program to go ahead that he talks about as the 
main building block for his government's direction in 
agriculture. 
 
A few years ago we had talk about glyphosate, a generic 
Roundup product.  And as you know, Mr. Speaker, people in 
the province were using Roundup to kill all kinds of weeds 
in their crops, but they were finding they couldn't afford the 
cost.  It was simply too expensive. 
 
But there was a generic project that someone had discovered 
through some work.  But there needed to be some more 
research done to find out if this product in fact would work, 
or if in fact it was cost-effective, or who could produce it.  
And there wasn't a vehicle to put it to the test.  There was no 
possible way that anyone could think of to be able to finance 
or research the product to see if we could find a reasonable 
alternative to the true Roundup. 
 
Through this vehicle, that option was available.  Through 
this vehicle, the Agriculture Development Fund, we had a 
research mechanism with funding so that people could put 
this to the test and they did. 
 
Now you can say, and truthfully, that the attempts made by 
people to bring about the generic Roundup manufacture and 
distribution and sale -- it failed.  Those sales never happened.  
The product never, ever got mass produced. 
 
But the reality is that the parent company that produced the 
real Roundup, realizing that this generic product was 
coming, that the research had been done, that the potential 
was there, they decided rather than to be run out of business, 
they would restructure their 

 whole operation, reduce the cost of their product enough so 
that nobody could compete and produce in competition to 
them. 
 
And so the net effect was that farmers have a product that 
works extremely well for them and it's provided at the cost 
that it should have been at to start with. 
 
So the process was well worthwhile.  It cost a lot of money 
for the research project; it cost a lot of time and effort. But 
the reality is that success was there.  The price of Roundup 
itself went down, and now farmers use it in vast quantities at 
very inexpensive prices. 
 
So the mere fact that you provided a vehicle that could 
provide competition meant that the parent product went 
down in price and now all farmers that use it have prospered 
and benefited.  And the whole industry, the whole 
agricultural industry has benefited as a result of the work 
done under the auspices of this Crown corporation that is 
now about to be destroyed with one fell swoop of the pen. 
 
Such a little Act that makes such a big difference in so many 
people's lives should certainly not be taken lightly.  And 
without a vehicle to replace it, we must take a hard, hard 
look at what we're losing, what is it that we are sacrificing. 
 
Through this program we had things like straw particle board 
-- manufacturing of particle board out of straw.  It was 
researched, found that it could be worked.  You will recall, 
Mr. Speaker, that there was a plant even set up and the 
product was produced.  Unfortunately the marketing wasn't 
there and the process failed eventually as a business. 
 
But now I understand . . . the last few weeks I heard that 
there is another venture about to start up because new 
technology, more research, has found better ways of 
handling the product, of making it a better and more 
sustainable product.  And yet another person and his group 
are going to attempt to manufacture this product and put it 
into a practical use.  So here is something, although it's taken 
a long time, it is going to happen and may yet be a success. 
 
We have the ethanol plants already proven to be a success, 
researched and developed through this program.  We have 
the Poundmaker one of course, that everybody knows about, 
and the other one in the province.  And several, several 
people that have discussed the possibility of setting up more 
of these kinds of ethanol plants that would be so helpful in 
the use of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, now you see why we 
need democratic reform. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: -- Well if the member opposite doesn't think 
that democratic reform is being served by discussing an 
important program like agricultural diversification, then 
certainly he can talk all day tomorrow about something else. 
 
But we happen to think, Mr. Speaker, that agriculture 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

is an important issue in our province, too important to be 
allowing a Crown corporation to be totally destroyed with 
one small Act, with all of its benefits lost to society, all of its 
benefits lost to agriculture without a visible plan to replace it 
and put it into the forefront. 
 
Even though the contradiction is there, Mr. Speaker, the 
contradiction that the government has said that they're going 
to make diversification in agriculture one of their prime 
targets, and yet here they are, doing exactly the opposite -- 
exactly the opposite. 
 
We've got all kinds of reasons that the minister has to know 
about, Mr. Speaker.  Because I believe that probably what 
happened here is that the minister decided to scrap this 
program without really researching how much good it has 
done and can do, and that that building block is still there to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is the role of opposition, to 
point out to the minister all of those things that might happen 
that he may have missed.  That's the reason for debate in this 
Assembly, and I believe we need to take a little time to do 
that.  We've got to talk about conserve-a-pal.  A lot of folks 
might not even know what a conserve-a-pal is.  And yet it is 
a cedar that was developed and researched through the 
Agriculture Development Fund. 
 
If that program had not been there, would this have ever been 
done?  Would you ever have looked at it?  Could you have 
known about it?  They don't know about it yet. 
 
(1630) 
 
We've got examples of the environment and sustainable 
agriculture that have been studied through this program, Mr. 
Speaker, biological control programs.  I wonder how many 
people in this Assembly know that we have weeds in our 
province that grow that can't be controlled with chemicals 
without totally sterilizing the soil -- totally sterilizing the soil 
so that when the wind comes up all the ground blows away 
with the chemical in the ground to be spread all over 
wherever it goes. 
 
You talk about a government that says it's interested in our 
environment.  And yet we have noxious weeds in our 
province that if you control them with the chemicals that will 
control them, they become a detriment to our environment so 
as to be so terrible that you can't possibly allow that to 
continue. 
 
And yet there is a solution; there is biological control.  
Because there were bugs in Europe that liked to feed on this 
particular plant.  Those bugs had to be brought to Canada.  
Those bugs had to be placed in fields.  And some damn fool 
had to put them bugs out there and somebody had to pay for 
them.  Now who did that and how did it happen? 
 
It happened through the auspices of a program like the 
Agriculture Development Fund, a program that you 

 are going to totally wipe out by destroying it with this Act. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, just for the information of those 
few members who are interested in agriculture on the 
opposite side, those tests have proven to be quite successful.  
And those little bugs are feeding on the plants quite nicely 
and eating most of them up, and they are reproducing quite 
quickly without eating any other of our good agricultural 
crops.  And that was of course the test that had to be done. 
 
Just south of Carmichael, Saskatchewan, we have such a 
project.  And I personally watched these little bugs eat, and 
they are doing quite a nice job.  And now isn't it so much 
better that we have those little bugs eating those weeds rather 
than to be spraying some kind of obnoxious chemical that 
will not only kill man but beast as well in our environment. 
 
We have projects like agro-forestry.  And folks will say, well 
what has forestry got to do with agriculture?  The reality, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we should be treating all of our forests as 
though it is an agricultural base.  We should be farming the 
forest, not mining the forest.  If we thought more in terms of 
farming our forests instead of mining our forests, we would 
look at it from this perspective.  We would take a 40-acre 
strip, cut the timber and plant it to new seedlings.  We would 
leave another 40-acre strip and we'd cut the next one over, 
and we would have a rotation within our forestry 
development. 
 
But this project of course was different; it was to plant 
certain kinds of trees so that you could harvest them for 
certain kinds of projects.  Monies are not available for a lot 
of farmers to be able to research these kinds of ideas on their 
own.  Lots of times a farmer comes up with an excellent idea 
and he'll know in his mind that society could use this new 
idea or this new product, but there is no possible way that his 
operation can finance that or fund it.  Those farms are family 
farms yet in Saskatchewan, and they are designed as such to 
provide an income for a family. There isn't enough money 
there for new research programs and the development of 
those kinds of new ideas.  And so this vehicle, this 
Agriculture Development Fund, provided that opportunity so 
that people could come up with those kinds of ideas and have 
them developed. 
 
The government of course would step in and help.  And I'll 
be the first one to say that lots of times it's better for the 
government to be out of the way and not interfere with 
farmers and new ideas; but on the other hand you have to 
have a balance.  You need to have a balance, Mr. Speaker, 
because sometimes things simply don't get done unless you 
give them that little extra help or that little extra push, 
especially in the area where there's very little money 
available.  And of course I don't think I'd have to spend a lot 
of time pointing out to folks that agriculture is an industry 
that is cash short in the past 10 years. 
 
We've got soil conservation programs that were all 
important, that were looked at and developed through 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

this legislation and through the vehicle of the Agriculture 
Development Fund.  The soil conservation programs became 
so critical in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when half of our farms 
were in the air instead of laying down where they should be.  
And I can talk from personal experience about the 
heartbreaking experience of watching your topsoil spreading 
through the air as the high winds of the late winters come up 
and you have no snow cover and no trash as a result of a 
summer-before drought.  It's happened to us three times in 
the 1980s and I hope it never happens again. 
 
But we learned a lot of things during those 10 years because 
in 1985 when the Agriculture Development Fund was 
coordinated and put into effect, we were into the second year 
of our drought, and I suspect that that was probably one of 
the main reasons why this project was started back in 1985 -- 
although it didn't become a Crown corporation, I understand, 
until 1989.  But the reality was that those conditions of the 
day were prompting us to realize that agricultural income 
was going down, the droughts of '84 and '85 told us that we 
had serious problems that we had to revisit.  Not new 
problems of course.  We've all heard about the Dirty Thirties, 
and those of us that are too young to have lived through them 
certainly have enough sense to listen to our fathers and 
grandfathers and know that those times were a reality. 
 
And they revisited us in the 1980s, and we had to revisit 
some of the old ideas of how to cope with those kinds of 
problems.  There were simple things like strip farming that 
had somehow gotten out of people's philosophy.  Folks had 
simply gotten so used to driving tractors with bigger 
equipment that they saw the economic advantages of larger 
fields where you had less corners and so the strips were 
gradually broke up, and bigger and bigger and bigger fields 
were being farmed.  Along came the drought with no trash 
left on the land, and the winds come up and it started to blow 
away. 
 
We had to revisit some of those old ideas.  And we had to 
have a vehicle to get that educational process working 
quickly, to get back into the minds of farmers the necessity 
to provide for these unusual circumstances during the good 
years so that when the bad ones come along our fields are not 
left vulnerable totally to the elements. 
 
And that applies of course, Mr. Speaker, to water erosion in 
those areas of the province where drought is not so prevalent, 
but most certainly in the Yorkton area of our province where 
people have a lot of flooding and a lot of water problems, 
and in that north area where they have so much drainage, the 
amounts of topsoil that are going to be washed away with the 
water will be just as significant in time as the topsoil that 
blows away in the southern part of the province where the 
winds and the dry conditions prevail. 
 
And so those programs had to be restudied and not really 
reinvented, but they had to be redeveloped, reorganized, and 
put into place with a view of our modern-day technology and 
the kinds of equipment, 

the kinds of horticultural herbicides and those kinds of things 
that we had available to us. 
 
A lot of people went, for example, to a no-till program where 
fields would be sprayed after a crop was harvested and they 
would never be worked up with an implement.  And yet the 
weeds were kept totally dead for an entire year using 
different kinds of herbicides to attack whatever kind of 
weeds happened to grow. 
 
And those kind of programs cost a lot of money to research 
and develop.  It cost us a lot of money to make sure that we 
weren't going to destroy the micro-organisms in the soil with 
the herbicides and the chemicals that we were using.  And 
that had to be done at an expense not to an individual farmer, 
but at an expense that would be shared by society because 
this was a benefit for all of society.  But each individual 
farmer will have to employ it if it would work.  But it 
couldn't be expected that an individual farmer would put up 
all of the money to do that. 
 
So those programs were put through a vehicle like the 
agriculture diversification fund and there was the opportunity 
there for us to make this work and to test it out and to find 
out where we were going.  We had to know if the constant 
use of chemicals year after year all year long would destroy 
the very micro-organisms that allow a crop to grow, for 
example, to begin with.  Perhaps nothing would grow; 
perhaps it would turn our entire province into a desert. 
 
And we couldn't take a chance on allowing that to happen 
without properly researching it, and that required the 
necessity of bringing in scientists from these different 
universities and all around the world to study these different 
kinds of approaches to soil conservation in drought years and 
in flooding conditions. 
 
How much of this chemical would be ending up in our great 
lakes or down our rivers; how many of them would affect 
our fish; what would be killed; would the plankton die from 
the herbicides; would the food supply for our fishes be 
constantly damaged or for ever gone?  We had to know those 
kind of things before we allowed these programs to continue 
on. 
 
We had that vehicle in place where that research could be 
done through, and now we see that destroyed with no 
alternative in place, Mr. Speaker, and that is very frightening 
for those of us in the agricultural industry. 
 
The minister must realize that there are so many things that 
are at stake here that he ought to perhaps reconsider.  At least 
if he's not reconsidering the cancelling of his Bill, the 
introduction of a new corporation to take its place, or some 
vehicle so that farmers and people in agriculture will know 
that they are not being abandoned.  I think they were very, 
very upset when they found out that millions of dollars that 
had been earmarked into this fund in fact seem to have 
evaporated in the last while.  I think if they hadn't been upset 
by that it would be unusual, but most likely most farmers 
haven't even realized that that has happened. 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

So I think it's important that they know that this government 
has been playing tricks with their money and that something 
has happened to these dollars that were ear-tagged for things 
like micro-biofertilizers -- microbal biofertilizers, pardon me 
-- and those kinds of projects.  This money was there for 
those kinds of projects to find out if in fact we could 
stimulate a new kind of approach to fertilizing our crops 
other than using commercial chemical fertilizers. 
 
Commercial chemical fertilizers are good, and I have nothing 
to say except good things about Saskferco and those kinds of 
plants where they create work and provide the materials that 
we need to help to enhance the growth of our crops.  
However, if we have micro-organisms in the soil that can 
somehow be stimulated so that they will produce fertilizers 
for our crops in the soil without large expenditures of money 
and no chemicals being added and no artificial stimulants 
having to be provided that might in fact cause us some other 
pollution factors, then, Mr. Speaker, it's well worth at least 
examining. 
 
I don't know of any farmer that could possibly go into this 
kind of a program on his own.  There are few that would 
have the kind of scientific background, although there are 
some, I suppose.  But they simply wouldn't have the time and 
the money even if they had the expertise.  And so we needed 
a vehicle to do those kinds of programs, and I think there's a 
lot of work that needs to be done in this area. 
 
This is a new frontier.  A new approach to thinking about 
growing crops altogether, rather than to dump tons and tons 
on fertilizer on, as the people in Europe have done to the 
point where they've got their soil so saturated now with 
nitrogen fertilizer that all of their drinking water is now 
poisoned pretty near, and they've got a real serious problem. 
 
And what we have here is the ability perhaps to produce 
fertilizers in a natural way, so that all of those effects 
wouldn't happen.  Who's going to finance that?  How are we 
going to provide a vehicle to provide that research for the 
agricultural industry? 
 
Well the agriculture diversification fund was that vehicle.  It 
is that building block that we need in order to provide these 
programs that can be so important, not just to the agriculture 
community, Mr. Speaker, but to all of the people in our 
world.  Because if we continue to mess up the ground that 
we grow our food on, if we continue to poison it without any 
kind of an approach to trying to grow our food in a safe and 
reasonable way, we are certainly doomed on this planet as a 
species.  Perhaps we will all end up with three heads and 
seven legs as time goes by and I don't think that any of us 
wants to see our future develop in that way. 
 
And so we need these programs. We need to have this 
research done. We've got to have people that look into these 
things. 
 
The organic production of food is all-important.  And that 
was one of the important things that was studied 

 through the agriculture diversification program, to see if we 
could go back to nature, as it were.  Could we go back and 
start to grow grain crops on land without herbicides and 
without fertilizer from a chemical plant?  Could we actually 
find micro-organisms that would attack the weeds?  Could 
we actually find micro-organisms that would produce 
fertilizer in the soil?  Could we actually produce enough 
grain on a piece of land without chemicals and still have it 
economically sustainable? 
 
And those projects were taken on, and have proven very 
successful, I might add.  And we have an awful lot of people 
that produce those kinds of foods that are classified as 
organic, and they sell them for an extraordinarily high price 
because people want to buy a product that they know doesn't 
have any contamination in it. 
 
Animal care. A few years ago if you ran your cattle in a 
pasture and left them there all winter long, nobody gave a 
care and nobody noticed.  The reality is though that animals 
have feelings, and somebody had to do some research to find 
out what kinds of stress each kind of animal could take, how 
much they should be allowed to handle before they started to 
suffer immense pain and stress. 
 
And all kinds of research projects have been done through 
the auspices of this vehicle and this program, and I think we 
need to carry on with that sort of thing.  I don't think that 
we're finished in this whole area of animal care and how best 
to provide for the animals that we as a society need to have 
and need to take advantage of in order to have a constant 
food supply. 
 
As the populations of the world continue to increase, it will 
become ever more important for us to find out how we can 
produce more and more animals in more restricted spaces, 
and what limits we put on all of those kinds of restrictions 
for animals when we intensively produce them in mass 
production. 
 
(1645) 
 
And then we go on to those kinds of things where 
diversification really gets into a broad scope, Mr. Speaker, 
where most people could not afford to do it on their own.  
How about things like ostrich farming, for example?  We 
hear about those kinds of things these days -- ostrich 
farming, game farming.  We have all kinds of projects going 
on to produce meats that will have less cholesterol in them, 
for example.  I'm not sure if the ostriches have extraordinary 
qualities other than that, but I'm sure that some of the ostrich 
ranchers will be letting me know. 
 
But I know in the game farming, the deer and the elk that are 
produced have very low fat content in the meat. And it is 
proven by some folks that if you eat this kind of meat rather 
than the fatty meat, it is a lot healthier for everybody. 
 
But who is going to put up the money to see if an elk could 
in fact be kept into a cage and raised as an animal, the same 
as pork and chickens are?  Well you 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

had to have somebody that could do some research and that 
had some money available, and this was the vehicle that 
provided that. 
 
I see no plan, I see no examples of where the government is 
coming from to provide an alternative to all of these good 
things that were embodied in this Crown corporation. 
 
We have the cage rearing of rainbow trout, Mr. Speaker.  
How many people would have believed that you could set up 
a fish industry in prairie Saskatchewan?  Who would ever 
have taken the chance to start to grow fish as a marketable 
product without some research and development done by 
somebody to show that it could in fact be done or how in fact 
it could be done successfully and effectively? 
 
In reality we've all known that there are a few fish in our 
lakes, and I guess as many years back as you can know about 
or think back, folks would throw a net in and catch a few.  
But that wasn't the most economical way to do it because 
after a while nature's supply would run out.  The best way to 
make money with fish, of course, would be to put a lot of 
them into a small body of water, feed them, and concentrate 
their growth the same as you would with chickens. 
 
But nobody had ever thought about that, and so the 
agricultural development and research fund provided a 
vehicle so that those people that had the idea could get some 
funding and some ideas and some research and development.  
And they looked into foods that would work to feed these 
fish.  They looked into how you had to get oxygen into the 
water and how much oxygen you had to supply in a 
restricted area for the number of fish that you had.  Who 
knew that?  Where was all of this expertise and knowledge 
before we had people that would research it and get into the 
business of doing it and providing the information so that 
others can do it? 
 
Now I have a neighbour who grows fish in his granary, if 
you can imagine that.  A man is growing fish in his granary.  
He has put a big tank in his granary and he has a big bubbler 
in there that runs from electricity that provides oxygen for 
the fish.  He feeds those fish every day.  And there was 
several thousands of fish growing in this man's granary last 
year.  Can you imagine that?  In prairie Saskatchewan we 
can now grow fish in a granary? 
 
And it started off by having rainbow trout in a dugout, and 
now we are growing them in tanks inside of buildings on our 
farms.  And it appears that it will be an economically 
profitable adventure that will certainly be called the kind of 
diversification that I'm sure our minister must be talking 
about when he says he wants to encourage diversification in 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it's not really a new idea.  And I'm not saying that he 
shouldn't carry on in this direction even though it's not a new 
idea, but he shouldn't try to take all the credit for it.  And he 
shouldn't try to destroy the programs that are in place that are 
already working. 

We had new ideas for replacement heifer marketings.  We 
had merino sheep research.  We had blueberry and saskatoon 
berries.  Here, Mr. Speaker, is a diversification that nobody 
really thought too much about.  A few years ago my 
grandparents would load up in the old one-ton truck and 
they'd head off into the hills in June and July to pick berries.  
And it was a yearly little picnic and outing, but it had a very 
important bottom line to it.  It was a necessity, because of 
course it was providing the fruits that would be canned for 
winter use back in those days. 
 
Those berries of course grew wild in the coule pes and out 
in the hills.  And all kinds of people talked about how great 
they were and how beautiful they were and how tasty they 
were. And yet when you went to the restaurant you couldn't 
buy a saskatoon berry pie.  And you couldn't buy a wild 
blueberry pie either.  But people talked about it. 
 
So somebody had to decide, could these plants be grown as 
an agricultural, harvestable product?  And what needed to be 
done was some research.  Somebody had to take some of 
those plants and start to grow them and develop them and 
find out what it would take in order for those plants to 
become economically viable to be produced on a farm.  That 
research, Mr. Speaker, didn't happen by itself.  It happened 
because somebody put up the money, somebody had an idea, 
and somebody else had the ambition to do the work. 
 
But those three components had to be put together through a 
vehicle, and the Agriculture Development Fund was the 
vehicle that did it.  It provided people with the opportunity to 
find out how many kinds of saskatoon berries for example 
there are.  There are different qualities, there are different 
sizes, there are different kinds of trees that grow in different 
places, and all of this had to be put together. And our 
horticulturists have done a phenomenal job. 
 
You can now go to restaurants south of Saskatoon, buy 
saskatoon berry pie.  You can buy chocolates with a 
saskatoon berry in the middle of them.  I've eaten them both 
and they're very delicious.  Probably one of the best 
attractions we'll have for tourism in our province is the 
development of these things that are native grown to our 
prairie region that people just simply don't get in the rest of 
the world.  And it's unique. And all we have to do is continue 
with this diversification that has been going on for some 
time. 
 
Whoever thought that we would be growing buffalo as a 
meat to be sold as hamburgers in the local downtown 
quick-outlet stores.  And here we are in the middle of a 
revolution of production, of diversification, and the minister 
wants to destroy the very corporation, the very Crown 
corporation that has provided all of the research and all of the 
funding throughout all of these programs.  And he's going to 
wipe it out and start something new and he's not going to tell 
us what it is, because his idea is so good that he doesn't want 
to share it with anybody.  Or does he have one?  That's the 
question I ask.  Where is this great 



February 28, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

idea? 
 
It is so important, Mr. Speaker, that they understand what 
they're destroying that I'm even going to go on and mention a 
few more things that have been done in this great program 
and why the minister needs to continue.  At least if he doesn't 
continue this program, to set one up in its place so that we 
don't lose all of this direction of diversification.  Because 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, is not going to happen all by 
itself; it's going to happen through education, it's going to 
happen through all kinds of test programs, it's going to 
happen through all kinds of coordination.  And you need that 
master body, that central focus point, something like the 
agriculture diversification fund to put this all together.  And 
that was all put together in 1985 and formulated in 1989.  
And this minister says it's his new, great creation, and he's 
going to destroy it today by wiping out the entire legislation 
and the entire organized structure of diversification for 
agriculture and he's going to bring in his new, great plan, 
Agriculture 2000 which, in effect, is GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance plan) no. 3, the one that everybody is supposed to 
be taken back with and enjoy so much. 
 
I think it's going to cause a mini revolution out in the 
countryside because people are simply going to be totally, 
totally upset when they find out that the alternatives that this 
minister has come up with for them is to take all of the 
funding from agriculture, all of the funding from these 
programs, dump it into general revenue and do nothing to 
re-establish it or to set up the new direction except GRIP no. 
3, which is nothing more than a job creation program for the 
accountants and an income-averaging program for farmers' 
own money which they can quite nicely do themselves. 
 
We had production and marketing as a big factor of the 
program of the agriculture diversification fund, Mr. Speaker.  
Production and marketing are some of the most key, 
important elements in the agricultural sector today. 
 
First of all, you have to produce the product and you have to 
produce it in large enough quantities to make it economically 
viable.  You have to be able to do that.  You have to have 
those production expertises in place so that you can get the 
product that you need to sell.  But there's no sense having it 
produced if you don't have a plan to market it.  Somebody 
has to find a place where this product, this new, diversified 
product, can be used. 
 
I'll go back to the trout, Mr. Speaker.  If the man with the 
granary full of trout doesn't have a market for the fish, why 
would he bother to grow them in a granary or in a dugout or 
any place else?  He has to have a market.  And there needed 
to be an awful lot of work done on marketing because we are 
a land-locked province where transportation is rather difficult 
and extremely expensive. 
 
So we went into the area with agriculture development for 
finding markets for things like dried beans, lupins beans, 
pinto beans, all kinds of grass seed production.  We've got 
forage sorghum that were 

checked out for markets, and we had orchard production 
even for fruit trees, as I mentioned -- the saskatoons and 
blueberries and all those good things. 
 
The reality is that we found markets in the United States for 
grass seeds that brought in absolutely millions of dollars 
through the 1980s when the Americans realized they were 
going the wrong way with their agriculture and their 
agricultural production.  They realized that drought was 
wiping out their lands and that they were blowing away, and 
they had to get back to a grass-intensive program to get those 
vulnerable soils back under some cover. 
 
Where did this grass seed come from to cover most of that 
land?  It came from Saskatchewan.  Our Saskatchewan 
farmers produced it because the Agriculture Development 
Fund said boys, we've got a market out here.  We found it for 
you, all you've got to do is go home and grow it, and here's 
how to do it.  And the guys did it, and they did it very well, 
and they supplied that market and brought in literally 
millions of dollars of profit to the province of Saskatchewan 
in a diversification such as the Minister of Agriculture in this 
government will never dream of his best day. 
 
Vegetable production, garlic production, savoury herbs -- I 
can't even hardly say the word; it almost made my mouth 
water, it's getting so close to supper time -- organic farming, 
grain corns, canola.  We've got things here, Mr. Speaker, that 
need to be worked on, like peas and corn and canola.  Those 
old crops that folks have known about for so long, and yet 
there's so much more that can be done. 
 
How many people knew that it would be better to grow peas 
and canola in the same field rather than to have them in 
separate fields, until somebody decided one day that maybe 
we should mix the two together, or probably the seeder got 
mixed up, and they found out it worked.  And they needed 
somebody to market the idea.  They needed somebody to 
educate folks that this was a good way to do it.  And there 
was no vehicle for that until we had the agricultural 
diversification fund.  And now we had that in place and it 
was working very well. 
 
And what we needed, Mr. Speaker, was to develop this idea.  
What we needed was to build on the building block we 
already had -- not to destroy it, not to tear it down, not to 
wipe it out without a new plan.  What we had to do was work 
with what we had and make it better.  We talked about wild 
rice -- whoever thought that wild rice, a plant that grows wild 
in our marshes up North, could actually become a viable 
crop.  And now we have people actually building combines 
that will work on top of the water in order to harvest it. 
 
Somebody had to put up the research for that; somebody had 
to do the work; somebody had to put up the money to find 
out how it was done.  We have high-bush cranberry 
production.  We've got labels designed so that you could 
mark the packages -- simple things like that that needed to be 
done so that we could find out what was in the bags after we 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard February 28, 1994 

shipped them off, how best to do that. 
 
We've got all kinds of gluten-free baking flour and bannock 
mix.  Isn't that amazing, Mr. Speaker, that folks that built this 
country forgot that the natives that lived in this country 
before it was settled by the Europeans, they actually had to 
live on something and there were some things that were 
extremely good that they used and bannock, of course, was 
one of them. 
 
And the recipes had almost been forgotten, people had just 
about forgotten how they used to live in those old days and 
what they used to make their products.  So they managed to 
find some of these old recipes and put them back to the test 
to see if our modern-day corns and wheats and flours could 
be used to go back to using the old recipes of the natives to 
make things like bannock and those kinds of very tasty 
foods.  And they found, of course, that it not only could be 
done but it was extremely a good product and people are now 
making it and using it and selling it and marketing it. 
 
We've got things like sweet basil -- whoever thought you 
could make that a marketable crop in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And here we are, growing all of 
these kinds of herbs because the research was done because 
somebody took the time and the money and put the effort 
into it, to see if we could get these new crops and these new 
diversified ideas to grow.  All kinds of testing done on our 
red meats, to see if one was better than the other. 
 
And this minister would tear it all down with one fell swoop 
of the pen.  He would destroy all of these building blocks by 
destroying this Crown corporation that helps agriculture and 
all for the sake of making himself look important so that he 
can come up with GRIP no. 3, the thing that's going to 
probably destroy him in his office as the Minister of 
Agriculture.  And if it doesn't, it most certainly should. 
 
So what are the alternatives, Mr. Speaker?  We come up with 
an idea . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose and the member from Kindersley, if they 
have anything to say to each other, go behind the bar and 
then speak quietly.  The member from Maple Creek has the 
floor and I wish the members would allow him to speak.  But 
being 5 o'clock now . . . 
 

ROYAL RECOMMENDATION 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce 
to the Assembly the receipt of royal recommendation of Bill 
No. 17 which was not received in time to appear on the order 
paper.  Therefore I beg to inform the Assembly that Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of 
the subject matter of Bill 17, An Act to amend The 
Municipal Employees' Superannuation Act, recommends it 
to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 
 


