






















































Hansard: February 21, 1994


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 309 
 February 21, 1994 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the propose  
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 

d 

 
Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, as I was 
saying before we adjourned the House for the supper break, 
there are a number of questions that certainly must be raised 
and be discussed over the period of the next few days -- and not 
just the period of the next few days in this budget debate but I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, as we get into the very serious debate on 
expenditures of government through the process and get int  
the different departments, there will be a lot of questions that 
will be raised.  And as we're finding even in our caucus today 
through the process of questions to the Premier, we are findin  
that there are indeed people across this province, not only in the 
city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon, but right across the 
province of Saskatchewan, that have some real serious 
concerns, have some legitimate questions that they would lik  
to direct towards the government, towards the Premier, via my 
colleagues and I.  And we will continue to do that. 

o 2) a reduction in federal transfer payments by 38 million and 
a reduction in revenues by 131 million. 

g The revenue shortfall was compounded by a $96-million 
increase in expenditures, mainly from the increased costs of 
farm safety net programs and debt service charges. 

e Then, (he goes on to say) this week, wearing a somber 
business suit, Romanow told an NDP fund-raising dinner that 
the 1992-93 deficit will likely be well above the target of 500 
million.  

Prior to supper, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the fact that I felt th t 
the government deserved an A plus for the way they put their 
budget together; however, gave it a very poor grade in the area 
of 1 to 10 on the basis of the fact that it was a budget that reall  
wasn't as truthful as it appeared to be on the surface. 

a 

y CIC is expected to lose more than 600 million in 1991. 

 
And I go back to an article in 1992 that I think even pertains to 
the address that we heard today and what most people think and 
the feelings of people across this province.  And the headline 
reads, "Provincial finances confused and possibly misleading  
And the editorialist says, it starts out: 

."  . . . $270 million more than estimated by Tchorzewski just a 
month or two ago, the premier said.  Should all or part of this 
loss be taken in the 1991-92 fiscal year, the projected deficit 
of $852 million could be substantially higher. 

 
 It's hard to know what or who to believe about the state of the 

province's finances these days. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 
 

 On April 22, 1991, Hepworth donned his rose-tinted glasse
and announced that the projected deficit for 1991-92 would 
be 265 million. 

s  Is there some double counting going on here?  Could it be the 
government intends to jack up the deficit to astronomical 
heights in the 1992 fiscal year to make the 1993 deficit look 
better?  

Further down he brings out the fact that, and says: 
 

 Freshly minted Finance minister Ed Tchorzewski donned his 
darkest, most funereal suit and announced the "revised 
1991-92 deficit would reach 960.3 million." 

 
 But down at the bottom of the third page of 

Tchorzewski's report was some fine print that read "prior to 
72 million in corrective measures."  In other words, the 
government had actually already lopped 72 million off 
government spending -- to offset the 72-million loss from the 
repeal of the expanded, harmonized sales tax. 

 
 So the deficit was really 888.3 million, not 960.3 million.  

The still-sore-at-the-Tories NDP just wanted to rub some salt 
into the wounds of the defeated Devine government. 

Then we move on to December 16 where again it says that: 
 

 Tchorzewski explained that the 587-million difference 
between the latest projection and Hepworth's was due to:  1) 
the absence of a $250-million dividend from Crown 
Investments Corp. 

 
Which I spoke a little bit about prior to supper. 
 

 

 

Why? 
 

 
And I gave some of those figures based on our investigations of 
the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation) report in Crown 
Corporations. 
 

 
And on and on it goes.  And at the end, the editorialist finally 
said: 
 

 
 In any case, the result is a very confused and possibly 

misleading, picture of the province's finances. 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what the 
government has done.  And what we saw in 1991, the 
government just taking bogus deficit figures, transferring them 
from one . . . and it was interesting, Mr. Speaker.  We had the 
auditor come and try and walk us through how we should try 
and follow the budgetary process in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And because most of my colleagues have a farming 
background, he referred to the fact that if you have two bins on 
your farm -- bin A, which we'll call the Consolidated Fund; bin 
B, which is your Crown corporations and other entities  
_- at the end of the day the fact is there's still only so much 
money.  The deficit is still a certain amount.  You've either got 
bin A is full and bin B is a quarter full.  There's a bin and a 
quarter of grain on your farm, an inventory. 
 
And what the government has basically done was took an 
inflated move from bin B into bin A to bring a bad light to the 
last few years of the Conservative government.  And then now 
they're transferring from bin A back to bin B to make the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government of the day look good, and 
leading the people of Saskatchewan to believe they are indeed 
balancing the budget when the reality is, the inventory on the 
farm is still the same.  It really hasn't changed. 
 
And we can also look at another column.  This one is February 
18, 1994 where one of the columnists kind of puts on his 
thinking cap and decides . . . tries to suggest what might have 
been had the '86 election gone a little different. 
 
But the interesting point that he brings out after all his 
discussions and talking about general revenues and what have 
you, the member suggests that there were budgetary surpluses 
in the last five budgets, three brought in by the present 
government, two brought in by the former Conservative 
government. 
 

 The positive revenue-to-expenditures picture of the last five 
budgets has only come about through tough decisions by 
both Tory and NDP administrations to cut spending and 
increase taxes. 

 
 Governments may have been four or five years too late in 

getting serious about the deficit problem. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me there are some media 
personnel who are willing to look a little bit beyond what they 
just see on the surface and look at the realities.  We hope that 
they will even get in when the auditor presents his statement 
and do a little more in-depth research to find out exactly where 
the deficit is, what the actual cost is to taxpayers, and the fact 
that the tax burden we face today is going to continue to 
increase even if this government shows -- and which I believe 
they will in the next two years -- a balance and if not a surplus 
on the general side or the Consolidated Fund. 

Looking at the budget presentation and some of the street polls, 
one individual contacted said: 
 

 I think the fact that we have one of the highest per capita tax 
rates says there's something wrong.  I also don't think the fact 
they are playing politician with this is good.  When they first 
start they say the deficit is bigger than it is, then at the end of 
their term they make things look good.  That is not right. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think from that comment and from a number of 
the comments that I received at the doors when I was helping 
the Conservative candidate in Regina North West, people are 
definitely concerned about politicians and how they relate to 
people and how they lay out promises, suggest that they won't 
do this, and then at the end of the day they go against it and 
totally reverse what they've said.  Like if we were to bring a 
tape recorder in and just go through some of the comments that 
were made from the '87 to '91 period, of all the berating that the 
government of the day took regarding the increases that weren't 
. . . There wasn't enough in Education, there wasn't enough in 
Health, and there wasn't enough for Municipal Government, 
and there wasn't enough for Social Services and for the poor 
people of this province. 
 
And then at the end of the day, where are we today?  And I 
think, I trust, Mr. Speaker, that people themselves are 
beginning to realize that they must act responsibly as 
well -- that people in general, the taxpayer, cannot expect to 
receive something for nothing.  If you're going to put more 
money into a program, it has to come from somebody.  It 
comes from each and every one of us as individual taxpayers. 
 
And as this one individual suggested in the street poll, it's time 
we put aside the politics and got on with the real issue of 
governing this province; of balancing our budgets; of putting 
things straightforward before the people instead of 
manipulating the programs, inflating the deficits when a 
government's first elected so that they can spend less through 
the next few years and all of a sudden balance the books and 
have a surplus at the end of the year. 
 
And I trust that the NDP don't find a major . . . as they would 
say, oh we came across a windfall, in the fall of 1995, so they 
can go to the people and through a budget in the spring of 
1996, and tell the people, this is what we can do for you 
because all of a sudden we've balanced the books.  We're going 
to have a $20 million surplus, but we're also going to have 
$120 million to pay . . . to put into further expenditures on your 
behalf, and then call an election shortly after the budget is 
presented for June of 1996.  Who knows? We may see that, 
maybe we won't.  Maybe the Premier's going to do it in the fall 
of 1995. 
 
But I think people in general want to see politicians of all 
stripes getting out there and saying: we don't have all the 
answers, but by working together and working with you we've 
got some ideas, and let's put them together and see what we can 
come up with.  And people are looking -- looking for ideas.  
They're 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

looking for politicians that have not . . . they're not necessarily 
looking for us to have all the answers to the problems they face.  
They're looking for us to give them some suggestions.  They're 
looking as well for us, as the politicians, to sit down and listen 
to them, and take some of their ideas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I read an article in Grainews the other day 
where an individual economist was suggesting a flat tax and a 
guaranteed income.  I met with a few people over the weekend 
and of course one of the major concerns on the street, and that's 
been coming in through questions, is the fact that there's been 
so many more people added to the welfare rolls -- the welfare 
list -- in this province, some 20,000 more since October of 
1991, 20,000 people more drawing off the taxpayer. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I found interesting -- people were 
saying:  well maybe instead of having a welfare roll or 
department of . . . welfare department, maybe if we had a 
guaranteed income that people could tie into if they have no 
income whatsoever, they can ask for and receive this basically 
on the same principles as welfare assistance.  Or if they have a 
job that gives them . . . let's say a family of four is entitled to 
$1,100 under the welfare system, but either the husband or the 
wife can find a job and generate $800 or $900 through a job for 
the same family of four; and rather than letting them struggle 
with the $900, giving them that income supplement and 
allowing them to raise their income up to that $1,100 range. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, you would find that there would be a lot 
of people say that sounds like a good idea.  Number one, it 
gives people a fair income to live on.  Number two, it probably 
would be a program that would be a lot easier to administer and 
wouldn't be as easy to manipulate as we see the welfare system 
as it sits today, and the fact that many people believe there are 
too many people abusing the welfare system. 
 
Another major concern is jobs, and the minister talked about 
job creation, talked about 5,000 more jobs in this current fiscal 
year. And one has to wonder where those jobs are really going 
to come from in view of the fact that we have seen such a 
reduction of jobs over the past few years. 
 
And I go to a young university student talking about the 
budget: 
 

 Speaking as someone who is just out of university that's not 
the way to go about it.  It takes away the opportunity for 
young people to get a start.  A lot of us are impeded as it is. 

 
Mr. Speaker, people are looking for job opportunities, and what 
we have in this province through the form of taxation that has 
been brought upon us, Mr. Speaker, we have taken away the 
incentive for individuals to set up and establish businesses and 
create job opportunities for young people. 
 
But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I would say to the 
young people of this province, that I'm not 

necessarily sure we should be looking to someone else to 
always create the jobs for us.  I think there are a lot of 
entrepreneurs out here in Saskatchewan who have a lot of ideas 
and a lot of vision. 
 
I've challenged young people at some of the graduations I have 
attended to begin looking at the fact of not necessarily going to 
university and asking father government to provide for their 
education and then to provide a job at the end of the day, but 
even if they go and get a university education to look at the 
possibility of applying the expertise they have and creating the 
employment, maybe starting their own processing or 
manufacturing.  And we have all kinds of opportunities in this 
province, especially when we look at agriculture and adding 
value added to our production rather than sending the raw 
product out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are a lot of opportunities out there 
and we need to encourage people to look at ways -- even young 
people -- to put some of the ideas to work.  And as 
governments and as parents, we need to work along with our 
young people and give them that assistance and encourage 
them along to look at designing some programs rather than 
always looking to government.  And I trust that at the end of 
the day the job creation that the Minister of Finance has talked 
about in our budget, that the government indeed will look at 
ways in which they can encourage and help people through the 
hoops of trying to design and operate a business versus just 
opening up another job in another department to say that they 
created jobs, for we know that there are going to be further job 
reductions. 
 
(1915) 
 
And I believe it was in Saturday's paper where there's a 
hundred more fewer jobs in the public sector.  And with 
reductions coming, further reductions in education and health 
care, there are going to be more people looking for work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all parties and all politicians want to cut deficit 
financing.  I believe that there . . . I don't know of any politician 
who wants to continue to spend more than they are generating 
in revenue, and on that part I give the Minister of Finance 
credit for endeavouring to reduce the deficit so that the costs of 
government will . . . the government will be living within its 
means.  But I would plead with the minister to be a little more 
straightforward and honest with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister also talks about the cost of living and boasted 
about where Saskatchewan is regarding the cost of living across 
Canada.  An article on Saturday's Leader-Post, February 19, 
'94, the title is "Little new to cost 
_of-living boast": 
 

 For Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon to boast her budget 
has left Saskatchewan taxpayers with the second-cheapest 
provincial taxes and utility rates would be a little like her 
bragging that Saskatchewan farmers produced the most wheat 
this year. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

 Both beg the immediate response: "So what. We always have. 
 

Further on, 
 

 This, MacKinnon noted with great pride during question 
period on Wednesday and repeated on budget day and again 
the day after, makes us the second-cheapest place to live . . . 

 
 The only thing is, that's about where we've always been. 
 
 In 1985, the same Saskatchewan family was also 

second-lowest ($3,152 annual charge) behind Alberta.  I  
1988, the same family(although a 20,000-a-year annual 
income comparison was used) was again rated second 
($2,620 annual charge) behind Manitoba. 

n "Urban governments are carrying more than their fair share of 
the provincial deficit." 

 
And then we go on. 
 

 In fact, if you discounted car insurance and even the gas ta  
(ours is the second highest in the nation), a $25,000-a-year 
family would pay more in taxes and real utility rates in 
Saskatchewan than any other non-Atlantic province. 

x 

 
And I conclude, quoting from this article, by saying it says: 
 

 Saskatchewan's otherwise highest-in-the nation income tax 
rate ($3,993 at $50,000-income level and $7,633 at 
$75,000-income level) means we don't do as well in the 
middle and upper income levels. 

 
 In both we are fifth. 
 
 Lower "utility rates" and all. 
 

What the article is basically bringing forth, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact that we can boast about a cost of living index, but the fact 
is the numbers really haven't changed.  We're still the second 
lowest in Canada; that hasn't changed from a period of over the 
last six years. 
 
And as I indicated before, Mr. Speaker, the indirect taxation is 
hurting many municipalities.  I just want to read a couple 
comments made by aldermen in the city of Regina and the . . . 
Mr. Henry Dayday, the mayor of Saskatoon.  "Cities countin  
cash."  "Grant reductions taking a heavy toll."  Regina, 
February 18. 

g The province didn't raise its taxes, but it may force Saskatoon 
to raise property taxes by cutting the amount of money it 
passes on to the city, officials say. 

 
 Finance Minister Janice MacKinnon got plenty of Lipp from 

the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association (SUMA) 
after she introduced the provincial budget Wednesday. 

 
 The association, which represents cities and towns across the 

province, claims the provincial government is trying to solve 
its 

deficit problems on the backs of local governments and on 
people who pay property taxes. 

 
 And Regina city councillor John Lipp, who was pressed into 

duty Wednesday as spokesman for SUMA, made it clear the 
association is not pleased. 

 
 "Again this year property taxpayers are being asked to pay 

for a large part of the provincial government's deficit 
reduction . . . 

 

 
 While the eight per cent reductions in urban revenue-sharing 

grants in this year's budget are no surprise, because it was 
announced in 1993 in order to give cities a chance to be 
prepared, Lipp said the reductions will still hurt. 

The fact that they were announced yesterday doesn't mean they 
will not hurt today, and the fact that all it did was gave the 
Minister of Finance the ability to say, no new taxes in this 
budget, because she'd already announced them. 
 
It would be interesting to note how different politicians will 
stand up and defend each other.  I look at the mayor of Regina 
here: 
 

 Archer said the announcement by MacKinnon that no further 
grant decreases for local government are planned after this 
year "is very definitely welcome news." 

 
In the meantime, while he is sitting down at city council and 
they're trying to determine how they are going to meet their 
deficit or their budget predictions with the knowledge that 
there's a further 8 per cent cut in transfer of payments from the 
province, Mr. Archer stands up there and says well it's 
welcome that we didn't have the . . . at least there weren't any 
further taxes announced to us.  I find that very interesting. 
 
Let's take a look at Saskatoon.  The province . . . an article in 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, February 18: 
 

 
 The revenue-sharing pool, the major transfer of provincial 

funds to municipalities, was cut by eight per cent and that is 
reflected in city council looking for 1.8 per cent more from 
property owners in its proposed operating budget, said 
finance director Phil Richards. 

 
And then I noticed with interest that what annoyed Saskatoon 
even more than anything was: 
 

 (While) Regina's Wascana Centre Authority will receive 
$782,000 . . . Meewasin receives 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

$740,000 . . . The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts in the 
Queen City receives $500,000 while the Centennial 
Auditorium receives nothing. 

 
 The MacKenzie Art Gallery receives a direct grant of 

$400,000 while the Mendel must rely on Saskatoon taxpayers 
for that portion of its funding. 

 
I can see why the mayor of Saskatoon is not very happy, and 
I'm surprised that all the Saskatoon MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) aren't standing up and berating the 
Regina MLAs and saying, isn't there a little bit of fairness here, 
or shouldn't there be a little bit of fairness. 
 
And I can understand.  I think what I see from most local 
governments, most hospital boards, most educators and school 
boards across the province, and your reeves and mayors, people 
are willing to take the cuts as long as they are treated fairly, as 
long as everyone is taking the same cuts and they're being 
treated in the same way. 
 
In the area of health care we have seen significant cuts, and the 
rural communities are the areas that are really being hurt the 
most.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege of dropping 
in and visiting patients in a number of the hospitals here in 
Regina and certainly in my own constituency. 
 
I find it interesting as I visit with patients, Mr. Speaker.  What I 
have found is you may find on one floor you go into a room, 
and you talk to a patient, an individual you know, and the 
comments will be:  boy, the service and the care around here is 
unbelievable; it's just terrific, it's just . . . I can't speak well 
enough of the nurses and the staff on this floor.  Then you go 
up two floors and you run into another patient and they haven't 
anything good to say.  And I begin to wonder what's going on. 
 
I just talked to a couple last night.  A gentleman just had an 
operation at the Plains Health Centre, was sent out two days 
after his operation, and is still struggling to recover from this 
operation.  And it's fortunate, Mr. Speaker, that his wife 
happened to be a nurse because she was sitting there caring for 
him.  And I'm not exactly sure what happened, whether it ju  
happened to be a floor where there was some very poor 
personnel on the floor, Mr. Speaker, or what the situation, but 
they certainly weren't happy with the type of care they were 
given.  And then to be asked to leave after two days when th  
recovery process still needed more time. 

st There won't be education funding cuts next year and this 
year's decreases are not as bad as first predicted, claims the 
provincial budget. 

e But school boards say there is some creative accounting at 
work and they'll still have to scramble to balance their local 
budgets.  

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that person, that patien
could have been treated a lot more fairly if at least they would 
have been allowed, rather then sending them home, to go to the 
local hospital in Kipling and spend three or four days there to 
recover.  Mr. Speaker, that would have been a saving, but at the 
same time would have put them in a hospital or an institution 
where they could have received the medical attention they 
needed. 

t,  

Mr. Speaker, I also found knocking on doors -- here again in 
Regina North West -- I happened to knock on one door and a 
lady came to the door and she had indicated that she had just 
come back from one of the hospitals here in Regina.  And she 
wasn't very happy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She had gone to visit her mother-in-law the day before and 
when she arrived at the hospital she found out that her 
mother-in-law was put in a situation where she had asked to use 
a bedpan, was left there for a whole hour before.  In fact she 
wouldn't have been taken care of if her daughter-in-law hadn't 
gone to the hospital.  So she was spending more of her time at 
the hospital to care for her mother-in-law. 
 
One has to ask what is going on, especially when the money 
that is being called for in this budget for health care really 
hasn't decreased.  We've cut services, but for the amount of 
services we are still spending a lot of money on health care and 
we're getting little for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked about health care.  I've talked about 
the concern people have.  I've talked about the concern school 
boards have.  One Dorothy Fortier, president of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, said: 
 

 The fact that school boards were forewarned about provincial 
funding cutbacks does not make the consequences any less 
severe for education in Saskatchewan. 

 
People are concerned, Mr. Speaker, people are willing to do 
with a little less.  They're willing to do their part and pull their 
weight.  But they are concerned with the way the systematic, 
slash-and-cut approach of the government and the way the 
government are leading people to believe they're doing so 
much for them when in fact they are doing so much less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, trustees are scrambling.  I've noticed an 
article, Leader-Post, Regina, Friday, February 18 where it 
talks about the effects of the budget on education and . . . just a 
couple of paragraphs: 
 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes people are concerned.  And for the Minister 
of Finance to stand in this Assembly and say, no, we haven't 
increased taxes, I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance wasn't really being honest with me as an 
elected representative, or the people of Saskatchewan in that 
comment.  It was a matter of how the department and the 
Department of Finance and the government of the day chose to 
manipulate the funds.  Mr. Speaker, I trust that in the future we 
will be able to move away from that. 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

As I close, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the government is 
certainly going to need a little skill and some luck in indeed 
reaching their projected targets without really increasing or 
putting a greater load on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the fact that the government is, as one headline reads, 
"Government banking on gambling windfall, the fact that the 
government is going into gambling as a means of generating 
revenue, I find appalling.  In fact most people I talk to -- and a 
lot of people have called and a lot of people have raised the 
issue -- really feel that what we have done in this province and 
what we're doing in Canada is really moving away from some 
of the moral guidelines in this province that our forefathers 
based and established this province under.  And I believe it's 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we can allow ourselves because 
of money . . . It says . . . The headline says or the first 
paragraph says: 
 

 It would appear that money is helping soothe the Romanow 
government's guilty conscience about its decision to expand 
the gambling industry. 

 
Well it would seem to me if money is what it's taking to soothe 
their conscience, maybe they should be listening to their 
conscience a little more because I'm sure many of their 
constituents have the same feeling that I do, that many people 
across this province have, regarding expanding the role of 
gambling.  And maybe this is an area, Mr. Speaker, where we 
should have a plebiscite giving people the real opportunity to 
express their opinions on how the government should be 
deriving revenue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if indeed the gambling doesn't take off the 
way the government is projecting it to take off, it's going to 
have a major impact on the budget of tomorrow.  And certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of things that the government is 
really hoping don't happen. 
 
They're hoping that we will indeed see an increase, if I'm not 
mistaken, in the oil prices from their projections for 1995-96, I 
believe.  At today's prices we're at about $14 American. 
They're projecting crude at about $20 American.  If we hit that 
price, certainly it's a boom for the province of Saskatchewan in 
the fact that there will be that extra revenue. 
 
The province is hoping that the Minister of Finance in Ottawa 
and the federal government does not offload any more onto it. 
If the federal government in Ottawa offloads any more, it's 
going to create a problem.  If they don't, then it's certainly to 
the province's benefit. 
 
But I trust, Mr. Speaker, we will not be relying totally on 
gambling proceeds to indeed balance the budget on the backs 
of poor people across this province. 
 
And I say poor people, Mr. Speaker, because . . . And I've 
talked to hoteliers who were lobbying me for video lottery 
terminals in their facilities two or three years ago, and with the 
change in government and the 

change in the way the government approached it were given 
those video lottery terminals.  And now today in some cases 
down in my area of the world some of the hoteliers have 
actually thrown out the VLTs (video lottery terminals) because 
what did they find, Mr. Speaker, a person would come in, sit all 
night at that little one-armed bandit, putting in their loonies.  
And you know what?  They didn't even spend a cent on a cup 
of coffee. 
 
(1930) 
 
And for all the cost it took to manage that VLT, the hotelier 
owners finally realized there was no benefit for them.  In fact 
they were losing revenue because people were spending . . . 
just putting every cent they had in their pocket just to try and 
get that one win.  And how many people do you watch sit there, 
pulling on that one-armed bandit to get that one big windfall, 
and it takes them an awful long time to get that windfall. 
 
And then I find, Mr. Speaker -- just from talking to 
people -- that if they do hit the windfall, hit the jackpot, most 
people don't know how to quit.  They tend to put it all back into 
the machine, and spend it, and they've lost it all anyway.  I 
guess they'd be further ahead if they looked and spent some 
time at home, and looked at ways in which they could find 
some recreation . . . enjoy recreation with their families, and 
wholesome family time.  They would be further ahead and we 
as a society would be further ahead as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that Saskatchewan families 
are going to be affected by this budget.  Each and every one of 
us are going to be affected.  We're going to have to dig deeper 
and deeper into our pockets, as the programs disappear, and as 
we try to put funding into the programs that are left. 
 
So it would seem when the NDP calls this budget a 
delivering-the-promise budget, it's simply not so, and I'm sure 
many of the members opposite know it as well, if they took the 
time to.  I would suggest they even take the time to sit down 
with the auditor, and go through the process of how you 
determine a budget, how you figure out spending in 
Saskatchewan, where all the money is spent.  They would be 
interested.  They would be surprised to find out what really 
goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's certainly been a pleasure to stand and to speak 
regarding the budget speech that was brought forward . . . or 
the budget proposal that was brought forth by the Minister of 
Finance.  And I would suggest to you that my colleagues and I 
will continue to monitor the process; and we will continue to 
stand up; and we will continue to remind the people of 
Saskatchewan that the so-called budget full of goodies, and 
promises, and no new taxes is anything but.  There were further 
taxes.  There will be further taxes.  The deficit isn't under 
control.  The overall deficit of this province continues to grow.  
And until we finally decide amongst ourselves that we're not 
going to quit playing politics, we will never see the deficit 
really under control. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that it's time we put 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

politics aside, laid it out so that people can see exactly where 
the spending is rather than juggling from bin A to bin B, and I 
think the MLA for Kinistino knows what it means to transfer 
grain from one bin to the next.  When we quit the transfers and 
just get on with the realities of the laying out for the people the 
total spending of the province of Saskatchewan, the total debt, 
the people of Saskatchewan will say thank you and we can get 
on with the job of building this province because it is a 
beautiful province to live in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Just 
picking up on the member opposite's last comments about 
transferring grain from bin A to bin B, I think that those words 
ring very hollow in view of the fact that for some 10 years they 
drummed up a $15 billion debt in this province that have 
required our government to take some very tough measures in 
order to get a handle on the mess that was left by the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'm very pleased to have an opportunity to engage in the budget 
debate and I want to start by thanking everyone in 
Saskatchewan, the thousands of people, who are working very 
hard to put into effect the health reform and the changes in 
health care in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Over the last two and a half years, Mr. 
Speaker, people have worked very, very hard to develop the 
health reform and to work in their communities to implement 
health reform.  We had, as I have said on numerous occasions 
in this legislature, stakeholder meetings right from the outset, 
right after we were elected. 
 
We started stakeholders' meetings, meetings in communities, 
town hall meetings across this province where we talked about 
the direction that we felt health care should be going, and we 
invited the public to participate in discussions, provide us with 
their ideas, and help us to implement health reform. 
 
We have had an unprecedented participation by the public in 
this process and it will result, I firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, in 
a very high quality health care system and a better health care 
system than had we not had this kind of participation from 
communities and the public. 
 
We have had a lot of rhetoric from the members opposite in 
this budget debate because the members opposite, both the 
Liberals and the Tories, are unable to focus on the larger 
picture.  Instead they get involved in petty politics instead of 
making a positive contribution to the debate or a positive 
contribution to the changes that are taking place in th  
province. 

e The first phase would be to remove the financial barrier 
between those giving the service and those receiving it.  The 
second  

The fact is, Saskatchewan has a balanced approach.  And our 
government is a government with a vision, and it is a 
government in control.  We are headed in 

the right direction, and we are doing what has to be done for 
the future of our children and grandchildren. 
 
I think it's important for us to think about our history as well as 
we examine what is taking place in Saskatchewan with respect 
to health care and with respect to balancing the budget and 
moving to a zero annual deficit.  We have often heard the 
Premier say -- and it is true -- that Tommy Douglas always 
talked about the need to live within our means.  Social 
democratic policy, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) policy, the policy of Tommy Douglas, has always 
been to live within our means. 
 
When the CCF took over government in 1944, the province 
was $178 million in debt and had not been able to borrow 
money since 1932.  The CCF set aside 10 per cent to pay off 
the debt, reducing it to 18 million by 1960.  And the CCF were 
able to do this while they proceeded to implement programs 
such as hospital insurance in 1948, free medicare for seniors 
and the handicapped in the 1950s, and full medicare in 1962.  It 
was the fiscal prudence of the CCF from 1944 to 1962 that 
allowed them to accomplish these feats of modern social 
policy, and it will be the fiscal prudence of the NDP 
government in 1991 and successive years, Mr. Speaker, that 
will allow us to balance our books and move ahead to 
strengthen social programs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
In 1944, the Sigerist report was done, which was the 
Saskatchewan Health Services Survey Commission.  It was a 
report on health services, and it was very interesting.  There 
were some very interesting points made in this report.  They 
noted that the main defect of medical care in the province at 
that time was the improper distribution of medical personnel.  
In other words, in 1944, the fact that there was an inadequate 
supply of doctors in rural areas was identified by the Sigerist 
report.  That goes back to 1944, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also indicated that it was urgent to establish a system of 
socialized medical service that would guarantee the people the 
basic service they need and which they are entitled to at all 
times.  It was recommended that a planning commission be 
created to prepare the way for the establishment of rural health 
districts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we see that way back, long before 1991, we have health care 
people talking about the need for rural health districts.  In fact I 
think about that time they were actually talking about 
approximately 30 regions or districts and then larger districts 
encompassing the smaller districts.  So this goes back a very 
very long ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1982, Tommy Douglas recognized that and indicated that 
"When we began to plan medicare, we pointed out that it would 
be in two phases." And these are Tommy's words: 
 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

phase would be to reorganize and revamp the whole delivery 
system. And of course, that's the big item.  That's the thin
we haven't done yet. 

g  

 
Tommy recognized the need to revamp and reorganize the 
health care system to create health districts, to coordinate an  
integrate services and to make the health system more 
responsive to local communities on a broader scale. 

d How can you assure us that this acute care crisis will not 
worsen? 

 
And it's very interesting when we look at what happened in 
1962, when Tommy moved to bring in medicare for all peop  
in Saskatchewan.  There was a so-called medicare crisis 
created, and who created this, Mr. Speaker?  Well it was the 
same people who sit there across from us today; it was Liberals 
and Tories. 

le 

 
KOD (Keep Our Doctors) committees were established 
throughout the province.  It started when four women in Regina 
were threatened that they would not treat them, that their 
doctors would not treat them if they became members of the 
government's medicare plan.  Scare tactics were used at that 
time in the same way that they're being used today. 
 
I want to make a point, however, at this stage, at this point in 
my discussion, Mr. Speaker, and that is that in Saskatchewan 
today the Saskatchewan Medical Association has not been 
engaged in this kind of fearmongering that has taken place by 
the Liberals and Tories.  There may be some individual 
doctors, for example, who are criticizing health reform for one 
reason or another.  But for the most part the medical profession 
in the province has been sitting at the stakeholder tables and 
has been helping us develop health reform and has been a very 
positive part of the process. 
 
However, back in 1962 the KOD committees warned mothers 
of a denial of medical attention for their children.  This was 
reported in The Toronto Star in 1962.  The Ottawa Journal 
similarly said that Saskatchewan voters have been aroused to a 
frenzy due to the fear of losing their doctors. 
 
Do these sort of tactics sound familiar, I ask the members in the 
legislature?  Of course they do.  We've been hearing them for 
the last year and a half by the Tories and Liberals on the 
opposite side of this House.  We've heard horror stories like no 
doctors, no services, destruction of rural Saskatchewan.  Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that history will once again prove 
them wrong. 
 
The KOD committees back in 1962 provided a means for 
Liberal, Conservative, and Socred parties to join around a 
single issue.  It was the same scare tactics and misinformation 
being used today by the Liberals and Tories.  The same threats, 
the same manipulation. 
 
On February 9, 1994, the member from Kindersley stated in 
this House: 
 

 . . . rural Saskatchewan has fewer doctors with heavier patient 
loads, fewer hospitals, with 

more cuts on the way . . . 

On February 17, 1994, the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
stated: 
 

 
 We're talking about people with real problems and real 

concerns and real fears . . . 

I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, the same scare tactics, the same 
misinformation being used today by Liberals and Tories as we 
witnessed in 1962.  And the KOD committee's press releases 
were a constant source of individual cases and they were given 
generous space in the generally anti-government media. 
 
On February 17, 1994, the member from Saskatoon Greystone 
said that: 
 

 . . . experiences like this are being brought to our attention 
with frightening regularity. . ." 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in most of these instances the facts of the 
members opposite are wrong, they're distorted, they're 
exaggerated, and they're used for political purposes as they try 
to manipulate the people to grandstand and score political 
points but not to help.  Not to help, and not to cooperate.  
Cheap scare tactics. 
 
(1945) 
 
And this is in opposition and this is in such contrast to the 
thousands of people across this province who are working very, 
very hard to implement health reform and to make things better 
for their community.  In sharp contrast is the leadership in 
some of their communities, the Liberals and Tories, who are 
doing what they will to destroy any improvement in the health 
care system, to denounce health reform, and all for cheap 
political gain. 
 
The KOD committees held rallies around various parts of the 
province -- does that sound familiar? -- and they planned a 
mammoth rally in Regina for July 11, 1962.  Plans for the rally 
went forward with ads in the press.  Instead of 40,000 to 50,000 
people expected, 4,500 showed. 
 
And the Liberals and Tories organized a rally last spring in 
1973.  The member from Greystone was at that rally inciting 
the people who were there, for her selfish political reasons.  
And the member from Estevan was there moving around in the 
crowd saying, don't let them get away with it, fight them, or 
words to that effect, as we saw quoted in the newspaper. 
 
And at that time as well there was predictions that there'd be 
some 12,000 people at this rally.  I think it was about 7 or 800 
people who showed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now why, why is this scare tactic occurring when we have so 
many hundreds and thousands of people in this province who 
have been working for a year and a half to reform our health 
care system so that we can 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

save it for future generations. 
 
The people of this province have a vision and they have 
foresight.  Unlike the Liberals and Tories opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, who choose to engage in KOD tactics, scare tactics, 
and tactics that go as far back as 1962. 
 
And to show the duplicitousness of the Liberal opposition -- in 
1991 the Liberal election platform indicated that the Liberals 
would develop a network of health care and social services that 
is community and regionally based.  They would promote and 
expand the cost-effective option of home care.  There would be 
a moratorium on capital construction.  They would focus on 
effective delivery of services rather than construction of new 
facilities and, as I indicated in the House the other day from a 
newspaper article which I don't have in front of me today, they 
also talked about a freeze on health care spending. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the effective service 
delivery rather than emphasis on construction of new facilities 
and many of the items that the Liberals indicated in their 
platform, are things that our government is working to put into 
effect today.  But instead, the Liberal opposition will have the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that they don't agree with 
health reform and they don't agree with the approach of this 
government, when they know full well that it is the only choice 
and the only alternative if we're to save medicare for future 
generations. 
 
Marcel Masse pé, the federal minister, said on health costs that 
we could reduce considerably, perhaps by 20 per cent, the costs 
of our health services while keeping the quality high, and yet 
we see the leader of the Liberal opposition suggesting that there 
should not be any decreases in health care funding.  And yet 
her federal counterparts are suggesting a 20 per cent decrease. 
 
And what are we witnessing in Alberta today, Mr. Speaker, 
where there is a Tory government?  We are witnessing 
absolutely massive cuts with no health care plan to minimize 
the impact of those cuts and to improve the health care situation 
for future generations -- massive cuts, 17.6 per cent for health.  
Hospitals in Calgary and Edmonton face cuts of close to 30 per 
cent.  Five thousand health care workers will lose their jobs 
over the next three years and there is no transition program for 
displaced workers. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have a transition program for workers that 
may be displaced in health care reductions.  We have a plan to 
minimize the impact on workers and on the general public, and 
we have a plan to move to services in the community which are 
less expensive and, in some cases, much more effective than 
institutional services. 
 
There is no plan in Alberta to reform health care delivery.  Cuts 
are being imposed on the existing system with no plan for the 
future, and that is the way Tory governments approach health 
care, Mr. Speaker.  The members opposite would have us 
believe that 

they are the saviours of medicare, and like the KOD in 1962 
they bring up anecdotal case after anecdotal case to try and 
prove their point.  All they have to do is look to the border on 
the west to see how Tory governments implement health care. 
 
The Saskatchewan NDP government has moved to reform the 
health system in as sensitive a manner as any government in 
this country and as sensitively as possible.  It needs to be done 
but it needs to be done in an organized and planned fashion 
with a sensitivity to the effects of health care reform. 
 
In the face of these huge cuts, Premier Klein from the Tory 
government in Alberta allowed one of his own cabinet 
ministers to build an unnecessary and expensive hospital in his 
home riding.  And that is Tory health reform. 
 
In Liberal New Brunswick, what do we see?  In Liberal New 
Brunswick they came forward without any consultation and 
wiped out existing 51 hospital boards, both private and public.  
In Saskatchewan, private institutions have been set aside and 
given a special status, particularly our denominational 
institutions.  You will see in other jurisdictions in this country, 
people saying the Saskatchewan experience has been a positive 
experience in this regard. 
 
In New Brunswick, these boards were wiped out overnight and 
they imposed eight consolidated hospital boards without prior 
warning or consultation.  That was in a Liberal province, Mr. 
Speaker.  The Liberal opposition leader here would have us 
believe that our consultation, which has been lengthy, and we 
are talking of thousands of people, wasn't adequate, and yet her 
friends in New Brunswick simply walk in and bang, it's done, 
and that's it. 
 
I just think there is absolutely no comparison between what's 
occurred in Saskatchewan and what's occurred in other 
jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let's look at federal Liberals' commitment to health care.  
Their commitment to health care is evident in the way that 
they've handled the tobacco tax.  They did not have to cut taxes 
to stop smuggling.  In fact the National Campaign for Action 
on Tobacco submitted a detailed 12-point plan to stop 
smuggling without a negative impact on either health or 
revenues. 
 
But the federal Liberals have shown us who their friends are.  
That's the Liberal leader's cousins in Ottawa.  They've showed 
us what their priorities are.  They've showed us who their 
friends are by agreeing to the request of Quebec Premier Daniel 
Johnson to cut taxes.  With a provincial election coming in 
Quebec this year and Johnson's Liberals underdogs to the P.Q. 
(Parti Que pébe pécois), Mr. Chre pétien put the interest of 
Quebec Liberals above the interests of Canadian children. 
 
Each year smoking causes over 38,000 deaths in Canada and 
590,000 deaths in the U.S.A. (United States of America).  If we 
adjust for population, the 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

incidence of smoking-related deaths are 40 per cent higher in 
the U.S.  Higher prices for cigarettes in Canada is cited as the 
main reason for this difference, according to health experts. 
 
But that didn't matter to the Liberals in Ottawa.  Purely political 
considerations are what was important to the Liberals in 
Ottawa, in the same way the Leader of the Liberal Party is 
more interested in cheap politics than trying to work with the 
government and with communities to implement health reform 
and save medicare for future generations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the World Health 
Organization states that health is a state of complete physical, 
mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of 
disease or infirmity. 
 
The three fundamental principles of the new health care system 
are: increasing community involvement and control over the 
health system; emphasizing disease and accident prevention, 
healthy lifestyles, and community-based programs; and 
increasing coordination and integration of health services to 
provide a more responsive and efficient health system. 
 
For the first time ever, accountability for health care 
expenditures goes far beyond simply counting pencils.  In The 
Health Districts Act, one of the requirements is to provide 
annual reports.  The district boards must provide annual reports 
on the services and activities that they provide and engage in, 
and on their costs.  They must set out audited financial 
statements.  Now I want to point this out.  Hospital boards were 
never required to make public their financial statements.  
District boards will be required to do that, and this is a major 
change in policy and a positive change that will require more 
accountability to the public.  The district board will have to set 
out a detailed audited schedule of investments. 
 
And get this, Mr. Speaker, a report on the health status of the 
residents of the health district and the effectiveness of the 
district health board's programs -- now that is one that I 
particularly like.  Because what that does is it will inform the 
public what the health status is of that district.  We will be able 
to keep this data on file in the Department of Health and make 
comparisons throughout the province. 
 
And the people within the district will also be able to make 
these comparisons and urge their district board to improve 
services if they don't show an increased health status, or if 
somehow the district may be slightly behind the district next 
door, and there is no specific reason for those differences. 
 
So I think that the accountability that's built into the new health 
care system is a first in this province, it's positive, and it is 
going to allow communities throughout this province to play a 
real role in developing their health care programing. 

Boards are required in this conjunction as well to have two 
public meetings each year and to present this 
information -- two public meetings.  Hospital boards were 
never required to do this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let's just examine some of the things that have happened 
so far with respect to health reform.  I just want to highlight 
some of the things. 
 
Some of the accomplishments have been . . . And I'm very 
proud to say I'm proud of our government that has increased 
successively the home care budget since it has taken 
government.  Over the last three budgets the increase in home 
care is 42.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker -- 42.5 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And home care districts and home care 
people are busy, and district boards now working with home 
care people are busy developing community-based services in 
our communities that will enhance the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Health centres are providing much-needed services that were 
not being provided in some cases in the past.  Craik and District 
Health Centre has more long-term care, palliative, and respite 
because of their ageing population.  Plans include, in Craik and 
district, offering more community based health programs 
working to better meet the needs of the elderly and their 
families and insuring continued access to reliable emergency 
services. 
 
And I'm sure that district board is doing whatever it can to 
expand its programing within the context of the budget and to 
determine what the needs of their citizens are and to implement 
programs that will meet those needs. 
 
If we look at some other health centres in the province; for 
example, the Montmartre health centre, the administrator there 
has said that if anything, the range of services now offered by 
the health centre is even broader than before they were 
converted. 
 
This is what's happening in communities and in areas where 
they are working with the district boards and with the 
government to develop services. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now I'm not suggesting that every community is doing that, but 
many, many, many communities are.  Some communities are 
suffering the manipulation of the members opposite, and I 
suggest to them that they are not doing their communities a 
service, they are doing their communities a disservice.  Because 
throughout this province we see many communities working 
with their district boards and with the Department of Health to 
come forward with expanded services.  In communities where 
this may not be happening, we often see a Tory MLA that is 
doing what he can to make sure that people are upset as 
opposed to working in a cooperative fashion. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

St. Walburg Community Health Centre for example, if I can 
just indicate some of what's happening in St. Walburg.  In 
addition to providing emergency services, stabilization and 
assessment, daily lab and X-ray service allows for diagnostic 
testing in their community health centre and there are nurses on 
duty 24 hours a day.  This is in a converted hospital. 
 
Mental health, community health, social service , 
physiotherapy and dietary counselling continue to be offered 
regularly.  A chiropractor visits two days a week.  Pre- and 
post-natal classes are offered to new and prospective parents.  
Upgrading classes are offered in the south wing of the building.  
Staff are hoping to arrange to bring remedial massage therapy 
services to the centre in the near future. 

s 

 
And in regard to that particular health centre, an RN (registered 
nurse) at that centre has indicated that the community health 
centre . . . she's indicated that "the place is buzzing with 
activity these days," and that's a quote from this particular 
person out of the Maidstone Mirror.  She's excited about the 
positive way health care workers have met to discuss the health 
needs and how best to meet them. 
 
That same article indicates that: 
 

 The Community Health Centre is the pivot point for health 
services and the staff is enthusiastic about promoting 
wellness in the community.  They want to encourage St. 
Walburg and area residents to suggest additional services that 
may be included in the future. 

 
And the article goes on to talk about the positive approach 
that's being taken in that particular community.  And this again 
is with respect to this particular district, one individual 
indicates in the Maidstone Mirror in August of '93: 
 

 "If we use our resources properly (this is the man who 
operates the private ambulance service in the district) we ca  
create a more economical service with a higher quality of 
care than ever before." 

n 

 
He feels very positive about the way the district is developing.  
I feel good about the fact that ambulance care is considered 
important. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is an example of communities cooperating 
and working together to provide good services, high-quality 
services, for the citizens and the residents. 
 
And there is another article that I want to bring to your 
attention, Mr. Speaker, because I think it summarizes what's 
happening across Canada in a very good way.  It's very basic, 
but it makes some good points.  This is an article out of the 
Vancouver Sun, November 12, 1993.  Now Bob Smith is the 
person that I will be quoting, and he chairs the board of the 
Canadian Hospital Association at this point.  And he made an 

observation Thursday, and this is a quote from there, while 
comparing the progress of reform across all 10 provinces.  He 
said that: 
 

 . . . four provinces are motivated mostly by a vision for the 
future.  They are B.C. (British Columbia), Saskatchewan, 
Prince Edward Island, and Quebec. 

This is the chair of the board of the Canadian Hospital 
Association saying that as he examines health reform occurring 
across this province, across this country, across this country of 
Canada, that Saskatchewan is motivated by a vision for the 
future.  And it's true, Mr. Speaker.  The people of 
Saskatchewan have long talked about the need for a vision on 
health care.  We saw it in the Sigerist report.  We saw it in 
successive commissions after that, and our government worked 
closely with the people to do something about this, to bring 
together a vision in consultation with the people that would 
take us into the 21st century in health care. 
 
And I want to say, we hear from the members opposite how the 
medical profession is upset about what we're doing, and I want 
to make a point once again that for the most part the medical 
profession is working in a cooperative fashion.  There may be 
individuals who have complaints, but for the most part, they 
have been working with us.  In that regard, on the Canadian 
Medical Association's newsletter on health reform, I want to 
just take a quote out of that, at page 883, September 15, 1993: 
 

 Although physicians do not perceive the impact to be 
imminent, they nonetheless support this wellness approach.  
(This is the Canadian Medical Association.)  In terms of 
physician resource strategies, 58% of those surveyed support 
placing greater emphasis on "promoting wellness rather than 
treating illness," and 69% agree with this statement:  "I think 
there should be much more emphasis on health promotion 
and disease prevention." 

And that is very much a part of the direction we are moving as 
we move to our new health care system. 
 
In the Maidstone Mirror again, one individual from Cochin, 
Saskatchewan, wrote this: 
 

 I firmly believe that in five years you will be hard-pressed to 
find anyone willing to go back to the good old days, 
pre-1993. 

 
I have in my hand a whole series of people writing positive 
articles.  And I want to raise this, Mr. Speaker, because so often 
all that we hear out there is the negative, the negative, the 
negative.  This horrible thing is happening and that horrible 
thing is happening and this is all a mess and so on and so forth.  
That's all we hear for the most part. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But it's getting to be less. 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, I think it is getting to be less.  It's 
getting to be . . . There is some improvement in that 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

regard. 
 
The fact is is there are hundreds of people across this province, 
thousands of people who feel positively about the new health 
care system and who want to be part of the new health care 
system and want to be working towards improving our health 
care and developing a system that will take us into the 21 t 
century; thousands of people who feel very positive about what 
is happening and of course they recognize that there's going to 
be problems. 

s 

 
We can't do a massive reform of this nature -- a massive reform 
that involves just about every person in this province and 
thousands and thousands of employees and hundreds of 
different boards -- we can't do a massive reform without some 
glitches and some problems.  They'll be there. 
 
But that doesn't mean that you throw up your hands and say it's 
a mess and we're not going to do anything.  That's an 
opportunity to work together and cooperate and develop a 
better health care system for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And I have in front of me an editorial 
from the Fort Qu'Appelle Times on October 5, 1993, which 
says: 
 

 . . . while one cannot underestimate the economic blow the 
hospital closures meant to these communities, neither can one 
deny the fact that the Romanow government's complete 
restructuring of the province's health care system was 
necessary. 

 
 This province can no longer afford to keep hundreds of 

hospitals beds open across the province when only a very 
small percentage of them were in use at any one time.  The 
millions of dollars that were being spent on these facilities 
can obviously be used more effectively and wisely in other 
areas of our health care system. 

 
And from the Melville Advance, October 6: 
 

 Health Minister Louise Simard has put forward a workable 
plan that'll still give Saskatchewan residents top quality 
health care, albeit in a manner that may be different from 
what many of them are accustomed to. 

 
 Of course, undertaking such a massive reform plan will result 

in problems.  To expect anything different would be 
unreasonable. 

 
 And there will be those (and I want the members to listen to 

this because this is what's happening today by Tory and 
Liberal oppositions) who will use those problems and 
glitches as ammunition to attack Simard's health reform . . . 

 
But we should remember the changes are not made for the 
sake of making a change.  Changes are necessary. They've 
been long talked about and long overdue. But it's only . . . 
(the NDP) government who've had the courage to do 
something about it. 

And I could go on and on and on with articles of that nature, 
Mr. Speaker.  There are people throughout this province who 
know that this is necessary and who know that, in order to 
undertake a massive reform of this nature, our government has 
had courage and stamina to proceed through the reform 
process. 
 
And in addition to articles and newspapers, we receive letters 
of support and solicitations, telephone calls, expressions of 
support, from members of the public.  One individual indicated 
to me the following, Mr. Speaker: we in the Kindersley district, 
which is represented by . . . and I can't use the member's 
name -- have been subjected to all sorts of false statements 
which frighten and confuse many. 
 
But that's what's happening out there, Mr. Speaker.  Another 
person wrote . . . didn't write, had contacted us, I believe -- I'm 
not sure whether it's a letter or not -- congratulating us for our 
political courage.  Another person advised us that they were 
shocked at the disgraceful abuse showered on us, and the 
tactics used by the opposition.  They indicated that it was not a 
respectful clash of ideas, of proposed policies, but a belligerent, 
malicious, and even vicious attack on me personally. 
 
And the expressions of support, Mr. Speaker, have gone on and 
on and on, so we in the government know that the people of 
Saskatchewan, even though there may be glitches and there 
may be some problems, they know in their hearts that this job 
has to be done.  They are thankful that this government has had 
the courage to do it, and thousands of them are participating in 
the process and are being part of it. 
 
In this health reform that we talk about, it isn't isolated to 
Saskatchewan, as I indicated before.  It's happening across this 
country.  Governments across this country are working in very 
much the same way, with different tactics being used in 
different areas, as I pointed out -- Alberta with its massive cuts 
and no plan; New Brunswick with its lack of consultation; 
Saskatchewan trying to do it through a consultative approach, a 
community development approach, with a vision and a plan for 
the future that will lead us to a higher quality health care 
system as opposed to just reducing budgets. 
 
To further us along that reduction, this budget spoke to rural 
initiatives fund of $10 million, identified for rural health 
initiatives.  It's designed to assist health reform in rural 
Saskatchewan.  Three million will be used by the province on 
specific initiatives including enhanced home-based services, 
such as palliative care and renal dialysis, and enhanced 
emergency response services.  Another 7 million will be 
allocated to districts on the basis of their very young and ageing 
rural populations for health promotion and disease 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

prevention initiatives. 
 
Further moving along a more wellness-oriented approach, the 
program for breast cancer, the screening program for breast 
cancer, has been expanded with a funding increase to the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation.  Expansion of this program 
by our government over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, 
has significantly increased the detection of cancers in the early 
stages which enhances success for treatment and recovery.  We 
have saved lives with this program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have the Health Services Utilization Commission that 
is doing its job in health reform, analysing the usage of our 
hospitals, analysing ECGs (electrocardiogram), analysing other 
tests that are being done by physicians, analysing long-term 
care; and coming forward with scientifically based 
recommendations and findings for district health boards and 
governments to indicate.  They studied the hospital system and 
they studied the long-term care system, and their study 
illustrates the pressing need for a major reorganization of our 
health care delivery model. 
 
(2015) 
 
Across Canada there have been cuts and lay-offs, as I've said, 
Mr. Speaker, but in Saskatchewan we have a plan and we have 
a vision and we have asked our Provincial Health Council to 
help us realize that vision. 
 
The Provincial Health Council was established by people 
across this province who have a broad view of society and of 
services that can be delivered in society.  They will be looking 
at the big picture, at the intersectoral approach, at issues such as 
health goals, as smoking issues, and other things in housing, in 
environment, in education that can be done by our government 
in a cooperative, intersectoral, interdepartmental approach to 
enhance the health status of Saskatchewan people and move us 
towards healthier lifestyles and a higher quality of life.  The 
Provincial Health Council will help us to realize our vision. 
 
Just today we announced a child action plan which is an 
interdepartmental approach to dealing with at-risk children and 
to try to enhance the quality of those children's lives, and the 
Department of Health is a part of that process. 
 
We have also established a family planning committee that has 
been consulting with communities and parents and teachers and 
young people throughout this province to see how we can 
reduce the very high teenage pregnancy rate that has been with 
us for many years now in this province.  They will be coming 
forward with some more detailed recommendations in the near 
future. 
 
We have enhanced funding for family violence, 

and the Department of Health is now involved in preventative 
funding with respect to family violence, Mr. Speaker, because 
we know that when people are in violent situations it causes 
tremendous amount of stress in their life and affects their health 
status. 
 
So as a Department of Health working in conjunction with 
Social Services and other departments, we are collaborating to 
reduce the amount of family violence and put in preventative 
measures to prevent the expansion of family violence and to 
reduce it within our society; because our government believes 
that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. 
 
These are many wellness initiatives that have already been 
undertaken and they're only a few of many of the things that are 
taking place across this province and that district boards are 
implementing. 
 
So what does the future hold?  What will the future health care 
system, the new system do for us, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It will be a strong acute care system with more emphasis on 
regional centres than what we have today.  Now this doesn't 
mean a hospital in every community, because in Saskatchewan 
we still have a very high number of hospitals.  In fact I think 
it's almost three times the national average of hospitals per 
100,000 population. 
 
It doesn't mean a hospital in every community but it means 
access to services when you need them.  And it means an 
expansion of home-based services and community programing 
that leads us to a healthier society.  It means more home care, 
more palliative care, respite care, more therapies.  It means 
individual and community involvement, and responsibility, 
where that's appropriate, for our health and our health care 
system. 
 
We are also looking at the establishment of group medical 
practices throughout the province.  And the funding of these 
medical practices will be different from place to place.  For 
example we may be looking at funding based on a per capita 
basis in an area where there's a group medical practice.  We 
may look at getting into an arrangement with the doctors where 
they go on salary, or there may be some fee for service, and 
some per capita funding depending on the individual situation.  
There may be contractual arrangements or there may be some 
sessional payments for time-based practices. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, what we'll be doing is 
experimenting with the medical profession to establish group 
medical practices and to experiment with different forms of 
remuneration.  Doctors are already asking to be a part of that 
process in Saskatchewan and we've already . . . We have the 
Nipawin experiment and we are looking at other . . . at doing 
this in other parts of the province. 
 
We want to move to needs-based funding.  Needs-based 
funding for health care.  That means that it will be based on 
population.  There will be an age and gender factor taken into 
consideration.  Also the difference in costs from one area to the 
next.  But we 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

want to move the health care system to funding for needs. 
 
In the past, the health care system was funded based on how 
many services you used the year before so there was incentive 
for people to stack their hospitals, and to stack their services, 
because it would mean that their services in the future would be 
funded at that level or greater.  We want to move the health 
care system to funding based on needs so that if there is a 
demonstrated need it's funded.  But we don't fund simply to 
keep a facility open, whether it's needed or not. 
 
But this new funding formula will be phased in over a period of 
time, Mr. Speaker.  It cannot be implemented overnight.  The 
reason being is that some areas of the province have received a 
very generous amount of home care funding, and other areas of 
the province have not been so lucky over the years.  This 
formula will make the distribution of funding more equitable 
throughout the province, but it does mean some will gain, and 
some will lose, and so it has to be done in a very slow process, 
so it can be phased in.  However there will be more said on that 
as that formula becomes implemented and more public. 
 
We want to establish multidisciplinary teams throughout the 
province of health care workers working side by side with 
doctors and nurses, working side by side with social workers, 
with mental health workers, with public health workers, with 
addiction counselling services, with teachers and other health 
care professionals within the community.  We believe that we 
can strengthen the health care system if health professionals 
can work as teams.  We've witnessed that in community clinics 
in this province in the past and in community health centres 
where we've had an opportunity to experiment with health 
professionals working together.  If they can work together as a 
team, then there will not be such an overlap of services, and 
health professionals will also appreciate the skills of the other 
professionals with whom they are working. 
 
Nurses can be given more responsibility than what they've had 
in the past.  We know that in remote communities such as 
northern Saskatchewan they have had to take this 
responsibility.  And they can take more responsibility.  So we 
will be looking at an expanded role for nurses.  In fact 35 
nurses are currently enrolled in the advanced clinical training 
nursing program to give nurses advanced clinical training and 
diagnostic skills, so they can work where we need them the 
most: in remote rural and remote northern communities, but 
eventually this program will be established so we have 
advanced clinical nurse practitioners throughout the entire 
province. 
 
The government is looking at the possibility of midwives in the 
province.  We know that some jurisdictions have already 
moved in this direction, and I think it's time for Saskatchewan 
to examine that possibility and to see how they could work 
with doctors in our health care system.  We know that we need 
more support to allow individuals to stay in their communities 
and in their homes as long as possible. 

And so we're looking at palliative care that will allow people to 
stay in their homes longer.  We've increased funding for 
home-based services.  We're looking at more home oxygen 
therapy with . . . the department is looking at all sorts of ways 
in conjunction with district boards that we can allow 
individuals to stay in their homes longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some other items that I wish to point out 
that we can be seeing in the future with respect to health care 
reform.  And that is that there will be a devolution to district 
boards of community-based services. 
 
Now what we mean by that is that there many workers right 
now who are working at the departmental level under the 
Department of Health.  Their jobs will be devolved to the 
district boards.  And although the department will maintain 
responsibility for standards, and for setting salaries, and for 
making sure that there are supports to these people in the 
districts, their jobs will actually be devolved to district boards 
and they will be closer to local communities and part of that 
process. 
 
We will be having future discussions as to the role of health 
care professionals as we move to these multidisciplinary teams.  
We want to know what the role of health service providers 
should be into the 21st century. 
 
We want to reduce any barriers there are to health information. 
It's very difficult for people to receive information about their 
individual health or about other matters in general with respect 
to health.  We want to reduce any barriers that there are to 
health information so that people will be better educated about 
health care services and their own health. 
 
We do need major education services, then, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide information about the need for individual 
responsibility. 
 
In conclusion, then, I want to say that the continuance of the 
second stage of health reform -- and I refer to it as the second 
stage of this health reform, the first stage was to set up the 
district boards -- the second stage is to enhance programing and 
move to a more wellness-oriented health care system, and we 
are now in that stage. 
 
There will be . . . In summary then, there will be ongoing 
increases in the development, implementation, and utilization 
of community-based health services, and a decrease in 
dependence on traditional institutional health care, although 
institutional health care will remain strong. 
 
There will be an increased emphasis on client-centred 
approaches to health services.  What that means is this: people 
will be better educated and health professionals will be better 
educated to work in conjunction with individuals and 
communities as they deliver services -- a more 
people-orientated approach. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

There will be increasing community and individual 
involvement in decision making and an increasing emphasis on 
health outcomes.  Now that is very important because all the 
health economists and all of the health people across this 
province talk about the need to look at health outcomes because 
the health care system has simply paid money without 
analysing whether or not it results in an improved health status 
for people in Canada.  And we know that there are countries 
that pay less than we do on health care and have a better health 
status.  So they're doing something that we're not doing and we 
have to determine what services result in an improved health 
status and what the health outcomes are to particular 
programing.  That should be integral to the new health system. 
 
We will also be adopting healthier public policies.  The 
Provincial Health Council is going to help us develop those 
policies so that we can move to a society that is more cognizant 
of healthy lifestyles and more cognizant of the interrelationship 
of many factors such as environment and housing and poverty 
and the economy on our health.  So that when we are talking 
about environmental policies we are also thinking of the health 
impacts.  When we are talking about poverty we are thinking of 
the health impacts and trying to build that into our programing.  
There will be increased coordination and integration of 
mandates then which affect health, social services, 
environment, and housing. 
 
(2030) 
 
And that is some of the things that we can expect to see in the 
months and years to come as Saskatchewan people continue to 
develop the new health care system that will be more 
responsive to individual people and to communities, that will 
result in more community involvement and more community 
control.  And it will provide a higher quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people and better quality health care services. 
 
In conclusion then, I want to once again thank the many, many 
people across Saskatchewan who have worked very, very hard 
to get to this stage and whom I know are going to continue to 
work over the next few months and years to realize this 
vision -- the vision of health care for the 21st century, a vision 
that is recognized by the chair of the Canadian Hospital 
Association who has said that Saskatchewan is one of four 
provinces that is working from a vision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that as health reform continues, 
Saskatchewan people will reap the benefits of the very hard 
work that they're doing today.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise tonight to 
voice my strong support for the balanced budget plan of our 
government, and more specifically, this year's budget as 
presented by the member from Saskatoon Westmount. 

Few people realize, Mr. Speaker, the many hours and hours of 
deliberation and presentation and consultation that must go into 
the preparing of a budget such as the one that was brought 
forward in this Assembly last week.  And I think that we all 
owe the minister responsible for Finance a debt of gratitude for 
the many hours that she's put in over this last year to deliver the 
promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- It's a promise that started with the first 
budget that we delivered in this Assembly and started with the 
hours of work, the many hours of travel, that were put in by our 
member from Regina north east. 
 
And I know the residents in my area of the city have also 
commented to me time and time again the work that had to go 
into cleaning up the mess, understanding where we were in that 
first budget year, and trying to adjust our plans and 
expectations to come in with that first budget, Mr. Speaker.  
And they have stood behind the member from Regina north 
east in the consideration and deliberation that he also put in to 
get us to this point where we're delivering the promise for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are many reasons for my support of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but today I will highlight four areas that I feel are very 
important to all residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
I'm not going to go further into the areas of health care reform 
except to say that I stand behind the Minister of Health and the 
work and the presentation that she put before us tonight when 
we talk about the second generation of health care that was 
contemplated by Tommy and that's being carried forward by 
the people of Saskatchewan as we go into the revolution that's 
occurring in health care reform today. 
 
The four areas that I want to speak on this evening, and they're 
in no priorized order, but the first one that I'm going to outline 
would be first things first, the financial integrity, the openness 
and accountability of delivering the promise.  Many people call 
this, Mr. Speaker, honesty.  And as a member earlier today 
from the Tory benches talked about:  he wouldn't maybe 
recognize that clearly when it hit him in the face because I don't 
think for 10 years that we saw delivering on any promises that 
the former government made to the people of this province. 
 
The second area I'd like to speak about is the area of jobs, 
economic development and jobs.  And the third is the human 
face of our budget -- support for those most vulnerable in 
today's society.  And it will be last but by no means least that I 
want to end and conclude my remarks this evening by giving 
credit where credit is due -- to the wonderful people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, the people who have made this a 
great province and have been helping us to deliver the promise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I don't want to spend a long time dwelling on 
the way we were.  Many stories have been told and people 
understand what happened in this province.  But I think its 
important to have people remember, and I know the people in 
the province have excellent memories that they will not forget 
easily the failure of the Tories' policies or the short-sightedness 
of their give-aways to their greedy buddies. 
 
However, it is important to see what we have done to restore 
the public trust, to see where we have come from, and how 
we've worked to deliver on the promise.  My colleagues will all 
remember that first session when, as a new government, we had 
to meet to clear up the irresponsible mess left by the former 
government the year before we arrived. 
 
That year before we arrived, I had been a member of Regina 
City Council, one of the municipalities that was talked about as 
a partner in relationship to this government, who rely on 
third-party funding for some of their budgeting. 
 
And as a member of the city council, what did we see?  We 
didn't see budgets finalized early to give people an 
understanding of where the province stands and whether or not 
they could deliver on the promise to the third parties involved.  
We didn't see budget details in time to set mill rates or put 
notices out to the residents that would reflect careful budget 
deliberation and understand what could be expected from a 
senior level of government. 
 
You can imagine the havoc to those plans of the municipalities 
when provincial budgets were consistently late, and they were 
consistently withdrawing more and more from programs and 
services and the dollars needed to deliver those services to third 
parties. 
 
And I can remember a time, as I mentioned earlier, in this 
province when we saw a withdrawal of funding from the city of 
Regina of over $9 million that one year.  And it wasn't taking 
the city aside and saying very early on, there's going to be a 
major withdrawal of funding, you should be prepared, to get 
them to understand the situation that the former government 
was in, or even begin to see the magnitude of the hit that was 
going to happen to the city of Regina.  They weren't alone in 
that.  But in particular this one year I remember well because it 
was over $9 million.  And we learned of this withdrawal of 
funding in July, halfway through a budget year, when cities are 
least equipped to handle a withdrawal of monies of that 
magnitude. 
 
You can imagine the frustration and the upsettedness when we 
hear that it's 85 years of Saskatchewan being a province, and so 
while the city is losing money in that magnitude, we're now 
going to have a birthday party where the members opposite can 
go across the province and stand on a podium and say that 
they're going to deliver to the residents of Saskatchewan $9 
million worth of birthday party. 

I remember it well, the members of city council coming 
together, my colleagues coming together trying to stay calm 
and make serious decisions on what we were going to cut back, 
how we were going to adjust with that short notice and halfway 
into our budget year.  And there were very serious decisions 
that had to be taken in a very short time.  And when you talk 
about that and the impact on jobs in the community, I can still 
remember that we owed a debt of thanks to the senior 
management team who helped us through those difficult times, 
who tried to put together alternatives and lead us through some 
very difficult deliberations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was one year.  But the members 
opposite topped that in 1991 when economic development in 
Saskatchewan was called Fair Share Saskatchewan, and the 
plan was to arbitrarily move families across the province, out of 
Regina.  The Liquor Board moved to Hudson Bay.  Try and get 
dealers and people in to talk to people in Hudson Bay, 
Saskatchewan and the hours that they would be travelling to do 
that.  And where there were the fewest seniors in the province, 
the Seniors' Secretariat would move to St. Walburg. 
 
And when you looked more closely at this Fair Share economic 
development strategy, you knew that it meant in some cases the 
mom was going to move to one community and the dad would 
be moving off in another direction.  That does not talk about 
support for families and it doesn't do anything for the economic 
development in this province, except move the deck chairs 
around on the Titanic. And that's what we saw from the 
members opposite. 
 
And when you talk about funding to third parties such as health 
care institutions, you can see almost the same kind of thing that 
happened in Alberta was happening toward the end of the Tory 
era in Saskatchewan. 
 
As the vice-chair of the Pioneer Village board in Regina, I 
remember very well Black Wednesday when, as the Health 
minister at the time, Mr. McLeod was announcing that there 
was going to be a 3 per cent increase to the pool for health care. 
They pulled together at the Plains Health Centre people of the 
communities and urban centres, and home care, and other 
organizations and say, you will hear that today in our budget 
deliberation and announcement, but remember that's to the pool 
and that money's already been spent in short-term, 
short-sighted, political-gain projects throughout the province.  
For you, you can look at a decrease in the order of 5, 6 and in 
many cases, adding inflation on to budget processes, in the 
magnitude of a 10 per cent withdrawal in one year from health 
care spending in those sectors in this province -- not unlike the 
Tories in Alberta, who in one year are announcing devastating 
cut-backs without a plan in that province. 
 
The same year budget diligence hit a new low and there was no 
budget passed.  The member from Estevan tried to tell himself: 
I thought I passed a 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

budget, I thought that happened; tried to convince high school 
students that there really was a budget in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but there was no budget passed. 
 
This left us as a province operating solely on special warrants 
until we could bring in that first financial report, and that was 
late in December.  We knew by then we would be galloping to 
prepare for some of the most difficult decisions we would have 
to ever make in the history of this province.  But we were true 
to our election promises and our promise of open and honesty 
and first things first, open the books and let's see what's really 
happening in the province of Saskatchewan, what went on. 
 
We began that process with an independent commission to let 
the people of Saskatchewan know what had been done with 
their hard-earned tax dollars.  Mr. Speaker, the one thing I 
heard most often from my constituents was, we know you have 
a tough job, but we want fiscal integrity.  We want fiscal 
integrity restored to this province.  We're prepared to help out 
as long as you're fair and you are honest with us.  I know it 
made us all very angry.  We were upset, we were angry about 
the mess that had been left to us.  It was not of our making, but 
we had to clean it up.  No easy task. 
 
So what did we do?  First we changed our method of 
accounting so we would be fairly and openly reflecting the 
spending of the province in the year that the debt occurs.  No 
more, oops, I seem to have missed by a billion or so; oh well, 
we've gotten past that election year.  This change, Mr. Speaker, 
is a significant accountability mechanism in itself. 
 
But why would we do this move to accrual accounting?  The 
average person in Saskatchewan doesn't really know what 
accrual accounting is or what it would mean to them.  I've just 
learned how that impacts on us ourselves and myself this year 
when we were talking about it. 
 
It's not a great news story.  You obviously haven't heard it 
covered in the media and the press.  Of course it's a good news 
story for the accountability to people in this province. 
 
It's not a great news story, Mr. Speaker, but it is delivering the 
promise of accountability and making sure there's a mechanism 
in place that this province will never see again -- the 
billion-dollar-oops mistakes of the former government. 
 
What else have we done in keeping the promise?  We've 
provided the public with audited financial reports for each and 
every Crown corporation, agency, board and commission, and 
on time, Mr. Speaker, in a timely basis and not a few years 
after the fact. 
 
We provide mid-year updates to the people letting them know 
whether or not we're meeting our targets.  And we provide 
summary financial statements to give our taxpayers the 
complete picture of our province's 

financial position.  This is delivering on the promise. 
 
Saskatchewan's financial watchdog, the Provincial Auditor, 
says these are the most useful financial statements issued by a 
senior government in Canada.  Even my sternest critics, Mr. 
Speaker, and I'm hoping they're only a few, admit that we are 
an open, accountable, and honest government, Mr. Speaker.  
And that is high praise indeed where I come from. 
 
(2045) 
 
The second area I want to speak about this evening is jobs.  I'm 
a mother of two teenagers and usually my home is home to 
many more young adults.  They want to be able to work in this 
province, to make their homes here, and be the future taxpayers 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They like our key priority in the Partnership for Renewal 
document and that priority is full employment.  They watched 
with great interest, the night of the budget, what the Liberal 
leader would say.  And so we sat by the television and we 
watched to see what her answer would be to the important 
question of full employment and jobs.  And were they 
surprised.  She didn't have one idea to put forward.  It was slam 
and blast but not to put forward one creative idea for the 
teenagers that I know and that I respect for having intelligence, 
would be able to understand if she would put forward an 
alternative for them in economic development and jobs. 
 
They wanted to know what she meant when she said, well the 
Liberals would create an economic climate.  Is that the same 
climate as all the other provinces governed by Liberals?  
Because if it's so, that means higher overall taxation, higher 
overall charges and rates, and these provinces haven't even 
begun to address their deficit situations. 
 
So the next question: could it be that the Liberals would deliver 
on jobs by exploring new suggestions and new ideas and 
creativity that she hears from within her party and her 
members?  But wait.  She has yet to bring to this Assembly, or 
to the minister responsible for Economic Development, one 
new idea. 
 
Aha!  So it must be that the Liberal strategy is going to be jobs 
through increased productivity and a safe and fair work 
environment for the working men and women in this province.  
And again, the young people are not only disappointed by the 
Leader of the Liberal Party, but upset. 
 
I've shown them the quote in the Yorkton press in December, a 
quote on occupational health and safety and workers' 
compensation.  And what does the Liberal Party say about 
these pieces of legislation?  That they're irrelevant to the people 
of Saskatchewan -- irrelevant, Mr. Speaker.  Occupational 
health and safety that's progressive, leading the way in this 
country, workers' compensation -- that is irrelevant.  But she 
goes on and condemns, sight unseen, the labour legislation that 
will be considered and that is 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

going to be considered in this Assembly, that was highlighted 
in the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why the young people of this province look 
to our government for the answer to economic development 
and jobs and not the Liberal Party, who tout the New 
Brunswick model.  Our Minister of Social Services earlier 
today talked about the New Brunswick model.  There was 
another occasion, on the night of the North West by-election, 
when I heard the member opposite say that the model they were 
going to follow was the McKenna model, a McKenna model on 
budgeting.  Well let's tell the people of Saskatchewan what the 
Liberal model looks like. 
 
The Liberal model is a $400 million deficit in the province, a 
province as small as New Brunswick and the Maritimes, $400 
million and spiralling.  This is according to The Globe And 
Mail.  A province led by a Liberal government that has 11 per 
cent provincial sales tax on most goods and services, and from 
quotes from the member opposite, she'd be in favour of 
supporting a taxation . . . a broadening of the taxation to cover 
such things like food.  That's the Liberal model. 
 
When you look in comparison to the utility rates and charges in 
this province, you see the Liberal McKenna model is that a 
combined utility charges for a family of four is $1,000 more 
than the province of Saskatchewan, $1,000 a year more.  And 
yet the members opposite stand and tell us that they were not 
going to consider increasing utility rates and charges.  Wonder 
where the money is going to come from for the Liberal model 
of economic development? 
 
All of this and we know that there's higher unemployment rates 
in those provinces led by the Liberal governments than there is 
in Saskatchewan.  Well that's the Liberal party model, and they 
tout the New Brunswick McKenna model of budgeting and 
cannot support delivering the promise, as we've done in the 
budget before us. 
 
It's a reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why on all fronts we're 
committed to act to promote economic recovery that's now 
occurring in this province.  It won't be the boom/bust 
megaprojects that will provide long-term, sustainable benefits 
or the flip-flop, gee, I haven't got any ideas of the Liberals 
across from us, but it will be the small, targeted steps that will 
move us forward in economic development and jobs.  It will be 
the small steps that support communities working in 
cooperation who will tell us what jobs can be sustained on the 
Main Streets through the province of Saskatchewan.  Our 
Finance minister has outlined many of these, but they are worth 
mentioning again.  And I refer to the budget address, 
Delivering the Promise, and I'd like to restate these because, 
as I mentioned earlier, good news stories don't usually make 
the pages of the press. 
 
Our economic development plan involves focusing on proven 
strengths identified by communities pulling together and 
talking about what those strengths are in 

our Partnership for Renewal plan.  And they tell us that they 
support the elimination of tax on direct agents used in 
manufacturing and processing, and it will be completely phased 
out by July 1 of 1994. 
 
They support the pioneering of a single-window approach to 
economic development programs in the province of 
Saskatchewan; the reduction of government red tape for small 
businesses; a revised royalty structure for oil and gas industry 
to encourage new investment; a north-west forest renewal 
partnership plan with funding of $226,000 in 1994 and '95, and 
$104,000 in 1995-96; and the continuation of the planned 
reduction in small business corporate income tax rate with the 
reduction to 8.5 per cent of corporate taxable income this year 
and a further reduction to 8 per cent in 1995.  Because, Mr. 
Speaker, in over four years, when we reduce the small business 
corporate income tax rate by 20 per cent, small business tells us 
that more dollars will be in their hands.  That translates into 
more jobs in the Main Streets of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- In our budget document we also highlight 
that our Crown corporations in government will spend $700 
million on much-needed capital projects.  It goes further to say 
that this budget will mean exporting more Saskatchewan 
products and services to the world market-place. 
 
This budget will help do that with total funding of $6 million 
for the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation -- the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation that will focus our 
economic development activity and will lead to more jobs, but 
not through the give-aways to a few, but to supported and 
sustainable and accountable jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased that this budget redirects over $4 
million to a strategy for economic renewal in northern 
Saskatchewan.  This will be done through assisting local people 
to process and market products grown or produced in northern 
Saskatchewan.  It will help local businesses to supply northern 
mines with goods and services that they require.  And it will 
provide training programs for northern people so that they can 
take advantage of these new opportunities. 
 
Our farm families will also be involved through Agriculture 
2000 strategy.  There will be $20 million invested over the next 
four years in value added projects, $1.4 million to improve 
products and enhance markets for the beef industry, and we're 
working hard to develop a whole new farm safety net program. 
 
It's no accident, Mr. Speaker, that jobs and employment were 
mentioned at least 15 times in an over-20-minute budget 
speech.  No accident, Mr. Speaker, it's delivering the promise. 
 
I want to refer back, Mr. Speaker, to a time when again I was 
talking about being a member of city council.  I had the 
opportunity to chair the task force on 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

women's issues.  I was a member of the mayor's inquiry into 
hunger, and served as a chair of the community services 
committee.  I saw firsthand the results of 10 years of a 
right-wing agenda -- 10 years of a right-wing agenda that I see 
being now vocalized by the members of the Liberal Party. 
 
You can see values of compassion and caring were being 
replaced with the "me first" greed and victim-blaming attitudes 
displayed by the Tory provincial leaders and we now hear 
being displayed by the leaders of the Liberal Party. 
 
This cuts deeply into my being, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my 
beliefs are grounded in the principles and the philosophy of my 
family roots, the CCF and NDP -- the philosophy and the 
principles of community, cooperation, and compassion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- Our leader stated many times in some of his 
speeches he's delivered throughout the province that times 
change, our values don't.  It's not with shaky temerity that we 
refer back to Tommy.  It's not with a sense of retreat that we 
talk about the budget of Fines.  It's with a sense of pride in 
where we're going, to understand and know where we've come 
from. 
 
As my colleague, the Minister of Social Services, talked about 
this afternoon, there was a quote from Tommy in 1954 that 
stated, and I quote: 
 

 The philosophy of this government is "Humanity First".  We 
believe that the measure of any community is the amount of 
social and economic security which it provides for even its 
humblest citizens. 

 
And in our times our party and our leader, the Hon. Premier of 
Saskatchewan, and my colleagues seated with me in this 
legislature, have been quoted as saying that we're: 
 

 New Democrat(s) because (we) believe in economic and 
social justice--in a society which seeks fairness, compassion 
and equity in all its affairs. 

 
I'm proud to be a part of this heritage -- from Douglas to our 
Premier, from Fines to our Finance minister -- because it's a 
budget and a time of humanity first.  Humanity first, brought 
about through budgets with commitment to these words:  a 
living budget of monetary commitment to improve the quality 
of life, seek fairness, compassion, and equity in all its affairs 
for even its humblest citizens.  A budget that even in the face of 
financial burden has begun the job of delivering the promise of 
humanity first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't think that even 
my colleagues have taken the time to sit back and reflect on 
what we've done to live up to the 

promises to the people of Saskatchewan.  And in the times of 
very difficult economic restraint, what we've still been able to 
accomplish for even the humblest of our citizens. 
 
And I want to run through some of those and recap what we've 
done since we've been in office, because people want to hear 
what we've done, and not the havoc and the wreck of the last 10 
years of a right-wing agenda, but what we've done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(2100) 
 
So in 1992 there was grants to child care centres that were 
increased by 21 per cent.  Funding for child hunger programs 
which were increased by 35 per cent.  The Saskatchewan child 
tax reduction for low income families was increased by 25 per 
cent to $250 per child annually and that was effective July 1, 
1992.  There was additional funding of $28 million provided 
for Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, which included provision 
for rate increases.  In total, funding for this exceeded $230 
million. 
 
In 1992 home care funding was increased by nearly 20 per cent 
to $38 million, to expand and enhance services such as nursing, 
meals, and home maintenance.  The northern food allowance 
for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan was doubled, doubled 
each month. 
 
A total of $20 million went to family support programs like 
counselling for teenage mothers and victims of family violence.  
Funding was provided to expand the breast cancer screening 
program at that time to include Saskatoon and three satellite 
centres, and we now know to include the entire province.  And 
on the recommendation of the Minimum Wage Board, the 
minimum wage was increased to 5.35 per hour from $5 an 
hour.  In 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I go on to 1993, leaving behind many things unsaid about what 
we were able to accomplish for the people of Saskatchewan in 
'92, but I don't want to go on too long and lose track of the 
growing numbers of things we've been able to provide in a 
budget that talks about a living budget and people first. 
 
So in 1993 home care funding was further increased to $43 
million from $38 million the year before.  A total of $18 
million was provided for programs that directly benefit 
children, including funding for child care, the hunger programs, 
the revised dental programs targeted to children in low income 
families.  And in 1993, 3.8 million was provided to establish a 
new child benefit program to support children in low income 
families. 
 
Another million dollars was provided to enhance the 
enforcement of maintenance orders to ensure parents live up to 
their responsibilities.  And almost $14 million was targeted in 
1993 for programs to promote Indian and Metis training and 
employment.  A total of a million dollars was provided for a 
child nutrition and development program.  The program would 
provide 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

grants to urban and rural communities around the province to 
help establish nutrition programs for hungry children.  A total 
of $3 million to the Blair Memorial Cancer Clinic in Regina 
and the Saskatoon Cancer Centre.  Funding totalling $5.2 
million was provided to create 1,250 jobs for people receiving 
social assistance under the community employment program. 
 
In 1993 additional funding was provided to expand the teen 
parent program for expectant teenage mothers to help them and 
encourage them to stay in school.  In the area of education, we 
saw reviews being conducted of all our educational institutions 
to determine their effectiveness and to formulate 
recommendations for future directions.  We established an 
Education Council to advise us on key issues and options for 
education.  This new approach involved parents, teachers, 
students, the business community, and labour -- partnerships 
for renewal, partnerships in education.  We heard earlier, 
partnerships in health. 
 
We have implemented changes to the administration of the 
student aid program to provide information to students quickly.  
We've maintained the six-month interest-free period before 
students must begin to repay the loans, and that's despite the 
federal government's elimination of the same for Canadian 
student loan programs. 
 
We initiated the program to address the needs of at-risk 
children and their families so that government agencies and 
community organizations would be involved and coordinate 
and integrate their approach to these important issues.  And as 
we've heard today, the child action plan this year will go a step 
further. 
 
We've supported literacy programs and initiated substantial 
funding for Saskatchewan Federation of Labour's workplace 
literacy program.  1993 saw the introduction of two key Bills, 
The Occupational Health and Safety Act in response to the 
demands of workers for safer and healthier workplaces.  The 
legislation became the first of its kind to deal with harassment 
and violence in the workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- There were amendments to The Workers' 
Compensation Act that were made to protect Saskatchewan s 
workers.  The legislative reforms provided for a better system 
of benefits and rehabilitation for injured workers. 

' 

 
So now we look ahead to the days ahead and to what's been 
projected in our budget this year and our agenda before us, and 
what do we see?  The announcement today of $4.4 million 
added to the child action plan, $10 million for rural health care 
initiatives.  We're into the third year of increases for the infant 
care services to help teen parents attend high school. 
 
We're looking at the victims of domestic violence Act that will 
be introduced to provide remedies to address situations of 
immediate danger and to minimize the 

disruption to the victims' lives.  We're looking at expansion of 
the Unified Family Court program on a province-wide basis.  
This will ensure that the justice system deals with family 
breakdown and other family law issues involving children in a 
more responsive, more supportive, and less adversarial manner. 
 
We're looking at the changes to The Ombudsman Act to amend 
that Act and establish the child's advocate, again delivering a 
promise.  And we'll be dealing with two important pieces of 
labour legislation that have been under much-needed 
review -- a broad consultation process with all the players 
involved.  We may not come to a complete consensus, but we 
must move ahead on these two pieces of legislation to 
accommodate the changing needs of the labour force. 
 
Amendments to The Labour Standards Act will have the 
greatest benefit for those 70,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan's lowest wage jobs, most of whom are women 
and the young children in this province, young adults. 
 
The Trade Union Act will also be amended to accommodate 
the changing needs of the labour force.  Amendments to this 
Act will insure that it's a fair, balanced, and up-to-date 
approach while at the same time encouraging a healthy climate 
for job creation and economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is delivering the promise. 
 
From our days as a new government we have worked together 
to present to our people a plan.  It started with the first budget 
when we came out into this House knowing it would be tough, 
asking for understanding and support from the people of 
Saskatchewan not for ourselves, not for a balanced budget 
alone, but for our children and their children. 
 
I would restate the closing quote in last year's budget that 
highlights this for all people in the province: 
 

 Together, we are uniting behind a plan to ensure that all that 
makes us fortunate today is there for tomorrow. 

 
 Living within our means is the only way to guarantee that 

what we all enjoy today is passed on to our children and our 
grandchildren. 

Mr. Speaker, we don't want to say to our children: we couldn't 
clean up this mess, we want you to do it, we're going to leave it 
all for you, we'll wring our hands and walk away and create 
more. 
 
A balanced budget is the only way and the mechanism we have 
to guarantee that what we're enjoying today is going to be in 
place for our children -- my children, and your children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: -- In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it is only fitting 
that we now give high praise and credit 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

where credit is due and that is to all people in the province.  
Not only the people in my constituency that I thank for their 
efforts and their standing behind us in these very difficult 
times, but all people in this province and all constituencies, 
including those that I've heard from the members of the 
constituencies of the Liberals and the Tories, all people in this 
province standing behind us to try and get some rhyme or 
reason to the mess for the next generation. 
 
So to the people of the province I say: you gave us your 
support; you've given us your hard work in consultation 
processes in health, in economic development, in getting down 
and doing the work that needed to be done in this province to 
come together; and they've given us the understanding that we 
needed while these processes are ongoing and bearing some 
fruit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it was with great pride in all the people of 
Saskatchewan that I rose last Thursday with my colleagues and 
the Minister of Finance, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount, to say thank you -- thank you to the people of this 
province -- and it's why I stand today in support of our budget 
that delivers our promise to all of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to start by 
congratulating my seat-mate, the member for Regina Wascana, 
for just an excellent job of going through many of our 
accomplishments.  I listened with a great deal of interest to a 
growing list of accomplishments that we have taken, that we've 
been a part of since we formed the government in October 
1991. 
 
And I know we are often our own harshest critics.  We always 
want to be able to deliver more and better and faster.  I don't 
think there's any of my colleagues ever got elected on the 
premiss that, well we'll just coast along for a while.  We are all 
pushing very diligently, particularly in the areas that we have a 
little bit of extra interest in which leads to the opening part of 
my remarks. 
 
And that was that of thanking the Minister of Finance, and the 
Deputy Premier before that, for the job that they have done in 
consulting, respecting the budget.  Mr. Speaker, you would be 
aware that there has been broad consultation throughout the 
Saskatchewan public -- broad.  I think it's safe to say never 
been more consultation throughout the province than has been 
delivered by the two successive Finance ministers of this 
government. 
 
But the consultation that has been sadly missing, certainly in 
the previous government, was that of a consultation and an 
involvement of government caucus members.  I know that the 
members opposite seem terribly surprised when back-bench 
MLAs get up and speak in support of the measures that this 
government has taken.  But the simple reason, Mr. Speaker, 
that I can stand so proudly, so in support of this budget that 
delivers the promise, is that I've been 

involved as a back-bench MLA in the consultation within the 
caucus.  And I can remember the very first budget we 
delivered.  I remember full well at the end of the first day, 
going home and my wife saying, well how did it go?  I saying, 
well thank goodness today's over; we got all the bad news out 
of the way.  There just can't possibly be any more bad news. 
 
And -- lo and behold! -- I went back the next day, and they 
started throwing the real big problems, the real big economic 
problems at us.  And I recall very distinctly at just after 11 
o'clock catching myself with some tears rolling down my 
cheeks because, Mr. Speaker, at that point I realized that many 
of the hopes that I had for immediately re-implementing a 
children's dental program for example, a school-based 
children's dental program, much as I would have wanted that 
and still want it, it was simply unattainable. 
 
(2115) 
 
The consultation of the caucus has been absolutely 
phenomenal.  And it's part of why I can be so proud of having 
sat in my chair here at my desk when the budget was being 
delivered, and about a half an hour into the Minister of 
Finance's speech, I pulled out one of my MLA business cards 
and wrote a little note on the back and left it in my desk 
because I didn't want to lose it.  And what I wrote was very 
simple: solid foundation.  That was the impression that I had a 
half an hour into the speech: solid foundation based on the 
thorough discussions that we've had.  Certainly cabinet has 
them, but I'm not privy to who says what in cabinet.  But I 
certainly am privy to who says what in the caucus, and I am 
intensely proud of the contributions that every single one of my 
colleagues have made on behalf of their constituents and on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Mr. Speaker, delivering the promise, I think that's 
what this budget is really all about.  We promise to meet our 
deficit reduction targets.  We promise it and we deliver. 
 
And I look at the historical record of budget delivery and I 
noted with a great deal of interest that -- here it is -- that the 
previous government had only missed by $75 million in the last 
budget that they audited and delivered in the legislature, that of 
1991.  In '92 they missed by $587 million -- just a little oops.  
And I go back to the previous election year, 1986, which I 
recall very vividly, when then Finance minister Gary Lane 
projected a $389 million deficit.  And he delivered the very 
next budget, where the deficit wasn't 389 million; it was $1.235 
billion.  He was out $846 million. 
 
And here we are, having delivered a budget bang on what we 
said.  We projected a deficit to come in at $296 million.  It 
came in at $294 million, just right on, Mr. Speaker.  Why?  
Because we think the people of Saskatchewan have a right to 
know what it is we want to do and to know that we're 
determined to deliver 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

what we say.  Part of that -- and I came to appreciate this from 
the consultation that has gone on in the caucus and indeed 
when we've had some Finance department officials in -- part of 
it is because this government will base its budget projections 
not on some airy-fairy, oh well let's write a budget on the back 
of a piece of scrap paper. 
 
Any fool can balance a budget on a piece of paper.  All you 
have to do is use the price of oil at $30 a barrel or the price of 
wheat going to $8 a bushel.  Any fool can write a balanced 
budget on the back of a scrap piece of paper.  But it takes the 
real test -- the real test -- for the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member for Thunder Creek, is to get a budget that is written, 
that you can deliver.  And deliver is exactly what the Minister 
of Finance and my colleagues have done. 
 
I'm real proud of the cabinet.  We delivered a budget.  We said, 
here it is, stood up, delivered it in the legislature and got within 
$2 million on a more than a $4 billion annual budget.  A 
remarkable feat and one that you should learn a great deal 
from. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, of course saying what we're 
going to do with respect to a budget and then delivering it is a  
important part of the process, but we should never lose sight of 
the fact that balancing the budget, which is what we've been 
working towards, balancing the budget is not an end in itself.  
But as the Premier repeatedly points out to us, balancing the 
budget is the means to the end. 

n The Romanow government is developing an excellent track 
record in reducing the enormous deficit it inherited.  The 
province continues to have the highest per capita debt levels 
in the country, but key debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) 
ratios are expected to stabilize this year and then begin to 
decline.  We expect the government to continue to hit its 
targets and therefore view the provincial credit rating outlook 
as positive. 

 
The means to us being able to again introduce a school-based 
children's dental program that I talked of a little bit earlier.  A 
means for us to get more directly involved in job creation 
projects.  A means for us to help scratch the itch where it might 
mean a few extra jobs throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
But frankly its a means that we have not benefited much from.  
We've seen the first beginning signs of it with the delivery of 
this budget, but you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
at all levels of income understand what it is I'm just saying. 
 
My colleague, the member for Regina Churchill Downs, has 
said to me on several occasions that there's no level of income 
at which one cannot live beyond.  And I happen to think that 
the hon. member is right on.  There's no level of income at 
which one cannot live beyond.  There's always more that we 
would wish. 
 
There's always a desire to be able to provide more, be it for 
ourselves . . . maybe it's a vacation or maybe it's a vehicle to 
replace the 1988 Plymouth Colt with 170,000 kilometres on it.  
Maybe it is simply to provide a swing set for your children. 
 
And I know what I speak of there because I've lived that.  I 
remember vividly us moving into Regina and the first winter, 
Mr. Speaker, Santa Claus, actually I think my parents had a 
hand in it, delivered a coat, a 

winter coat under the Christmas tree.  I was going without a 
winter coat that year because we'd bought the house and 
frankly, we were very, very house poor.  But I felt well, we had 
the house, at least I could be warm once I got home. 
 
Anyway, I got that.  Then that summer for my 25th birthday, 
my parents bought me a swing set.  I confess I thought it was a 
little bit late in my life for them to be doing that, but they felt 
that their two grandchildren, that my wife and I share, might 
enjoy my swing set and indeed they did, as did our third child 
when she came along. 
 
I just have to throw this in as a matter of interest, Mr. Speaker.  
I turned 40 last summer and these same parents who had 
bought me a swing set for my 25th birthday -- I'm not sure 
what this says about what they think of their favourite 
son -- but they bought me a composter and a shovel to go along 
with it.  So I can hardly wait until I turn 50 and then 60 and 
then 65 and see what my parents think of their favourite son at 
that stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to just touch briefly . . . I talked about 
the budget and I want to quote from Burns Fry Economics 
dated February 17, and this is a quote: 
 

 
Mr. Speaker, I'm quite proud of that because as our credit 
rating improves, our interest costs in borrowing will decline, 
and that will help us further in our delivering the promise. 
 
I'm going to talk very briefly about utilities because, Mr. 
Speaker, frankly we have used comparisons that talk about 
Saskatchewan taxes, then we throw in utilities and we point out 
that once you count power, home heating, gas, natural gas, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates and telephone 
rates, that Saskatchewan goes from being a very high 
cost-of-living province to one of the lowest cost provinces. 
 
Other colleagues have covered that very, very well with the 
exception I haven't heard anybody in the legislature want to 
throw in the price of housing as well, and that's a major benefit, 
price of housing.  I don't think my aunt and uncle in Toronto 
would feel bad when I put it this way.  They have a three 
bedroom bungalow.  My wife and I have a three bedroom 
bungalow.  Theirs is in Toronto; ours is, of course, here in the 
north end of Regina.  If you were to, or anyone else, Mr. 
Speaker, were to write me a cheque that didn't bounce for 
$100,000, I can guarantee that you'd have the keys for my 
bungalow in almost no 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

time flat.  It's yours.  I don't think you'd be too hardly done by, 
but I'd be doing all right too. 
 
But I wouldn't trade my bungalow for my aunt and uncle's 
bungalow in Toronto and I don't think they would take a mere 
250,000 or a quarter of a million dollars.  So you see the 
housing advantage in Saskatchewan is indeed very, very 
significant.  I can afford to own a house in Regina.  I don't 
think that I could afford that luxury -- it would become a 
luxury -- in Toronto . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Vancouver 
is very similar as the member for Regina Wascana has just 
indicated to me. 
 
The Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, has been very 
fond of talking about New Brunswick and Frank McKenna, 
using a dual-prong approach, and his being a realistic and 
rational approach to budgeting and to running a province.  I 
find it kind of interesting in that I've got here, dated February 
21, a fiscal update from New Brunswick for its '93-'94 budget 
and I see that their deficit this year goes from 349 to 451 
million dollars -- an increase of $102 million.  Oops -- they 
were out by 29.2 per cent. 
 
Now the two-pronged approach, Mr. Speaker, seems to me that 
you want to balance your spending and your revenues collected 
and I see that they have overspent by 15 per cent and 
underestimated . . . pardon me, overestimated revenue.  They 
collected, actually, 85 per cent less revenue than they thought 
they would.  I'm talking the percentages of the $102 million.  
They overspent by 15 million.  They underestimated . . . they 
didn't underestimate -- they overestimated their revenue 
coming in and they got $87 million less. 
 
So they don't seem to have it right, Mr. Speaker.  And I would 
just caution the Leader of the Liberal Party not to hitch her 
horse too closely to Frank McKenna's Liberal government in 
New Brunswick.  It seems to me to be a horse destined not to 
get out of the starting gates.  They're doing some things 
decently in New Brunswick, but it's not the great thing that 
we're led to believe it is. 
 
As I'm winding down, Mr. Speaker, I do want to make one 
final comment, and that is about the difference between deficit 
and debt.  The deficit is simply the amount of money we spend 
extra in a year, over and above our revenues.  This year the 
deficit that we just delivered, we spent $294 million more than 
we took in in revenue.  That added to the fourteen and a half 
billion dollar debt we inherited when we formed the 
government.  But that's added to the debt. 
 
In 1996-97, if our projections are accurate, we will actually 
have a $20 million surplus.  But I want people to very clearly 
understand, Mr. Speaker, that mountain of debt, that $15 
billion, because it will have grown from fourteen and a half, 
that roughly $15 billion dollars debt will still be there.  Or put 
another way, we've still got a huge mortgage.  But we will be 
paying the principal and interest, or the interest on that 
mortgage on an annual basis, once we hit a balanced budget, so 
we'll stop adding to our debt. 

And of course there's no way of running from that forever. 
 
(2130) 
 
But the reason I talk about that, Mr. Speaker, is simply that 
there are still some individuals who seem to have the 
impression that we're paying off the entire debt that we 
inherited from the former Conservative government, that we're 
paying the entire debt off in three or four years.  And that just 
simply, much as we might wish we could do that, it is simply 
an impossible task.  But we're going to stop adding to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by again commending the 
Minister of Finance.  I think this budget is just wonderful and I 
think that it was summed up very well by an article in Friday's 
Leader-Post titled, "NDP has taken all the fun out of budget 
day."  And it's a column . . . I might as well say it.  Bruce 
Johnstone wrote it. 
 
The whole premiss of his column, Mr. Speaker, is that we are 
just so upfront.  This is what we're going to do, we say, and 
then we go out and we do it.  There was absolutely no 
surprises.  What we said we were going to do, we did. 
 
And I think that that certainty is something, that in the absence 
of a great economic boom, at least we have the certainty of 
knowing we've got a Finance minister that is steady, that will 
deliver us, and is in fact doing so with this budget.  The 
Minister of Finance is delivering the promise.  Thank you. 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to rise 
today to speak on behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon River 
Heights in support of the budget presented by my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, on Thursday last. 
 
During the 1991 election campaign and consistently since then, 
our party promised to restore sound fiscal management to the 
affairs of the people of this province, and this budget delivers 
on that promise.  And this budget delivers on that promise with 
common sense, caring, and compassion. 
 
When in late 1991 we entered the fiscal wilderness that was the 
legacy of the previous administration, we realized that in order 
to maintain the support of the people of Saskatchewan through 
the tough measures that would be required to restore fiscal 
integrity, we would need a long-term plan.  We would need to 
consult extensively with people, listen to them, and share the 
development of that plan with the people who would be 
affected.  If there were hurts, those people would have warning, 
so there would be no surprises.  They would know what 
measures were being taken and why, and there would be a 
timetable leading to the goal of a balanced budget with regular 
report cards along the way. 
 
To illustrate our government's approach, I quote the advice of 
Thomas H. Huxley, who said: 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

Perhaps the most valuable result of all education is the 
ability to make yourself do the things you have to do, 
when they ought to be done, whether you like it or not.  It 
is the first lesson that ought to be learned. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we set out to do what ought to be done, not 
because it was or is always the popular way, but because it was 
the right way and continues to be the right thing to do.  We 
abandoned the Hansel and Gretel approach to financial 
management of right-wing government, Mr. Speaker: leading 
people in circles through the fiscal forest, dropping little 
crumbs or sometimes bigger crumbs -- depending on who was 
their best friend -- but large crumbs or small, all leading them 
to the oven of the wicked witch to be burnt up in a fire-storm of 
debt.  Instead we honed the tools necessary to blaze a trail 
straight through the forest, and lit a torch to help people find 
their way safely to the other side. 
 
It is to the credit of the people of Saskatchewan, their 
resilience, their creativity, and their ever-abiding hope for the 
future, Mr. Speaker, that we have all come this far.  And I 
appreciate this opportunity to thank all the people of th
province who are accompanying us on this journey of renewal. 

e  But the most critical issue in government that has 
transformed the NDP is debt.  The lack of money had 
ideologically disarmed the New Democrats.  Without the 
means to intervene in the economy to achieve social and 
economical goals, they have been reduced to fiscal managers. 

 
It is a credit to all of them and to their endurance that our plan 
is on target.  In two short years we have reached beyond the 
halfway point towards our goal of a balanced budget.  But 
reaching that goal is not an end in itself.  Only when we reach 
that goal will we be able to tackle the principal of the debt.  
Reducing that debt will lower the amount needed to service it 
every year.  Then and only then will we be able to use the 
dollars that go to pay interest now for enhancements to th  
programs that represent our real goal.  As stated by Tommy 
Douglas in 1954: 

e Our province is steeped in tradition . . . and Tommy Douglas 
folklore. 

 
 The philosophy of this government is "Humanity First."  We 

believe that the measure of any community is the amount of 
social and economic security which it provides for even its 
humblest citizens. 

 
And reaffirmed by our Premier, Mr. Speaker, in 1993: 
 

 I am a New Democrat because I believe in economic and 
social justice--in a society which seeks fairness, compassion 
and equity in all its affairs. 

 
We don't put those principles on call-waiting, Mr. Speaker, in 
tough times.  I will have more to say about specific examples 
later.  But meanwhile as we continue our journey, it is 
important that we notice and take advantage of the 
opportunities along the way.  Ralph Waldo Emerson said: 
 

 Bad times have a scientific value.  These are occasions (that) 
a good learner would not miss. 

 
Thanks to the ingenuity and the cooperation of Saskatchewan 
people, we are discovering new ways of delivering services in 
Health, Education, Social 

 Services, and Economic Development which are 
community-based rather than top down.  Not only is this more 
cost-effective, it reflects the real needs of people more 
accurately. 
 
In more prosperous times, leaders at all levels may have 
fleeting thoughts like there must be a better way to do this, but 
unless pressed as we all are now, we naturally take the path of 
least resistance.  So Emerson was right: bad times do have 
value, and we are all learning from them to emerge from this 
experience stronger and better. 
 
Members opposite and others criticize the budget.  I would 
remind them of the words of Benjamin Disraeli who observed 
how much easier it is to be critical than to be correct, especially 
when critics say that we the New Democrats are no different 
than others in our approach.  Those who say that we are no 
different are wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Dale Eisler says in the Leader-Post on February 19: 
 

 
Wrong, Mr. Eisler. 
 
The member for Kindersley said last week in this House: 
 

 
 Mr. Speaker, it might surprise you to know that some of us in 

the legislature are young enough that we didn't even know 
Tommy Douglas . . . I didn't even know the man . . . 

 
 To me he holds no special meaning . . . 
 

For shame, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry that the member opposite 
did not have the opportunity to know Tommy Douglas  He is 
the poorer for it.  For once I'm glad to be old, Mr. Speaker, old 
enough to have known Tommy and to be the richer for it.  New 
Democrats are different, Mr. Speaker, we are progressive and 
able to face new realities squarely without abandoning our 
principles of hope, heart, and humility. 
 
What do others say?  Let market forces prevail.  Bigger is 
better.  On with the corporate agenda.  Lower corporate taxes 
and give incentives and the good will trickle down.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I'm tired of waiting for that first drop to land on my 
head.  Ten years of right-wing government in this country and 
this province have, instead of a stream of good things raining 
down upon us the folks, brought about the longest drought 
we've ever had, not to mention the biggest debt. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

We've had a tax on orderly marketing systems that we built.  
The value of craftsmanship, of artisans, have been replaced by 
mass production and planned obsolescence.  Our environment 
has been ravaged.  Government benevolence to large 
corporations has resulted in the mergers of greed.  Corporate 
restructuring has caused untold human misery and widened the 
gap between the very rich and the growing numbers of poor 
people.  Farmers and small-business people have been 
dispossessed by usurious interest rates.  No, Mr. Speaker, that 
is not the New Democratic way. 
 
That is one of the reasons that this budget supports small 
business with tax reductions.  That is how New Democrats are 
different.  And it supports ordinary people with many 
enhancements, even in tough times.  New Democrats believe in 
shielding those least able to help themselves, like hungry 
children, from the forces that would prey upon them.  That is 
how New Democrats are different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Most people in Saskatchewan would agree that the economic 
and social forces at work in the 1980s in this province have not 
been positive.  But to reinforce Emerson's words about bad 
times having value, I would like to share with members, Mr. 
Speaker, an experience I had as a young girl growing up in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
During the winters . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, great 
place my fellow members say.  During the winters in the small 
community where we lived about a mile away from, social 
events were held every Friday night at the schoolhouse.  They 
were usually family events -- whist drives, pie shoots, box 
socials, all those things that we used to do in the pre-television 
era. 
 
It was the custom, since we had no power, for every family to 
bring a lantern or gas lamp to the school.  There were rows of 
hooks on the ceiling where all the lamps would be hung and 
their collective light would be just like electric.  One Friday our 
father was ill and not able to drive the whole family to the 
event, so my sister and I begged to go.  It was a chinook that 
day so our mother relented and allowed us to brave the timber 
wolves and the wolverines to walk to the school by ourselves.  
So we went carrying our lamp and spent the evening in all 
kinds of frivolity and so forth. 
 
When we entered the school it had been a very warm day.  
When we went to go out it turned into one of those 
phenomenon that happens in Saskatchewan where it was 
melting all day but while we were in the school in the evening 
the temperature plunged, a strong wind came up, and it was 
snowing heavily.  So we decided rather than going round by the 
road which made it a little further, that we would cut across the 
field.  And for some reason . . . Usually when we left the school 
we'd blow out the lamp but we carried it across the field with 
us. 
 
As we walked further and further and got colder and 

colder, I began to be afraid that we must have walked further 
than it would have taken to get home.  We were getting quite 
cold and all of a sudden, the wind blew out the mantles on the 
lamp and it went dark. 
 
So as we stood there in the dark, sort of refocusing our vision, 
we looked around and saw a tiny light, the coal oil lamp in our 
kitchen window; and as it transpired, that we had actually 
already passed our farmyard, we had missed it by a bit, and if 
the light hadn't gone out just then and we had gone a few more 
steps, we probably would have been too far away to see the 
light in our kitchen window.  And beyond was miles of muskeg 
and no people living at all, so if the light hadn't gone out, I 
wouldn't be standing here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2145) 
 
And the parallel I wish to draw is that whether that light is held 
by an individual, a government, or a corporation who gets too 
far off course, and when you're in that circle of light, you can't 
see beyond it.  When the light is extinguished, as it was in this 
province by an election, it provides an opportunity to refocus 
sight and thinking, to take new bearings, and to chart a new 
path towards our destination. 
 
That new trail, Mr. Speaker, is what this budget and the 
previous two in this province are blazing, and the lights are 
coming on in Saskatchewan again to shine upon social 
democratic values and caring compassion in the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Teichrob: -- We are different, Mr. Speaker, and here is 
how.  I could speak all night on the extensive list of measures 
in this budget, but will mention just a few. 
 
Funding for child hunger programs has been increased by more 
than 35 per cent.  A new child benefit program to support 
children in low income families has been allotted $3.8 million.  
Eighteen million dollars has been provided for programs that 
directly benefit children, including funding for child care and 
revised dental program targeted to the children of low income 
families. 
 
We have maintained the funding for inner-city community 
schools and we have pilot projects, like the preschool program 
in La Loche and the integrated program with Health, Social 
Services, Education, and Justice in the West Flats in Prince 
Albert.  There are very many worthy project, Mr. Speaker.  
We've done these measures to illustrate why we're different and 
how. 
 
Well in Alberta, the Tory government there has halved their 
budget for kindergarten and preschool intervention, meaning 
that parents will have to pay half the cost, or those parents who 
are not able to will have their children denied access to those 
programs.  Those who most need support in education and 
training to lift themselves out of a poverty cycle will be 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard February 21, 1994 

denied in Alberta, while we are enhancing supports to them.  
That's how we're different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to mention the New Careers program, which was a 
program initiated by the members opposite, but the parameters 
that they gave it were like a treadmill where you go off social 
services, work for a few weeks, get unemployment insurance, 
go back on social services. 
 
We refocused it and involved the supervision of journeymen in 
the building trades so that those jobs are not dead-end jobs.  
They are supervised by journeymen and the hours worked are 
counted as certifiable hours towards a trade.  So we turned, Mr. 
Speaker, without spending any more money, a treadmill into a 
ladder.  And that is the kind of measure, Mr. Speaker, which 
illustrates the difference and indicates what the priorities of a 
New Democratic government are.  For these reasons and many 
others, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support this budget 
which has delivered our promise.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Scott: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly 
my pleasure to rise in the House this evening and to offer my 
support for the budget brought in last week.  And I would 
certainly like to commend the Finance minister and her staff for 
producing such a very good budget and again, a budget which 
saw another $100 million cut off our operating deficit.  
Certainly a very fine piece of work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was campaigning for the election in '91, 
the debt and deficit was the most important issue with people in 
my constituency and many of them are seniors.  And the 
feeling was that the seniors would tell me that they worked 
long and hard, they scrimped and saved through tough times to 
build this province and make it one of the best places in the 
world to live for their children and grandchildren. 
 
And they were certainly saddened to see a province with a 
multibillion-dollar debt in a mere 10 years.  And there was a lot 
of feelings of anger and despair out there among the people in 
rural Saskatchewan.  They survived the drought of the 1930s, 
they survived war years, and a number of other difficult periods 
and times. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in just over two years we have seen our 
deficit decrease from over a projected billion dollars, to a 
deficit of under $200 million projected for the next coming 
year.  And this will further be decreased until we hit zero two 
years from now.  Certainly a feat for the people of 
Saskatchewan to be proud of, and that we were only able to do 
this because of the support from the people of the province. 
 
The former premier bragged about being able to mismanage the 
financial affairs of the province and still break even.  And the 
former deputy premier, in the dying days of the government 
past, made the statement to the effect that we will make such a 
mess 

here in Saskatchewan that the province will be ungovernable.  
Well they tried but they did not succeed. 
 
The 1980s saw many issues.  We saw the fact that many of our 
assets were sold or given away, basically, to friends of the 
government of the day.  And not only did we lose the assets but 
we also lost the money from them.  In other words we sold the 
farm and lost the money as well. 
 
Members opposite remind us -- or harp about -- rising utility 
costs.  Perhaps, we wonder, we should remind them why these 
utility costs are rising.  What we have is a government in the 
1980s that gave away our gas reserves.  We had a government 
that gave away our coal reserves near Estevan.  The coalfields, 
which SaskPower used to own, are now owned by consortiums 
based in the Bahamas and Panama City, with people like Peter 
Lougheed as a director. 
 
Why are these utilities rising?  Because we have lost control of 
our assets and our resources, and this was not the fault of the 
people of this province or this government, but by a former 
government set on rewarding their friends and giving away our 
resources.  Well, the dark days of the 1980s are behind us, Mr. 
Speaker, but the memories and impacts will be with us for 
generations to come.  Unlike the hardships caused by the 
Depression of the 1930s or the war years or drought or 
grasshoppers or the national trade wars, the hardship and the 
multibillion-dollar debt of the 1980s was Saskatchewan 
made -- not by the people of this province, not by this 
government, but by the former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is still the number one industry in our 
province here, and I must say there is a new air of optimism out 
there.  We have a variety of new crops which farmers 
themselves have got into.  We have diversified machinery, 
much of it produced and built right here in Saskatchewan and 
designed by farmers themselves such as my neighbour, Jim 
Halford, with his Conserva-pak seeder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw multibillions of dollars given to farmers 
in the 1980s, and it proved to be merely a band-aid because 
next year the farmers required more.  What has solved the 
problem on the farm is farmers helping themselves.  And in 
doing this in the last number of years, we've seen a number of 
new crops such as canola and mustard and safflower and lentils 
and peas and others grown instead of the traditional wheat, 
oats, and barley. 
 
In 1993 alone we saw a decrease of about 14 per cent of wheat 
acres here in Saskatchewan.  And with the diversified 
equipment, continuous cropping, and zero till are certainly very 
much a part of the farming practice today.  One would think 
with a hundred thousand or so people starving to death in the 
world each year that third-world and developing countries 
could use our wheat.  And certainly this would be possible 
except that the powers that be decide that bombs and guns are 
more important than food for their people. 



February 21, 1994 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

There's also a new feeling of optimism in rural communities.  
While main-streeting around the Christmas season, most small 
businesses reported a much better year in 1993 than in 1992.  A 
couple of farm dealerships reported that they had been busier in 
the last couple of months than they had been at any other time 
in the last 10 years.  So there is a new feeling of optimism. 
 
Beef prices continue to remain good and I certainly salute the 
agriculture, beef producers, hog and poultry producers here in 
the province, for their determination.  For this industry requires 
work and dedication 365 days of the year.  But in the recent 
year or so, prices have been good and people are seeing results 
for their hard labour. 
 
Health reform is another issue which certainly has been first 
and foremost in many people's minds in the last year or so, Mr. 
Speaker.  And certainly the initial reaction, as might be 
expected, was anger and fear of the unknown and what was to 
come.  Certainly when any community loses its hospital or at 
least acute-care bed funding, similarly to a school or elevator or 
railway service, post office, or what have you, it is a blow to 
the community.  And naturally these people were of great 
concern and some were upset. 
 
But everyone has agreed that health reform was necessary, Mr. 
Speaker, as we could see that the financial burden of our health 
care system could not go on for ever.  We had to reform it, and 
everyone agreed something had to be done, and there were 
many ways of doing this.  And certainly there were some loose 
ends that needed to be cleaned up, Mr. Speaker, after our initial 
round of health reform.  And I'm very pleased to see, just 
recently, that the Rural Health Coalition -- consisting of 52 
communities -- in the last two months have worked very 
diligently with the Department of Health officials in resolving 
some of these outstanding issues such as ambulance service and 
what have you, that these particular communities needed.  Each 
community felt that they required certain little fixes here and 
there to make health reform more palatable for their community 
and certainly these people knew best what was needed in their 
own towns and communities.  And certainly Rod MacDonald 
and the coalition did a very fine job as I mentioned, with the 
Department of Health officials in resolving some of these 
concerns. 
 
The government also recognizes that health reform and health 
services can best be delivered and administered by local people 
and that's why we set up the health district boards throughout 
the province.  And we salute those people who have dedicated 
many hours of work and their services to serve on these boards 
and help bring health reform and better health services to their 
communities.  And these people are from all walks of life and 
from all political stripes. 
 
There are a number of other issues, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government must continue to work on and certainly jobs which 
we have highlighted already are 

of great concern.  We must keep concentrating on them as well.  
There's other issues in the province, such as underground fuel 
tanks which we need to give more attention to, crop 
depredation by wildlife also is an outstanding issue. 
 
The whole history of forestry management, another great 
resource, can use some more attention and direction and 
cooperation by all the users.  Water management is of a 
concern.  We have one arm of government preserving wetlands 
and we have another arm of government draining wetlands.  
We need to coordinate our water policy because it is a very 
valuable resource. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before I leave I'd certainly like to offer 
praise to our pioneers who did build this province and made 
many sacrifices in doing so, and we enjoy those benefits today 
from those sacrifices our forefathers made before us.  I'd also 
like to salute the veterans of the great wars who fought for our 
freedom so that we may be here in the legislature today and 
participate in a democratic society. 
 
We often complain about high taxes and government cut-backs 
and all kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, but I think when we really 
look at ourselves here in Saskatchewan, we are very fortunate, 
and I think very few of us would choose another spot in the 
world to live, especially outside of Canada.  So, Mr. Speaker, it 
is with great pleasure that I participate with this government 
and very strongly support the budget.  The sun is rising again in 
Saskatchewan and will soon be shining brightly, because the 
people see hope.  And people are prepared to make sacrifices 
when there is hope on the horizon.  Thank you very much.  I 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 
 


